1501. Neuropsychologia. 2006;44(14):3011-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.05.030. Epub 2006 Aug 22.

Lewy body dementia and creativity: case report.

Drago V(1), Crucian GP, Foster PS, Cheong J, Finney GR, Pisani F, Heilman KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Florida, College of Medicine, PO BOX 
100236, Gainesville, FL 32610-0236, USA. valeria.drago@neurology.nfl.edu

BACKGROUND: We studied a visual artist with Lewy body dementia (LBD) to learn 
how this disease influenced his paintings during the course of the disease.
METHODS: Study 1 evaluated two paintings of the same subject matter, one that 
the patient painted before his illness and the other after the onset of this 
disease. Study 2 evaluated a collection of his paintings from the time before he 
was ill (1994) until the time he stopped painting when he was suffering with LBD 
(2002). To learn how the onset and progression of LBD affected his paintings we 
had judges score the following qualities: aesthetic-beauty, closure 
completeness, evocative impact, novelty, technique and representational quality.
RESULTS: In Study 1 we found that the representational ratings for the picture 
he painted when he had LBD was significantly lower than the picture he painted 
before he developed LBD. In Study 2, we found that all the artistic qualities 
measures temporally declined except novelty. We also found that the paintings 
that were judges as having the highest quality representations were 
significantly more novel than those that had poorer representations. In 
addition, we conducted a forward stepwise regression analysis using quality 
measures as predictor of year. This analysis revealed that only representational 
quality significantly predicted painting year.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that as LBD progresses, except for novelty 
there is a gradual degradation of the ability to visually express artistic 
subject matter. It possible that the preserved ability to paint novel picture is 
related to relative preservation of frontal lobe function, but the degradation 
of other artistic qualities might be related to deterioration of the parietal 
lobes which either impairs the brain's iconic representations or the knowledge 
needed to portray these representations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2006.05.030
PMID: 16930639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1502. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2006 Mar;2(3):132-3. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0129.

Are atypical antipsychotics associated with a reduced risk of developing 
parkinsonism?

Chou KL(1), Friedman JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

DOI: 10.1038/ncpneuro0129
PMID: 16932538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1503. Hippocampus. 2006;16(10):826-33. doi: 10.1002/hipo.20212.

Hippocampal neuron and glial cell numbers in Parkinson's disease--a 
stereological study.

Joelving FC(1), Billeskov R, Christensen JR, West M, Pakkenberg B.

Author information:
(1)Research Laboratory for Stereology and Neuroscience, H:S Bispebjerg 
University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Hippocampal atrophy and neuron loss are early and reproducible findings in 
Alzheimer's disease, and recent magnetic resonance imaging studies indicate that 
hippocampal atrophy may also be present in Parkinson's disease (PD). To 
determine whether or not cell loss occurs in PD, we estimated the total neuron 
and glial cell numbers as well as the total volume unilaterally in the 
hippocampi of eight demented PD patients and eight control subjects. Cell 
numbers were estimated in the neuron-containing layers of CA1, CA2-(3), CA4, the 
dentate gyrus, and subiculum using the optical-fractionator technique. The 
Cavalieri method was used to estimate the volume of the total hippocampus and 
its subregions. We did not find significant differences in cell numbers or 
volumes in PD brains when compared with control subjects. Our results thus 
indicate that hippocampal atrophy and cell loss are not necessarily involved in 
the memory impairment and dementia observed in PD.

2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hipo.20212
PMID: 16941622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1504. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006 Dec;21(12):1150-5. doi: 10.1002/gps.1621.

Co-morbid and socio-demographic factors associated with cognitive performance in 
an elderly community dwelling Irish population.

Chin AV(1), O'Connell H, Kirby M, Denihan A, Bruce I, Walsh JB, Coakley D, 
Lawlor BA, Cunningham C.

Author information:
(1)Mercer's Institute for Research on Ageing, St James's Hospital, James's 
Street, Dublin D8, Ireland. achin@stjames.ie

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies suggest an association between health 
factors and dementia. The impact of these factors on the cognitive performance 
of the elderly population is unclear. Possible correlates of poor cognitive 
performance in a community dwelling elderly Irish population were examined.
METHODS: Subjects were from a sample of individuals over 65 years agreeable to 
interview using the Geriatric Mental State (GMS)-Automated Geriatric Examination 
for Computed Assisted Taxonomy (AGECAT) package conducted at the subject's home. 
Associations between patient profiles and Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
score were investigated in a multivariate model.
RESULTS: There were 793 subjects, 528 (66.6%) female with mean (s.d.) age 74.8 
(6.7) yrs. Mean MMSE score was 26.5 (3.3). 169 (21.3%) were current smokers, 198 
(25%) ex-smokers. Two hundred and twenty-four (28.3%) had a history of 
hypertension, 85 (10.7%) case level anxiety or depression, 51 (6.4%) stroke, 
ten0 (1.3%) epilepsy, nine (1.1%) Parkinson's disease and 29 (3.7%) dementia. 
Two hundred and fifty-five (32.2%) subjects were on psychotropic medications. 
Factors associated with MMSE score included age (p < or = 0.0001), diagnosis of 
dementia (p < or = 0.0001), socioeconomic group (p < or = 0.0001), education (p 
< or = 0.0001), previous stroke (p = 0.0013) and use of psychotropic medication 
(p = 0.03). Case level anxiety or depression (p = 0.99), Parkinson's disease (p 
= 0.52), epilepsy (p = 0.26), smoking status (p = 0.99) and hypertension (p = 
0.34) were not found to be associated with cognitive performance.
CONCLUSION: Factors associated with cognitive performance included age, 
socioeconomic group, education, previous stroke and use of psychotropic 
medication. These factors should be adjusted for in studies assessing cognition 
in this population. Stroke prevention strategies and avoidance of psychotropic 
medication may benefit cognitive performance.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1621
PMID: 16955434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1505. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006 Dec;14(12):1022-31. doi: 
10.1097/01.JGP.0000225088.29353.08. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

APOE genotype and cholesterol levels in lewy body dementia and Alzheimer 
disease: investigating genotype-phenotype effect on disease risk.

Borroni B(1), Grassi M, Costanzi C, Archetti S, Caimi L, Padovani A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ageing Brain and Dementia, Department of Neurology, the III 
Laboratory of Biotechnology and Department of Biochemistry, University of 
Brescia, Brescia, Italy. bborroni@inwind.it

BACKGROUND: APOE is the most recognized genetic risk factor for sporadic 
late-onset Alzheimer disease (AD). The role of APOE genotype in Lewy body 
dementia (LBD) is still unknown as well as the relationship between APOE 
genotype and cholesterol levels.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to explore the association between 
APOE genotype and cholesterol levels in patients with LBD and those with AD.
METHODS: Eighty-two patients with LBD were consecutively enrolled as well as a 
comparable number of patients with AD and comparison group. Each subject 
underwent a clinical and neuropsychologic evaluation and APOE genotyping.
RESULTS: The distribution of APOE genotypes significantly differed between AD 
and LBD cases compared with the comparison group, with the APOE epsilon4+ 
(epsilon4+/epsilon4 + or epsilon4+/epsilon4-) genotype more frequent in patient 
subgroups. Different models have been fitted, and total APOE 
epsilon4-hypercholesterolemia complete interaction effect was claimed in 
predicting their relationship on disease outcome. Subjects with 
hypercholesterolemia and heterozygous for APOE epsilon4 allele had more than 
threefold risk to develop AD compared both with the comparison group and with 
those with LBD. The risk to develop AD in hypercholesterolemic and APOE epsilon4 
homozygous subjects was 13-fold compared with the comparison group and those 
with LBD. Conversely, there was not evidence for APOE 
epsilon4-hypercholesterolemia complete interaction effect in LBD and in the 
comparison group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlighted that APOE is a risk factor not only for AD, 
but also for LBD, and that the APOE-cholesterol pathway differently affects AD 
and LBD. This approach may aid the search for the identification of an 
interactive effect of APOE genotype and modifiable risk factors, i.e., 
hypercholesterolemia, eventually resulting in individualized and effective 
cholesterol-lowering therapy in at-risk subjects.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JGP.0000225088.29353.08
PMID: 16956959 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1506. Cell Signal. 2007 Feb;19(2):219-28. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.06.013. Epub 
2006 Sep 7.

Chlorinative stress: an under appreciated mediator of neurodegeneration?

Yap YW(1), Whiteman M, Cheung NS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National 
University of Singapore, 8 Medical Drive, Singapore 117597, Singapore.

Oxidative stress has been implicated as playing a role in neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as ischemic stroke, Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's 
disease. Persuasive evidences have shown that microglial-mediated oxidative 
stress contributes significantly to cell loss and accompanying cognitive decline 
characteristic of the diseases. Based on the facts that (i) levels of 
catalytically active myeloperoxidase are elevated in diseased brains and (ii) 
myeloperoxidase polymorphism is associated with the risk of developing 
neurodegenerative disorders, HOCl as a major oxidant produced by activated 
phagocytes in the presence of myeloperoxidase is therefore suggested to be 
involved in neurodegeneration. Its association with neurodegeneration is further 
showed by elevated level of 3-chlorotyrosine (bio-marker of HOCl in vivo) in 
affected brain regions as well as HOCl scavenging ability of neuroprotectants, 
desferrioxamine and uric acid. In this review, we will summary the current 
understanding concerning the association of HOCl and neuronal cell death where 
production of HOCl will lead to further formation of reactive nitrogen and 
oxygen species. In addition, HOCl also causes tissue destruction and cellular 
damage leading cell death.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2006.06.013
PMID: 16959471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1507. Mov Disord. 2006 Nov;21(11):1899-907. doi: 10.1002/mds.21077.

Effects of rivastigmine in patients with and without visual hallucinations in 
dementia associated with Parkinson's disease.

Burn D(1), Emre M, McKeith I, De Deyn PP, Aarsland D, Hsu C, Lane R.

Author information:
(1)Regional Neuroscience Center, Newcastle General Hospital, 
Newcastle-upon-Tyne, United Kingdom. d.j.burn@ncl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007 May;3(5):250-1.

We aimed to determine prospectively whether rivastigmine, an inhibitor of 
acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase, provided benefits in patients 
with and without visual hallucinations in a population with dementia associated 
with Parkinson's disease (PDD). This was a 24-week double-blind 
placebo-controlled study. Primary efficacy measures were the Alzheimer's Disease 
Assessment Scale cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) and Alzheimer's Disease 
Cooperative Study-Clinician's Global Impression of Change (ADCS-CGIC). Secondary 
efficacy measures included activities of daily living, behavioral symptoms, and 
executive and attentional functions. Patients were stratified according to the 
presence of visual hallucinations at baseline. The study included 188 visual 
hallucinators (118 on rivastigmine, 70 on placebo) and 348 nonvisual 
hallucinators (239 on rivastigmine, 109 on placebo). Rivastigmine provided 
benefits in both visual hallucinators and nonvisual hallucinators. Absolute 
responses to rivastigmine on the ADAS-cog were comparable over 6 months, 
although rivastigmine-placebo differences tended to be larger in visual 
hallucinators (4.27; P = 0.002) than in nonhallucinators (2.09; P = 0.015). On 
the ADCS-CGIC, differences between rivastigmine and placebo were 0.5 in visual 
hallucinators (P = 0.030) and 0.3 in nonhallucinators (P = 0.111). Rivastigmine 
provided benefits on all secondary efficacy measures, and placebo declines and 
treatment differences were more marked in visual hallucinators. Adverse events 
were reported more frequently by rivastigmine-treated patients, although this 
difference was less marked in visual hallucinators. Visual hallucinations appear 
to predict more rapid decline and possibly greater therapeutic benefit from 
rivastigmine treatment in PDD.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21077
PMID: 16960863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1508. Neuropathology. 2006 Aug;26(4):293-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2006.00699.x.

Vascular complications in dementia with Lewy bodies: a postmortem study.

Isojima D(1), Togo T, Kosaka K, Fujishiro H, Akatsu H, Katsuse O, Iritani S, 
Matsumoto T, Hirayasu Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Yokohama City University, 
Japan.

The effects of cerebrovascular lesions on DLB are not yet fully understood, 
whereas the development of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is known to be associated 
with cerebrovascular lesions. In this study, we investigated the frequency of 
concomitant cerebrovascular pathologies in autopsy-proven DLB cases (n = 25) in 
comparison with AD cases (n= 63). We also investigated the correlation between 
cerebrovascular pathologies and the clinical features of DLB cases. On gross 
inspection, five cases of DLB and seven cases of AD were complicated by cerebral 
hemorrhages and the difference was significant; most of the lesions in DLB were 
subdural hemorrhages, possibly related to trauma. Nine cases of DLB and 25 cases 
of AD had grossly identified infarctions, but no significant difference was 
observed. Three cases of DLB and four cases of AD had concomitant hemorrhages, 
while 10 cases of DLB and 43 cases of AD had infarcts on microscopic inspection. 
There was a significant difference in the frequency of microscopic infarcts 
between DLB and AD, whereas no significant difference was noted in the frequency 
of microscopic hemorrhages. In DLB cases without vascular complications, memory 
disturbance was common as the initial symptom, while parkinsonism was more 
common in those with vascular complications. However, no significant difference 
was observed between DLB cases with and without vascular complications with 
respect to the frequency of individual clinical symptoms over the whole clinical 
course. These findings suggest that grossly identified hemorrhages are more 
common in DLB because of trauma, while microinfarcts are less common in DLB than 
AD, although the reason remains unclear. Such vascular complications might 
affect the clinical manifestations, in particular, the initial symptom, of DLB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2006.00699.x
PMID: 16961064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1509. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2006 Sep;12(5):657-67. doi: 10.1017/S1355617706060784.

The role of the basal ganglia in the control of automatic visuospatial 
attention.

Fielding J(1), Georgiou-Karistianis N, White O.

Author information:
(1)Experimental Neuropsychology Research Unit, School of Psychology, Psychiatry, 
and Psychological Medicine, Monash University, Clayton Campus, Victoria 3800, 
Australia.

Cognitive impairments in patients with basal ganglia dysfunction are primarily 
revealed where performance relies on internal, voluntary control processes. 
Evidence suggests that this also extends to impaired control of more automatic 
processes, including visuospatial attention. The present study used a 
non-predictive peripheral cueing paradigm to compare and contrast visuospatial 
deficits in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) with those previously 
revealed in patients with Huntington's disease (HD) (Fielding et al., 2006a). 
Compared to age-matched controls, both PD and HD patients exhibited increased 
distractibility or poor fixation, however only PD patients responded erroneously 
to cue stimuli more frequently than control subjects. All subjects demonstrated 
initial facilitation for valid versus invalid cues following the shorter 
stimulus-onset asynchronies (SOAs) and a performance decrement at the longer 
SOAs (inhibition of return), although there was a clear differentiation between 
these groups for immediate SOAs. Unlike both control and PD subjects, where IOR 
manifested between 350 and 1000 msec, IOR was evident as early as 150 msec for 
HD patients. Further, for PD patients, spatially valid cues resulted in 
hyper-reflexivity following 150 msec SOAs, with saccadic latencies shorter than 
those generated in response to un-cued targets. Thus contrasting deficits were 
revealed in PD and HD, emphasizing the important contribution of the basal 
ganglia in the control of more automatic behaviors

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617706060784
PMID: 16961947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1510. Nat Genet. 2006 Oct;38(10):1184-91. doi: 10.1038/ng1884. Epub 2006 Sep 10.

Hereditary parkinsonism with dementia is caused by mutations in ATP13A2, 
encoding a lysosomal type 5 P-type ATPase.

Ramirez A(1), Heimbach A, Gründemann J, Stiller B, Hampshire D, Cid LP, Goebel 
I, Mubaidin AF, Wriekat AL, Roeper J, Al-Din A, Hillmer AM, Karsak M, Liss B, 
Woods CG, Behrens MI, Kubisch C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, 50931 Cologne, Germany.

Neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson and Alzheimer disease cause motor 
and cognitive dysfunction and belong to a heterogeneous group of common and 
disabling disorders. Although the complex molecular pathophysiology of 
neurodegeneration is largely unknown, major advances have been achieved by 
elucidating the genetic defects underlying mendelian forms of these diseases. 
This has led to the discovery of common pathophysiological pathways such as 
enhanced oxidative stress, protein misfolding and aggregation and dysfunction of 
the ubiquitin-proteasome system. Here, we describe loss-of-function mutations in 
a previously uncharacterized, predominantly neuronal P-type ATPase gene, 
ATP13A2, underlying an autosomal recessive form of early-onset parkinsonism with 
pyramidal degeneration and dementia (PARK9, Kufor-Rakeb syndrome). Whereas the 
wild-type protein was located in the lysosome of transiently transfected cells, 
the unstable truncated mutants were retained in the endoplasmic reticulum and 
degraded by the proteasome. Our findings link a class of proteins with unknown 
function and substrate specificity to the protein networks implicated in 
neurodegeneration and parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1038/ng1884
PMID: 16964263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1511. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;21(11):1078-85. doi: 10.1002/gps.1610.

The Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination Revised (ACE-R): a brief cognitive test 
battery for dementia screening.

Mioshi E(1), Dawson K, Mitchell J, Arnold R, Hodges JR.

Author information:
(1)MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, University of Cambridge, Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, Addenbrooke's Hospital, UK.

There is a clear need for brief, but sensitive and specific, cognitive screening 
instruments as evidenced by the popularity of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive 
Examination (ACE).
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to validate an improved revision (the ACE-R) which 
incorporates five sub-domain scores (orientation/attention, memory, verbal 
fluency, language and visuo-spatial).
METHODS: Standard tests for evaluating dementia screening tests were applied. A 
total of 241 subjects participated in this study (Alzheimer's disease=67, 
frontotemporal dementia=55, dementia of Lewy Bodies=20; mild cognitive 
impairment-MCI=36; controls=63).
RESULTS: Reliability of the ACE-R was very good (alpha coefficient=0.8). 
Correlation with the Clinical Dementia Scale was significant (r=-0.321, 
p<0.001). Two cut-offs were defined (88: sensitivity=0.94, specificity=0.89; 82: 
sensitivity=0.84, specificity=1.0). Likelihood ratios of dementia were generated 
for scores between 88 and 82: at a cut-off of 82 the likelihood of dementia is 
100:1. A comparison of individual age and education matched groups of MCI, AD 
and controls placed the MCI group performance between controls and AD and 
revealed MCI patients to be impaired in areas other than memory 
(attention/orientation, verbal fluency and language).
CONCLUSIONS: The ACE-R accomplishes standards of a valid dementia screening 
test, sensitive to early cognitive dysfunction.

Copyright (c) 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1610
PMID: 16977673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1512. Clin Neuropsychol. 2006 Dec;20(4):623-36. doi: 10.1080/13854040500376831.

Neuropsychological differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies from normal 
aging and Alzheimer's disease.

Ferman TJ(1), Smith GE, Boeve BF, Graff-Radford NR, Lucas JA, Knopman DS, 
Petersen RC, Ivnik RJ, Wszolek Z, Uitti R, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA. ferman.tanis@mayo.edu

We examined the diagnostic utility of selected neuropsychological measures in 
the differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from normal aging and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Patients with DLB (n = 87), AD (n = 138), and a group 
of normal controls (n = 103) were recruited from the Mayo Alzheimer's disease 
patient registry and Alzheimer's Disease Research Center. Neuropsychological 
measures shown to have utility in previous studies were included in the 
analysis. The final multivariate logistic regression model distinguishing DLB 
from normal controls included Auditory Verbal Learning Test (AVLT) percent 
retention, Block Design, Trail Making Test-Part A, and Benton Visual Form 
Discrimination. This model has a sensitivity of 88.6% and specificity of 96.1%. 
The final multivariate logistic model distinguishing DLB from AD included Trail 
Making Part A, Boston Naming Test (BNT), AVLT percent retention, and copy of the 
Rey-Osterrieth Complex Figure. This model had a sensitivity of 83.3% and a 
specificity of 91.4%. AVLT and BNT had negative coefficients, indicating that 
lower scores decreased the likelihood of DLB relative to AD. These finding 
extend prior research suggesting a cognitive profile that can aid in the 
clinical diagnosis of DLB. Early attention and visual perceptual disturbance 
suggests DLB, while early impairment in memory and naming suggests AD.

DOI: 10.1080/13854040500376831
PMID: 16980250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1513. Acc Chem Res. 2006 Sep;39(9):611-9. doi: 10.1021/ar0500766.

Small molecule oxidation products trigger disease-associated protein misfolding.

Bieschke J(1), Zhang Q, Bosco DA, Lerner RA, Powers ET, Wentworth P Jr, Kelly 
JW.

Author information:
(1)The Scripps Research Institute, 10550 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, 
California 92037, USA.

Oxidative stress and inflammation are risk factors for both the development of 
alpha-synucleinopathies, such as Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies, and Alzheimer's disease, the two most common neurodegenerative 
disorders. These diseases are associated with the neurotoxic deposition of 
misassembled alpha-synuclein and amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptides, respectively. 
Both occur sporadically, that is, without detectable disease-related mutations, 
in the vast majority of cases. Small molecule oxidation products, especially 
secosterols derived from cholesterol and 4-hydroxynonenal derived from lipid 
peroxidation, found in afflicted brains, accelerate the misassembly of both 
Abeta and alpha-synuclein. This Account explores the mechanism of small molecule 
oxidation product-mediated protein misassembly and possible intervention 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1021/ar0500766
PMID: 16981677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1514. Free Radic Res. 2006 Jul;40(7):731-9. doi: 10.1080/10715760600632545.

A spectroscopic study of some of the peptidyl radicals formed following hydroxyl 
radical attack on beta-amyloid and alpha-synuclein.

Tabner BJ(1), Turnbull S, King JE, Benson FE, El-Agnaf OM, Allsop D.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Laboratory, Department of Biological Sciences, Lancaster 
University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK.

There is clear evidence implicating oxidative stress in the pathology of many 
neurodegenerative diseases. Reactive oxygen species (ROS) are the primary 
mediators of oxidative stress, and hydrogen peroxide, a key ROS, is generated 
during aggregation of the amyloid proteins associated with some of these 
diseases. Hydrogen peroxide is catalytically converted to the aggressive 
hydroxyl radical in the presence of Fe(II) and Cu(I), which renders 
amyloidogenic proteins such as beta-amyloid and alpha-synuclein (implicated in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), respectively) vulnerable 
to self-inflicted hydroxyl radical attack. Here, we report some of the 
peptide-derived radicals, detected by electron spin resonance spectroscopy 
employing sodium 3,5-dibromo-4-nitrosobenzenesulfonate as a spin-trap, following 
hydroxyl radical attack on Abeta(1-40), alpha-synuclein and some other related 
peptides. Significantly, we found that sufficient hydrogen peroxide was 
self-generated during the early stages of aggregation of Abeta(1-40) to produce 
detectable peptidyl radicals, on addition of Fe(II). Our results support the 
hypothesis that oxidative damage to Abeta (and surrounding molecules) in the 
brain in AD could be due, at least in part, to the self-generation of ROS. A 
similar mechanism could operate in PD and some other "protein conformational" 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1080/10715760600632545
PMID: 16984000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1515. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Oct 15;15 Spec No 2:R188-95. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl190.

Untangling the tau gene association with neurodegenerative disorders.

Pittman AM(1), Fung HC, de Silva R.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, University College 
London, 1, Wakefield Street, London WC1N 1PJ, UK.

Pathological tau protein inclusions have long been recognized to define the 
diverse range of neurodegenerative disorders called the tauopathies, which 
include Alzheimer's disease (AD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Mutations in the tau gene, MAPT, cause 
familial frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17), and common variation in MAPT is strongly associated with the risk of 
PSP, corticobasal degeneration and, to a lesser extent, AD and Parkinson's 
disease (PD), implicating the involvement of tau in common neurodegenerative 
pathway(s). This review will discuss recent work towards the unravelling of the 
functional basis of this MAPT gene association. The region of chromosome 17q21 
containing MAPT locus is characterized by the complex genomic architecture, 
including a large inversion that leads to a bipartite haplotype architecture, an 
inversion-mediated deletion and multiplications resulting from non-allelic 
homologous recombination between the MAPT family of low-copy repeats.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl190
PMID: 16987883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1516. Mov Disord. 2006 Dec;21(12):2062-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.21076.

Association of olfactory dysfunction with incidental Lewy bodies.

Ross GW(1), Abbott RD, Petrovitch H, Tanner CM, Davis DG, Nelson J, Markesbery 
WR, Hardman J, Masaki K, Launer L, White LR.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Pacific Islands Health Care System, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. 
wross@phrihawaii.org

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2008 May 15;23(7):1060.

Olfactory dysfunction is found in early Parkinson's disease (PD) and in 
asymptomatic relatives of PD patients. Incidental Lewy bodies (ILB), the 
presence of Lewy bodies in the brains of deceased individuals without a history 
of PD or dementia during life, are thought to represent a presymptomatic stage 
of PD. If olfactory dysfunction were associated with the presence of ILB, this 
would suggest that olfactory deficits may precede clinical PD. The purpose of 
this study was to determine the association of olfactory dysfunction during late 
life with ILB in the substantia nigra or locus ceruleus. Olfaction was assessed 
during the 1991-1994 and 1994-1996 examinations of elderly Japanese-American men 
participating in the longitudinal Honolulu-Asia Aging Study. Among those who 
later died and underwent a standardized postmortem examination, brains were 
examined for Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra and the locus ceruleus with 
hematoxylin and eosin stain. Lewy bodies in the brains of individuals without 
clinical PD or dementia were classified as ILB. There were 164 autopsied men 
without clinical PD or dementia who had olfaction testing during one of the 
examinations. Seventeen had ILB. The age-adjusted percent of brains with ILB 
increased from 1.8% in the highest tertile of odor identification to 11.9% in 
the mid-tertile to 17.4% in the lowest tertile (P = 0.019 in test for trend). 
Age-adjusted relative odds of ILB for the lowest versus the highest tertile was 
11.0 (P = 0.02). Olfactory dysfunction is associated with ILB. If incidental 
Lewy bodies represent presymptomatic stage of PD, olfactory testing may be a 
useful screening tool to identify those at high risk for developing PD.

Copyright 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21076
PMID: 16991138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1517. Acta Neurol Taiwan. 2006 Sep;15(3):161-9.

Genetic characteristics of dementia in Taiwan.

Chen HH(1), Hu CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Taiwan Miners General Hospital.

The most common causes of dementia in Taiwan are Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
followed by vascular dementia (VaD). Several genetic studies have documented an 
increased risk of AD among apolipoprotein E gene allele 4 (ApoE4) carriers in 
Taiwanese (ethnic Chinese). Although ApoE4 is considered the most important risk 
factor for AD, the ApoE4 allele frequency is lower in Taiwanese (around 7%), 
than that in most Caucasian populations (over 10%). This phenomenon raises the 
hypothesis that low ApoE4 allele frequency contributes to the low prevalence of 
AD in Taiwanese. Other studies of the genetic impacts on modulation or 
regulation of manifestations, progression, and treatment response of AD in 
Taiwan have been inconclusive. Familial AD, which is conferred by PS1 gene 
mutation has been identified. There were very few studies of fronto-temporal 
dementia (FTD) or dementia with Lewy body (DLB) in Taiwan. Genetic studies of 
VaD remain limited and only NOTCH3 gene mutation has been detected in a 
Taiwanese cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarct and 
leukoencephalopathy (CADASIL) family. Limited data indicated that non- 
ApoE4-associated AD may represent a larger proportion of AD in Taiwanese, 
suggesting the existence of novel genetic factors which remain to be identified.

PMID: 16995595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1518. Clin Geriatr Med. 2006 Nov;22(4):773-96, v-vi. doi: 10.1016/j.cger.2006.06.004.

Cognitive, affective, and psychiatric features of Parkinson's disease.

Barbas NR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, 1920 Taubman Center 0316, 
1500 Medical Center Drive, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0316, USA. nbarbas@med.umich.edu

Nonmotor symptoms, including cognitive deterioration and dementia, depression 
and apathy, and psychosis, are common in Parkinson's disease. Their presence is 
associated with a tremendous burden for the patient and family members. This 
article reviews the pathophysiololgy, risks, impact, major features, diagnosis, 
and treatment of these symptoms in Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cger.2006.06.004
PMID: 17000335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1519. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Dec 1;250(1-2):120-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.08.004. Epub 
2006 Sep 26.

CSF orexin levels of Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, progressive 
supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration.

Yasui K(1), Inoue Y, Kanbayashi T, Nomura T, Kusumi M, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. yasui@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Excessive daytime sleepiness has been widely accepted as a common problem not 
only in Parkinson's disease (PD) but also in other related disorders. Lowered 
excretion of orexin A (hypocretin 1) into the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is known 
to play a pathological role in narcolepsy and secondary hypersomnia due to 
hypothalamic dysfunction. Although the levels of CSF orexin in PD have been 
previously examined, the results have been controversial, and no systematic 
investigation of CSF orexin excretion has been conducted on PD related 
disorders. In this study, orexin was measured in CSF collected by lumbar 
puncture in 62 patients with PD, 13 patients with dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB), 16 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and 7 patients 
with corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Levels of CSF orexin (mean+/-SD pg/ml) 
were 302+/-38 in PD, 297+/-48 in DLB, 258+/-37 in PSP, 246+/-90 in CBD. The 
occurrence of low orexin levels (<or=110pg/ml) was rare in both PD and DLB, and 
orexin levels were significantly lower in the PSP and CBD groups compared to PD 
(PSP: p<0.001, CBD: p<0.05). Orexin levels were inversely correlated with 
duration of morbidity in PSP but not in the other conditions studied. These 
findings suggest that loss of orexin neurons or impaired orexin 
neurotransmission might exist as a part of the neurodegeneration associated with 
advanced PSP with long duration of morbidity.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.08.004
PMID: 17005202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1520. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Dec 1;250(1-2):97-102. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.07.007. Epub 
2006 Sep 26.

Differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer's disease using 
Mini-Mental State Examination and brain perfusion SPECT.

Hanyu H(1), Shimizu S, Hirao K, Kanetaka H, Sakurai H, Iwamoto T, Koizumi K, Abe 
K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, 6-7-1 
Nishishinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0023, Japan. h-hanyu@tokyo-med.ac.jp

To determine whether combined studies of Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
and brain single photon emission CT (SPECT) would provide more useful means of 
differentiating between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), we studied 36 patients with probable DLB and 96 patients with probable AD. 
DLB patients had significantly better performance on word recall, but more 
impaired attention and copying than AD patients. We confirmed that a weighted 
score derived by Ala et al. [Ala, T.A., Hughes, L.F., Kyrouac, G.A., Ghobrial, 
M.W., Elble, R.J. The Mini-Mental State exam may help in the differentiation of 
dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer' disease. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 
2002;17:503-9]: (Attention-5/3.Memory+5.Construction), was helpful in 
discriminating between DLB and AD. SPECT study revealed that medial occipital 
perfusion significantly decreased in DLB patients than AD patients. Combined 
studies of MMSE and brain SPECT achieved a high discrimination between DLB and 
AD with a sensitivity of 81% and a specificity of 85%, suggesting that there is 
a useful and practical approach to differentiate DLB from AD. Our findings will 
need to be substantiated in an independent and prospective study sample.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.07.007
PMID: 17005204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1521. J Affect Disord. 2007 Apr;99(1-3):127-32. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2006.08.030. Epub 
2006 Sep 28.

Investigation of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology in community dwelling 
older subjects who committed suicide.

Peisah C(1), Snowdon J, Gorrie C, Kril J, Rodriguez M.

Author information:
(1)Academic Department for Old Age Psychiatry, Prince of Wales Hospital, 
Australia. cpeisah62@optusnet.com.au

BACKGROUND: Older people have a higher risk of completed suicide than any other 
age group worldwide. The contribution of neurodegenerative disease to this risk 
remains controversial.
AIMS: To investigate prevalence of Alzheimer's disease-related (AD) pathology in 
older suicide victims.
METHODS: Ratings of AD pathology using Braak and CERAD protocols were compared 
in 143 community-dwelling suicide victims aged 65 years or more and 59 motor 
vehicle accident victims autopsied at the request of an Australian Coroner's 
Court.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences in plaque score or 
neurofibrillary tangle staging between suicide and control groups. None of the 
subjects with a history of dementia had neuropathologically confirmed AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study is the second and largest investigation of the prevalence 
of AD neuropathology in the elderly suicide population. Unlike the previous 
study, we did not find an increased prevalence of AD neuropathology despite a 
history of dementia in 6.3%, implicating other pathologies such as Lewy Body or 
Vascular dementia in the aetiology of dementia in elderly suicide victims.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2006.08.030
PMID: 17011041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1522. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;19(6):575-80. doi: 
10.1097/01.yco.0000245756.29244.b9.

Treatment of dementia: anything new?

Machado JC(1), Caramelli P.

Author information:
(1)Aurus IEPE - Institute of Research and Education on Aging, Lucas Machado 
Foundation, Faculty of Medical Sciences of Minas Gerais, Belo Horizonte, Brazil. 
jcmachado@attglobal.net

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim of this article is to discuss new data on presently 
approved drugs for dementia, such as cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine, 
and concerns regarding the use of antipsychotics for treating neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, as well as to summarize some relevant studies recently published on 
emerging therapies with potential disease-modifying effects.
RECENT FINDINGS: The main focuses of recent studies of cholinesterase inhibitors 
and memantine have been on efficacy and safety aspects in extended clinical 
trials, combined treatments or comparative analysis between agents, and also on 
potential neuroprotective effects and new indications. Other publications have 
assessed the evidence of efficacy and the increased risk of cerebrovascular 
events, rapid cognitive decline, and mortality with the use of antipsychotics in 
dementia, providing important information in relation to the controversy 
surrounding its use. Although more studies are warranted, a sizable literature 
on novel treatment options under investigation is currently available as a 
result of a better understanding of pathogenesis of dementia.
SUMMARY: So far, there is no established method to predict better responders or 
long-term benefits with currently approved drugs for treatment of dementia. 
Recent systematic reviews and new research on current treatment, however, 
provide valuable information for clinicians, and novel drugs under investigation 
reveal promising new therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1097/01.yco.0000245756.29244.b9
PMID: 17012934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1523. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;19(6):581-6. doi: 
10.1097/01.yco.0000245746.45384.0e.

The neurobiology of neuropsychiatric syndromes in dementia.

Meeks TW(1), Ropacki SA, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
California, San Diego, and Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San 
Diego, California 92161, USA. tmeeks@ucsd.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Neuropsychiatric disturbances in dementia are prevalent, and 
research is uncovering their neurobiological correlates.
RECENT FINDINGS: Late-onset depression appears to be associated with Alzheimer's 
disease pathology at autopsy, and lifetime depression episodes may worsen 
Alzheimer's disease pathology in the hippocampus. Vascular disease and elevated 
homocysteine increase risk for both late-onset depression and Alzheimer's 
disease and may partly mediate their relationship. Monoamine changes are robust 
finding in Alzheimer's disease and may account for many observed depression 
symptoms. Risk of psychosis of Alzheimer's disease appears to be increased by 
several genes also implicated in schizophrenia (e.g., 
catechol-O-methyltransferase, neuregulin-1). Psychosis in dementia with Lewy 
bodies appears to be related to cholinergic deficits. Alzheimer's disease is 
associated with changes in the circadian sleep-wake cycles, including decreased 
night-time melatonin. Sleep apnea may be related to apolipoprotein E genotype 
and impact cognition in Alzheimer's disease. Rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder is intricately related to synucleinopathies, such as dementia with Lewy 
bodies, but synuclein changes may not totally explain this relationship.
SUMMARY: Neuropsychiatric disturbances are a core feature of dementia and worsen 
many clinical outcomes. Among the most validated syndromes are depression, 
psychosis, and sleep disturbance of Alzheimer's disease. Neuropathology, 
neuroimaging, and genetic studies increasingly provide insight into the origins 
of these psychiatric symptoms in dementia.

DOI: 10.1097/01.yco.0000245746.45384.0e
PMID: 17012935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1524. Indian J Med Res. 2006 Aug;124(2):163-72.

A random sample survey for prevalence of major neurological disorders in 
Kolkata.

Das SK(1), Biswas A, Roy T, Banerjee TK, Mukherjee CS, Raut DK, Chaudhuri A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromedicine, Bangur Institute of Neurology, Kolkata, India. 
das_sk70@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVES: Large scale epidemiological studies on neurological 
disorders are very few in India. We therefore planned to conduct a 
cross-sectional population-based epidemiological study on a stratified randomly 
selected sample from the city of Kolkata to study the prevalence of major 
neurological disorders such as epilepsy, stroke, dementia and Parkinsonism.
METHODS: The method of case ascertainment was two- stage house-to-house survey; 
the first stage was undertaken by a field team consisting of four field workers 
and a neuropsychologist. Screening questionnaire based on National Institute of 
Mental Health and Neuro Sciences (NIMHANS) protocol was used. In the second 
stage a neurologist examined all the screened positive cases.
RESULTS: A total of 52,377 subjects participated in the study. The crude 
prevalence rates (per 100,000 population) of major neurological disorders with 
95 per cent confidence intervals (95% CI) and age adjusted rates (AAR) based on 
US 2000 population were 557.5 (95% CI 496.17-624.40 and AAR - 516.77) in 
epilepsy, 486.85 (95% CI 377.0 to 551.11 and AAR-765.68) in stroke, 87.82 (95% 
CI 64.02-117.50 and AAR-168.4) in dementia and 45.82 (95% CI 29.64-67.63 and 
AAR-71.64) in Parkinsonism. The weighted prevalence rates (per 100,000) of the 
whole population based on re-screening of 10 per cent of negative samples were 
763.89 (95% CI 690.55- 842.57) in epilepsy, 624.32 (95% CI 555.64-699.24) in 
stroke and 139.37 (95% CI 108.71-176.06) in dementia.
INTERPRETATION & CONCLUSION: A high rate of stroke and overall lower prevalence 
of Parkinsonism and dementia was recorded as compared to western studies. High 
prevalence rate of stroke emphasizes the need to study incidence, morbidity and 
mortality profile of stroke including its socio-economic impact and also 
case-control analysis to determine the underlying risk factors.

PMID: 17015930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1525. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2006 Oct;23(5):431-5. doi: 
10.1097/01.wnp.0000216127.53517.4d.

Visual-evoked potentials to onset of chromatic red-green and blue-yellow 
gratings in Parkinson's disease never treated with L-dopa.

Sartucci F(1), Porciatti V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Neurological Clinic, Pisa University Medical 
School, Pisa, Italy.

The differential dysfunction of chromatic and achromatic visual pathways in 
early Parkinson's disease (PD) was evaluated by means of visual-evoked 
potentials (VEPs) recorded in 12 patients (mean age 60.1 +/- 8.3 years; range 46 
to 74 years) in the early stages of PD and not yet undergoing treatment with 
L-dopa, and in 12 age-matched controls. Visual stimuli were full-field (14 deg) 
equiluminant red-green (R-G), blue-yellow (B-Y), and black-white (B-W) 
sinusoidal gratings of two cycles per degree, presented in onset (300 
milliseconds)--offset (700 milliseconds) mode, at two contrast (K) levels (90% 
and 25%). The VEP mean latencies were significantly more delayed in PD patients 
than in controls for chromatic than for luminance stimuli, in particular for B-Y 
stimuli of low contrast (K90%: B-W = 6.6 milliseconds, R-G = 3.34 milliseconds, 
B-Y = 15.48 milliseconds; K25%: B-W = 7.8 milliseconds, R-G = 14.8 milliseconds, 
B-Y = 28.9). Latencies of chromatic VEPs were more variable that achromatic VEP 
latencies in both normal subjects and PD patients. Therefore, the frequency of 
latency abnormalities (within 30%) was not significantly different for the three 
visual stimuli. Our results show that, in addition to achromatic VEPs, chromatic 
VEPs are impaired in early PD patients not yet undergoing L-dopa therapy, 
indicating an acquired color deficiency in these patients. The greater delay for 
the B-Y VEPs suggests a higher vulnerability of visual blue-cone pathway in the 
early stages of the disease. However, the overall sensitivity of chromatic VEPs 
in detecting early visual impairment in PD is comparable with that of achromatic 
VEPs.

DOI: 10.1097/01.wnp.0000216127.53517.4d
PMCID: PMC3703931
PMID: 17016154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1526. Int Psychogeriatr. 2006 Dec;18(4):755-7. doi: 10.1017/S1041610206244417.

Catechol-o-methyltransferase gene polymorphism in dementia with Lewy 
bodies-related psychosis: evidence for a genetic predisposition.

Borroni B, Di Luca M, Padovani A.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610206244417
PMID: 17026782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1527. Brain Res Bull. 2006 Oct 16;70(4-6):386-90. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.07.008. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Olfactory deficit in idiopathic rapid eye movements sleep behavior disorder.

Fantini ML(1), Postuma RB, Montplaisir J, Ferini-Strambi L.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Neurology, Università Vita-Salute San 
Raffaele, Via Stamira d'Ancona n. 20, 20127 Milan, Italy. 
fantini.marialivia@hsr.it

INTRODUCTION: REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia characterized by 
a loss of atonia and an increased phasic muscle activity during REM sleep. 
Idiopathic RBD frequently herald an alpha-synucleinopathy, including such as 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy Body (DLB). Pathological changes 
in the anterior olfactory nucleus and olfactory loss occur very early in the 
course of PD and DLB. The aim of the study was to assess olfactory function in a 
large group of idiopathic RBD patients.
METHODS: Fifty-four consecutive polysomnographically-confirmed iRBD patients (44 
men, 10 women; mean age: 69.2+/-8.3 years; mean Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale Part III (UPDRS-III) score: 4.9+/-4.3) and 54 age and 
gender-matched control subjects underwent the Brief University of Pennsylvania 
Smell Identification Test (B-SIT).
RESULTS: A marked olfactory impairment was observed in the RBD group (mean B-SIT 
score: 7.1+/-2.5 versus 9.4+/-1.8; p < 0.0001), with 33 (61.1%) RBD patients 
versus 9 (16.6%) controls showing abnormal olfactory function (p < 0.0001). No 
correlation was found between the degree of olfactory loss and either duration 
of RBD symptoms or UPDRS-III score. Deficit in recognize paint thinner odorant 
showed the highest positive predictive value (0.95) for identifying idiopathic 
RBD.
CONCLUSIONS: The olfactory deficit found in most idiopathic RBD patients shares 
similarities with that described in PD and may be a sign of a widespread 
neurodegenerative process. Its detection may help in identifying subjects at 
higher risk of developing an alpha-synucleinopathy-mediated neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2006.07.008
PMID: 17027774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1528. Mov Disord. 2006 Dec;21(12):2170-4. doi: 10.1002/mds.21144.

Associations between family history of Parkinson's disease and dementia and risk 
of dementia in Parkinson's disease: A community-based, longitudinal study.

Kurz MW(1), Larsen JP, Kvaloy JT, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Dementia is common in patients with Parkinson's disease (PDD). The etiology of 
PDD is still unclear, but exciting advances have been made in discovering 
pathogenetic components in Parkinson's disease (PD), implicating the role of 
genetic factors. It is, however, still controversial whether genetic factors 
also contribute to the development of dementia in PD. Thus, we investigated the 
association between development of dementia and a positive family history of PD 
or dementia in a community-based study of PD in Rogaland County, Norway (n = 
219). The patients were followed prospectively with neurological and 
neuropsychological assessments. Dementia was more common in patients with a 
strong family association of PD (first-degree relatives > second-degree 
relatives > no family history; P < 0.05). However, time to dementia did not 
differ between the two groups. No associations between dementia in PD and 
familial occurrence of dementia could be shown. Further studies with larger 
samples are needed to explore a possible relationship between a family history 
of PD and development of dementia in PD and its potential pathogenetic 
mechanisms.

Copyright 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21144
PMID: 17029273 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1529. Brain. 2006 Nov;129(Pt 11):3103-14. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl268. Epub 2006 Oct 9.

Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism associated with the IVS1+1G->A mutation 
in progranulin: a clinicopathologic study.

Boeve BF(1), Baker M, Dickson DW, Parisi JE, Giannini C, Josephs KA, Hutton M, 
Pickering-Brown SM, Rademakers R, Tang-Wai D, Jack CR Jr, Kantarci K, Shiung MM, 
Golde T, Smith GE, Geda YE, Knopman DS, Petersen RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
bboeve@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Brain. 2006 Nov;129(Pt 11):2808-10.

We previously reported a kindred with three cases of dementia, in which the 
proband exhibited features typical of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism 
(FTDP). An arginine insertion at codon 352 (insR352) in the presenilin-1 (PSEN1) 
gene was identified in the proband, but analyses in plasma and CSF suggested a 
mechanism of neurodegeneration not directly related to amyloid pathophysiology. 
The proband was followed with yearly evaluations of functional, clinical, 
neuropsychologic, neuropsychiatric and radiologic status, which showed 
relatively linear change over the initial 4 years of assessment. Upon the 
proband's death at age 63, neuropathologic examination revealed frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration (FTLD) with ubiquitin-positive inclusions (FTLD-U). We 
recently identified several kindreds with familial FTDP associated with 
mutations in the progranulin (PGRN) gene, particularly in those cases with 
neuronal intranuclear inclusions. Our proband was indeed found to have such 
inclusions, and PGRN analysis in this proband revealed the G to A mutation in 
the exon 1 splice donor site (IVS1+1G-->A) which is predicted to destroy the 
5'-splice site of exon 1 and remove the start methionine codon and hence 
completely block any PGRN protein from being generated. These findings suggest 
that the insR352 PSEN1 is not pathogenic, and the IVS1+1G-->A mutation in PGRN 
causes FTDP associated with FTLD-U pathology and represents a new class of 
neurodegenerative disease--the 'hypoprogranulinopathies'.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl268
PMID: 17030535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1530. Antioxid Redox Signal. 2006 Nov-Dec;8(11-12):2047-59. doi: 
10.1089/ars.2006.8.2047.

Reproductive hormones modulate oxidative stress in Alzheimer's disease.

Barron AM(1), Fuller SJ, Verdile G, Martins RN.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, The University of Western 
Australia, Nedlands, Australia.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a neurodegenerative disease characterized by gradual 
cognitive decline, impairments in speech and language, and dysfunction in the 
sensorimotor systems, culminating in complete reliance on nursing care. 
Oxidative stress, caused by an imbalance in the pro-oxidant/antioxidant 
mechanisms in the body, has been implicated in AD pathogenesis, as in many other 
age-associated diseases such as atherosclerosis, Parkinson disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Although the hormones estrogen, progesterone, 
testosterone, and luteinizing hormone are best known for their roles in 
reproduction, many studies show these hormones have other roles, including 
neuroprotection. Changes in the levels of these hormones that occur in 
reproductive senescence are hypothesized to increase risk of AD, as a result of 
reduced protection against oxidative insults. The Abeta peptide, overproduction 
of which is thought to be a key pathogenic event in the development of AD, is 
neurotoxic, most likely due to its ability to promote oxidative stress. The 
reproductive hormones are known to influence Abeta metabolism, and this review 
discusses the beneficial and detrimental effects these hormones have on Abeta 
production and oxidative stress, and their relevance in potential AD therapies.

DOI: 10.1089/ars.2006.8.2047
PMID: 17034349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1531. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2006;2006(3):78549. doi: 10.1155/JBB/2006/78549.

Gaucher disease and the synucleinopathies.

Hruska KS(1), Goker-Alpan O, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892-3708, USA.

Several recent observations suggest a connection between Gaucher disease, the 
inherited deficiency of glucocerebrosidase, and the synucleinopathies. Rare 
patients have been observed who develop both Gaucher disease and parkinsonism. 
Autopsy studies on these subjects reveal synuclein-positive Lewy bodies and 
inclusions. An increased incidence of synucleinopathies also has been noted in 
relatives of Gaucher probands. In complementary studies, screening of patients 
with parkinsonism has identified a greater than expected frequency of 
glucocerebrosidase mutations. These glucocerebrosidase mutation carriers have a 
wide spectrum of associated parkinsonian phenotypes, ranging from classic 
L-dopa-responsive Parkinson disease to a phenotype more characteristic of Lewy 
body dementia. Despite this association, the vast majority of Gaucher carriers 
and patients with Gaucher disease never develop parkinsonism. However, mutations 
in this gene are likely to be a contributing risk factor in subjects otherwise 
prone to developing synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1155/JBB/2006/78549
PMCID: PMC1510950
PMID: 17047314


1532. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2006;2006(3):82323. doi: 10.1155/JBB/2006/82323.

Oxidative damage to RNA in neurodegenerative diseases.

Nunomura A(1), Honda K, Takeda A, Hirai K, Zhu X, Smith MA, Perry G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa 
078-8510, Japan.

Since 1999, oxidative damage to RNA molecules has been described in several 
neurological diseases including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Down 
syndrome, dementia with Lewy bodies, prion disease, subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis, and xeroderma pigmentosum. An early involvement of RNA 
oxidation of vulnerable neuronal population in the neurodegenerative diseases 
has been demonstrated, which is strongly supported by a recent observation of 
increased RNA oxidation in brains of subjects with mild cognitive impairment. 
Until recently, little is known about consequences and cellular handling of the 
RNA damage. However, increasing body of evidence suggests detrimental effects of 
the RNA damage in protein synthesis and the existence of several coping 
mechanisms including direct repair and avoiding the incorporation of the damaged 
ribonucleotides into translational machinery. Further investigations toward 
understanding of the consequences and cellular handling mechanisms of the 
oxidative RNA damage may provide significant insights into the pathogenesis and 
therapeutic strategies of the neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1155/JBB/2006/82323
PMCID: PMC1559934
PMID: 17047315


1533. J Neuroinflammation. 2006 Oct 19;3:29. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-3-29.

Complement activation in the Parkinson's disease substantia nigra: an 
immunocytochemical study.

Loeffler DA(1), Camp DM, Conant SB.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, William Beaumont Hospital Research Institute, Royal 
Oak, MI 48073, USA. DLoeffler@beaumont.edu

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory processes are increased in the Parkinson's disease (PD) 
brain. The long-term use of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs has been 
associated, in retrospective studies, with decreased risk for PD, suggesting 
that inflammation may contribute to development of this disorder. The objective 
of this study was to determine the extent of complement activation, a major 
inflammatory mechanism, in PD.
METHODS: Substantia nigra specimens from young normal subjects (n = 11-13), aged 
normal subjects (n = 24-28), and subjects with PD (n = 19-20), Alzheimer's 
disease (AD; n = 12-13), and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; n = 9) were stained 
for iC3b and C9, representing early- and late-stage complement activation, 
respectively. Numbers of iC3b+, C9+, and total melanized neurons in each section 
were counted in a blinded fashion. Nonparametric analyses were used to evaluate 
differences between groups and to evaluate correlations between complement 
staining, numbers of melanized neurons, and the duration of PD.
RESULTS: Lewy bodies in both PD and DLB specimens stained for iC3b and C9. 
Staining was also prominent on melanized neurons. The percentage of iC3b+ 
neurons was significantly increased in PD vs. aged normal and AD specimens, and 
in young normal vs. aged normal specimens. C9 immunoreactivity was significantly 
increased in PD vs. AD specimens, but unlike iC3b, the increased C9 staining in 
PD and young normal specimens did not achieve statistical significance vs. aged 
normal specimens. iC3b and C9 staining in PD specimens was not correlated with 
the numbers of remaining melanized neurons, nor with the duration of PD.
CONCLUSION: Complement activation occurs on Lewy bodies and melanized neurons in 
the PD substantia nigra. Early complement activation (iC3b) is increased on 
melanized neurons in PD vs. aged normal specimens, and late-stage complement 
activation (C9) also tends to increase. This latter finding suggests that 
complement activation may contribute to loss of dopaminergic neurons in some 
individuals with PD. Complement activation on melanized neurons appears to 
decrease with normal aging, suggesting a possible neuroprotective role for this 
process in the normal substantia nigra.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-3-29
PMCID: PMC1626447
PMID: 17052351


1534. J Psychopharmacol. 2006 Nov;20(6):732-55. doi: 10.1177/0269881106068299.

Clinical practice with anti-dementia drugs: a consensus statement from British 
Association for Psychopharmacology.

Burns A(1), O'Brien J; BAP Dementia Consensus group; Auriacombe S, Ballard C, 
Broich K, Bullock R, Feldman H, Ford G, Knapp M, McCaddon A, Iliffe S, Jacova C, 
Jones R, Lennon S, McKeith I, Orgogozo JM, Purandare N, Richardson M, Ritchie C, 
Thomas A, Warner J, Wilcock G, Wilkinson D; British Association for 
Psychopharmacology.

Author information:
(1)University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. alistair.burns@manchester.ac.uk

The British Association for Psychopharmacology (BAP) coordinated a meeting of 
experts to review the evidence on the drug treatment for dementia. The level of 
evidence (types) was rated using a standard system: Types 1a and 1b (evidence 
from meta-analysis of randomised controlled trials or at least one controlled 
trial respectively); types 2a and 2b (one well-designed study or one other type 
of quasi experimental study respectively); type 3 (non-experimental descriptive 
studies); and type 4 (expert opinion). There is type 1a evidence for 
cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine) for mild to 
moderate Alzheimer's disease; memantine for moderate to severe Alzheimer's 
disease; and for the use of bright light therapy and aromatherapy. There is type 
1a evidence of no effect of anti inflammatory drugs or statins. There is 
conflicting evidence regarding oestrogens, with type 2a evidence of a protective 
effect of oestrogens but 1b evidence of a harmful effect. Type 1a evidence for 
any effect of B12 and folate will be forthcoming when current trials report. 
There is type 1b evidence for gingko biloba in producing a modest benefit of 
cognitive function; cholinesterase inhibitors for the treatment of people with 
Lewy body disease (particularly neuropsychiatric symptoms); cholinesterase 
inhibitors and memantine in treatment cognitive impairment associated with 
vascular dementia; and the effect of metal collating agents (although these 
should not be prescribed until more data on safety and efficacy are available). 
There is type 1b evidence to show that neither cholinesterase inhibitors nor 
vitamin E reduce the risk of developing Alzheimer's disease in people with mild 
cognitive impairment; and there is no evidence that there is any intervention 
that can prevent the onset of dementia. There is type 1b evidence for the 
beneficial effects of adding memantine to cholinesterase inhibitors, and type 2b 
evidence of positive switching outcomes from one cholinesterase inhibitor to 
another. There is type 2a evidence for a positive effect of reminiscence 
therapy, and type 2a evidence that cognitive training does not work. There is 
type 3 evidence to support the use of psychological interventions in dementia. 
There is type 2 evidence that a clinical diagnosis of dementia can be made 
accurately and that brain imaging increases that accuracy. Although the 
consensus statement dealt largely with medication, the role of dementia care in 
secondary services (geriatric medicine and old age psychiatry) and primary care, 
along with health economics, was discussed. There is ample evidence that there 
are effective treatments for people with dementia, and Alzheimer's disease in 
particular. Patients, their carers, and clinicians deserve to be optimistic in a 
field which often attracts therapeutic nihilism.

DOI: 10.1177/0269881106068299
PMID: 17060346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1535. Drugs Aging. 2006;23(10):807-22. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200623100-00004.

Management of Parkinson's disease dementia : practical considerations.

Rongve A(1), Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Haugesund County Hospital, Haugesund, Norway University of Bergen, Bergen, 
Norway. arvid.rongve@helse-fonna.no

Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) ultimately develops in about 80% of patients 
with Parkinson's disease (PD), and cross-sectional studies have found that some 
30% of these patients will experience neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as visual 
hallucinations and psychosis. The most consistently reported risk factors for 
dementia in PD are age, severe parkinsonism and mild cognitive impairment. In 
PDD, both subcortical cognitive and cortical cognitive profiles are described. 
Specific disorders of sleep, such as rapid eye movement sleep behaviour 
disorder, excessive daytime sleepiness and sleep attacks, occur frequently. 
Alzheimer and Lewy body pathology coexist, but the Lewy body pathology in limbic 
and cortical areas seems to be the main cause of dementia. Neurochemical changes 
in the biogenic amines and acetylcholine are common, and magnetic resonance 
imaging studies have shown cortical atrophy in wide cortical areas, including 
the hippocampus. All PD patients should be screened for mild cognitive 
impairment and dementia. A large randomised clinical trial showed that the 
cholinesterase inhibitor rivastigmine has desirable effects on cognition and 
neuropsychiatric symptoms in PDD patients. Atypical antipsychotic agents may 
improve psychosis in PDD, but the evidence for this is poor and adverse effects 
from such therapy are common and may be severe. Non-pharmacological 
interventions can also be effective but require further study.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200623100-00004
PMID: 17067184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1536. Front Neuroendocrinol. 2006 Dec;27(4):404-14. doi: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2006.09.003. 
Epub 2006 Oct 27.

Estrogen-BDNF interactions: implications for neurodegenerative diseases.

Sohrabji F(1), Lewis DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Experimental Therapeutics, TAMU Health Science 
Center, College Station, TX 77843-1114, USA. f-sohrabji@tamu.edu

Since its' discovery over 20 years ago, BDNF has been shown to play a key role 
in neuronal survival, in promoting neuronal regeneration following injury, 
regulating transmitter systems and attenuating neural-immune responses. 
Estrogen's actions in the young and mature brain, and its role in 
neurodegenerative diseases in many cases overlaps with those observed for BDNF. 
Reduced estrogen and BDNF are observed in patients with Parkinson's disease and 
Alzheimer's disease, while high estrogen levels are a risk factor for 
development of multiple sclerosis. Estrogen receptors, which transduce the 
actions of estrogen, colocalize to cells that express BDNF and its receptor 
trkB, and estrogen further regulates the expression of this neurotrophin system. 
This review describes the distribution of BDNF and trkB expressing cells in the 
forebrain, and the roles of estrogen and the BDNF-trkB neurotrophin system in 
Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yfrne.2006.09.003
PMCID: PMC1828910
PMID: 17069877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1537. Acta Neuropathol. 2007 Apr;113(4):471-9. doi: 10.1007/s00401-006-0155-8. Epub 
2006 Oct 28.

Biochemical and pathological characterization of frontotemporal dementia due to 
a Leu266Val mutation in microtubule-associated protein tau in an African 
American individual.

Van Deerlin VM(1), Forman MS, Farmer JM, Grossman M, Joyce S, Crowe A, 
Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, Chatterjee A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center for Neurodegenerative 
Disease Research and Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, 3600 Spruce 
St., 3 Maloney Bldg., Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. vivianna@mail.med.upenn.edu

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a clinically heterogeneous disorder 
characterized by alterations in language and/or behavior, often in association 
with Parkinsonism or motor neuron disease. A familial form of FTD is associated 
with mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) gene. We report 
here on the clinical, neuroimaging, cerebral spinal fluid biomarker, genetic, 
biochemical and postmortem neuropathological analyses of a case of familial FTD 
with a Leu266Val MAPT mutation which results in a very early age of onset and a 
rapid course of disease. This is also the first reported case of any MAPT 
mutation in an individual of African American ethnicity.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-006-0155-8
PMID: 17072625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1538. J Proteome Res. 2006 Nov;5(11):3077-83. doi: 10.1021/pr0601382.

Allosteric modulation of dopamine D2 receptors by homocysteine.

Agnati LF(1), Ferré S, Genedani S, Leo G, Guidolin D, Filaferro M, Carriba P, 
Casadó V, Lluis C, Franco R, Woods AS, Fuxe K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena, 41100 Modena, Italy. 
luigiagnati@tin.it

It has been suggested that L-DOPA-induced hyperhomocysteinemia can increase the 
risk of stroke, heart disease, and dementia and is an additional pathogenetic 
factor involved in the progression of Parkinson's disease. In Chinese hamster 
ovary (CHO) cells stably cotransfected with adenosine A(2A) and dopamine D2 
receptors, homocysteine selectively decreased the ability of D2 receptor 
stimulation to internalize adenosine A(2A)-dopamine D2 receptor complexes. 
Radioligand-binding experiments in the same cell line demonstrated that 
homocysteine acts as an allosteric D2 receptor antagonist, by selectively 
reducing the affinity of D2 receptors for agonists but not for antagonists. Mass 
spectrometric analysis showed that, by means of an arginine (Arg)-thiol 
electrostatic interaction, homocysteine forms noncovalent complexes with the two 
Arg-rich epitopes of the third intracellular loop of the D2 receptor, one of 
them involved in A(2A)-D2 receptor heteromerization. However, homocysteine was 
unable to prevent or disrupt A(2A)-D2 receptor heteromerization, as demonstrated 
with Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer (FRET) experiments in stably 
cotransfected HEK cells. The present results could have implications for 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1021/pr0601382
PMID: 17081059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1539. Mov Disord. 2007 Jan;22(1):48-54. doi: 10.1002/mds.21197.

Transcranial brain sonography findings in clinical subgroups of idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease.

Walter U(1), Dressler D, Wolters A, Wittstock M, Benecke R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. 
uwe.walter@med.uni-rostock.de

To investigate whether transcranial brain sonography (TCS) discriminates 
different courses of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), 101 patients with 
clinically definite PD were studied. In four patients, TCS was not possible due 
to insufficient acoustic temporal bone windows. Substantia nigra (SN) 
hyperechogenicity was found in 96% of assessable patients. Larger SN echogenic 
size correlated with younger age at PD onset (Spearman correlation, r = -0.383; 
P < 0.001), but not with age, PD duration, or severity. Marked bilateral SN 
hyperechogenicity indicated early-onset rather than late-onset PD, and 
akinetic-rigid (AR) or mixed-type (MX) PD rather than tremor-dominant PD. SN 
echogenic sizes were larger contralateral to the clinically more affected side 
in AR PD and MX PD patients. Reduced echogenicity of brainstem raphe was 
associated with depression (RR = 1.61; 95% CI = 1.05-2.46; P = 0.044) but not 
with other clinical features. Caudate nucleus hyperechogenicity was, 
independently from PD duration, related to drug-induced psychosis (RR = 2.40; CI 
= 1.36-4.22; P = 0.001), but not to motor fluctuations. Lenticular nucleus 
hyperechogenicity indicated AR PD rather than tremor-dominant PD (RR = 1.44; CI 
= 1.11-1.86; P = 0.040). Frontal horn dilatation > 15.4 mm (mean of bilateral 
measurements) indicated increased risk of dementia (RR = 4.11; CI = 1.51-11.2; P 
= 0.001). We conclude that TCS displays characteristic changes of deep brain 
structures in different clinical manifestations of PD.

Copyright 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21197
PMID: 17083096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1540. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2006 Dec;19(4):195-201. doi: 
10.1177/0891988706292755.

Predicting lewy body pathology in a community-based sample with clinical 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Tsuang D(1), Simpson K, Larson EB, Peskind E, Kukull W, Bowen JB, McCormick W, 
Teri L, Montine T, Thompson ML, Leverenz JB.

Author information:
(1)University of Washington Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Seattle, WA, USA. dwt1@u.washington.edu

Accurate antemortem prediction of Lewy body pathology in patients with dementia 
is problematic. This study generates a model that better predicts Lewy body 
pathology in community-based patients with clinical Alzheimer's disease. Lewy 
body pathology was detected in 80 of 152 participants (52.6%) with an initial 
diagnosis of probable Alzheimer's disease. In a stepwise logistic regression 
model, female gender, lower education, being married, bradykinesia, 
hallucinations, and absence of irritability predicted the greatest likelihood of 
Lewy body pathology. The predictive model correctly diagnosed Lewy body 
pathology with an estimated sensitivity of 75%, specificity of 68%, and accuracy 
of 72%; the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve was 0.75. In 
a community-based autopsy sample, this predictive model confirmed parkinsonism 
and hallucinations as important predictors of Lewy body pathology in patients 
with clinical Alzheimer's disease. The model also identified other demographic 
and clinical characteristics that might enhance the prediction of Lewy body 
pathology.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988706292755
PMID: 17085757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1541. Mov Disord. 2007 Jan;22(1):141-5. doi: 10.1002/mds.21220.

Laterality, region, and type of motor dysfunction correlate with cognitive 
impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Williams LN(1), Seignourel P, Crucian GP, Okun MS, Rodriguez RL, Skidmore FM, 
Foster PS, Jacobson CE 4th, Romrell J, Bowers D, Fernandez HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

We studied the relationship between two screening cognitive measures and off 
motor Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) scores in 108 Parkinson's 
disease patients. Multiple regressions were conducted to examine the UPDRS 
subscores' unique contributions to cognitive function. When including 
bradykinesia, rigidity, and postural/gait instability subscores, only 
bradykinesia predicted Mini Mental Status Examination (MMSE), normalized beta = 
-0.57, t(104) = -3.31, P < 0.01, and Dementia Rating Scale-2 (DRS-2), normalized 
beta = -0.45, t(104) = -2.55, P < 0.05. Tremor was not included in the 
regression analyses because it did not correlate with cognitive function. When 
including axial and appendicular subscores, only the axial subscore predicted 
MMSE, normalized beta = -0.39, t(105) = -3.19, P < 0.01, and DRS-2 scores, 
normalized beta = -0.40, t(106) = -3.28, P < 0.01. When including left-sided and 
right-sided subscores, only the right-sided symptoms predicted DRS-2 scores, 
normalized beta = -0.28, t(105) = -2.45, P < 0.05, and showed a trend toward 
predicting MMSE scores, normalized beta = -0.22, t(105) = -1.95, P = 0.054. We 
therefore found that right-sided symptoms (for laterality), axial symptoms (for 
region), and bradykinesia (for type of symptoms) were the best predictors of 
cognitive function.

Copyright 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21220
PMID: 17089386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1542. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007 Feb;22 Suppl 1:S115-26. doi: 
10.1016/j.acn.2006.10.006. Epub 2006 Nov 13.

Identifying and monitoring cognitive deficits in clinical populations using 
Automated Neuropsychological Assessment Metrics (ANAM) tests.

Kane RL(1), Roebuck-Spencer T, Short P, Kabat M, Wilken J.

Author information:
(1)VA Maryland Healthcare System, United States. Robert.Kane@va.gov

In this article we review studies in which Automated Neuropsychological 
Assessment Metrics (ANAM) measures were used to screen for impairment in various 
clinical populations. These clinical groups include patients with multiple 
sclerosis, systemic lupus erythematosus, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's 
dementia, acquired brain injury, and migraine headache. Data are also presented 
from a group of outpatient referrals unselected with respect to clinical 
condition. Findings support the use of ANAM as a screening procedure for 
identifying the impaired patient.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acn.2006.10.006
PMID: 17101258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1543. Neurology. 2006 Nov 14;67(9):1605-11. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000242630.52203.8f.

Clinical phenotype of Parkinson disease dementia.

Galvin JE(1), Pollack J, Morris JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63108, USA. galvinj@neuro.wustl.edu

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007 Jun;3(6):308-9.

OBJECTIVE: To determine which clinical features best characterize Parkinson 
disease dementia (PDD), compared with Alzheimer disease (AD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB), and to determine the pathologic basis for PDD.
METHODS: We examined 103 participants enrolled in a longitudinal study 
(nondemented control = 10, PD = 42, DLB = 20, AD = 31) who were followed to 
autopsy using standardized protocols. We characterized the features of PDD using 
published criteria for AD and DLB as a framework. Statistical analysis was 
performed using chi(2) and Fisher exact tests, Kaplan-Meier curves, and logistic 
regression models.
RESULTS: The sample's mean age was 74.0 years (range 53 to 91 years), and 
individuals were followed for a mean of 3.4 visits (range 1 to 12 visits). 
During longitudinal follow-up, 83% of subjects with PD developed dementia, 
defined as a Clinical Dementia Rating score of >or=0.5. Features that 
distinguished PDD from AD included cognitive fluctuations (p = 0.001), visual (p 
< 0.001) and auditory (p = 0.006) hallucinations, depression (p = 0.003), and 
sleep disturbance (p = 0.003). These PDD features were identical to those 
observed for DLB. The pathologic substrates for PDD included DLB (38%), AD 
(32%), and nigral LB alone (24%). Clinical predictors of PDD were visual 
hallucinations (odds ratio [OR] 21.3; 95% CI: 1.5 to 309.6) and male gender (OR 
9.6; 95% CI: 1.3 to 71.4).
CONCLUSIONS: Parkinson disease dementia (PDD) shares identical clinical features 
with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB); both entities can be distinguished from 
Alzheimer disease. The presence of PDD/DLB features at any time during the 
course of PD is highly predictive of dementia and the presence of LB at autopsy; 
in particular, male gender and visual hallucinations in PD predict dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000242630.52203.8f
PMID: 17101891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1544. Autoimmun Rev. 2006 Nov;6(1):54-60. doi: 10.1016/j.autrev.2006.07.002. Epub 2006 
Aug 1.

To smell the immune system: olfaction, autoimmunity and brain involvement.

Strous RD(1), Shoenfeld Y.

Author information:
(1)Beer Yaakov Mental Health Center, Beer Yaakov, Israel. raels@post.tau.ac.il

Aside from its recognition and warning functions, olfaction serves many purposes 
in the CNS and remains one of the most important means of communication with the 
environment. In addition to olfactory tract input, the olfactory bulb also 
receives and provides input to other brain centers that modify neuronal 
activity. Research in the field of immunology as well as in various brain 
illnesses is beginning to indicate the increasing relevance of smell in 
pathophysiology. Much of this is based on the many intricate interactions that 
exist between the immune system and the nervous system, and evidence exists that 
there may be something unique about the olfactory system that is inextricably 
related to immunological function. In addition, accumulating evidence confirms 
the existence of olfactory dysfunction in brain disease, much of which appears 
at early stages including multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer's Disease, Parkinson's 
Disease, schizophrenia and depression. Such observations may further suggest 
that under certain circumstances, olfactory abnormalities may be associated with 
autoimmune conditions. Since the organization of the olfactory system is so 
sensitive, impairment may be noted at an early stage. This may become important 
in the prediction of certain brain illnesses. While preliminary evidence may 
suggest a role for olfaction in the management and alleviation of various 
disorders, investigation of its clinical relevance remains limited.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autrev.2006.07.002
PMID: 17110318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1545. Mov Disord. 2007 Apr 15;22(5):753; author reply 753-4. doi: 10.1002/mds.21189.

Re: clinical feature profile of spinocerebellar ataxia type 1-8 predicts 
genetically defined subtypes.

Friedman J.

Comment on
    Mov Disord. 2005 Nov;20(11):1405-12.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21189
PMID: 17115400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1546. J Neurol. 2006 Dec;253 Suppl 7:VII2-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-7002-7.

The natural history of Parkinson's disease.

Poewe W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020 
Innsbruck, Austria. werner.poewe@uibk.ac.at

Although Parkinson's disease (PD) is the only chronic neurodegenerative disorder 
for which there are effective symptomatic therapies no treatment has yet been 
identified that would significantly slow its natural progression. Studies into 
the natural history of Parkinson's disease have been complicated by issues of 
diagnostic accuracy, heterogeneity of different forms of the disease as well as 
confounding effects of age related comorbidities. Only recently results from 
placebo-controlled clinical trials have helped to define the rates of 
progression of motor dysfunction as assessed by the UPDRS in early PD. Studies 
in treated patients suggest that there may be different rates of progression in 
different phases of the disease with faster decline in earlier versus later 
stages. Measuring progression of motor symptoms, however, alone is insufficient 
to describe the natural history of PD and may also be inadequate to define 
clinically meaningful disease modification in intervention trials. Progression 
of global disability as captured in the Hoehn and Yahr scale is important to 
consider and progression to stage III with beginning postural impairment defines 
a major milestone in the natural history of this illness. In addition, non-motor 
symptoms have major impact on the natural history of PD. Dementia, sleep-wake 
cycle dysregulation and autonomic failure were present in 50-80% of patients in 
one recent 15 year-follow up study. Dementia and psychosis are also major risk 
factors for nursing home placement in PD. A prerequisite for effective 
interventions that would modify disease progression in Parkinson's disease is 
the identification of the earliest preclinical stages of illness. This is now 
become a realistic possibility with screening tests of olfactory function and 
subsequent functional imaging. Subjects at risk for Parkinson's disease should 
be the future focus of neuroprotective trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-006-7002-7
PMID: 17131223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1547. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007 Jun;22(6):568-73. doi: 10.1002/gps.1717.

Subtle imitation behaviour in convenience samples of normal, demented, and 
currently depressed elderly subjects.

von Gunten A(1), Duc R.

Author information:
(1)Service of Old Age Psychiatry of the Department of Psychiatry - CHUV, 
Lausanne, Switzerland. armin.von-gunten@chuv.ch

BACKGROUND: The clinical significance of imitation behaviour (IB) is unclear. 
The aim of this study was to investigate the prevalence of subtle naïve and 
obstinate IB in convenience samples of normal elderly, demented, and depressed 
subjects.
METHOD: Subtle IB was assessed using a protocol constructed ad hoc in 146 
patients, consecutively referred to a memory clinic having received an ICD-10 
diagnosis of either dementia or depression, and in 241 healthy subjects. The 
prevalence of IB in the three groups was determined and the association with 
possible demographic, cognitive, and non-cognitive variables analysed.
RESULTS: Subtle naïve IB was frequent in the elderly with dementia, intermediate 
in the depressed, and rare in the normal elderly except that the latter 
frequently stretched out their arms. Obstinate IB never occurred in the normal 
elderly. IB was predicted by none of the variables used.
LIMITATIONS: The groups included were convenience samples with the depressed 
being a small group precluding further distinction of depressive subtypes.
CONCLUSION: Although naïve IB is a frequent clinical feature in the demented, it 
also accompanies depressive disorders in the elderly. It can be observed as 
context-specific IB in the normal elderly. Obstinate IB does not occur in the 
normal elderly.

Copyright 2006 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1717
PMID: 17136707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1548. Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2006 Dec;4 Spec No 1:S25-34.

[Cognitive disorders in Parkinson's disease without dementia].

[Article in French]

Lévy R(1), Pillon B.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U 610 et Fédération de neurologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris. 
richard.levy@psl.aphp.fr

The cognitive disorders observed in non-demented Parkinsonian patients are 
frequent but subtle. They mostly result from difficulties to control attentional 
resources. These deficits particularly disturb the strategies involved in 
planning as well as in encoding and retrieval processing of memory, whereas 
consolidation of the mnemonic traces and instrumental functions are relatively 
spared. These deficits can be related to the striatal dopamine depletion (in 
particular in the caudate nuclei) which seems sufficient to account for the 
cognitive disorders that appear early in the course of the disease. In 
particular, the caudate dopamine depletion induces a cascade of dysfunction 
within the basal ganglia, downstream of the striatum, which ultimately affects 
the prefrontal functions. It is likely that, in the course of the disease, 
lesions of other ascending systems of neurotransmission (cholinergic, 
serotoninergic and noradrenergic pathways) contribute to worsen the cognitive 
disorders and also to modify their clinical pattern. The impact of direct 
cortical lesions can also be discussed but it seems that these lesions mostly 
contribute to the cognitive deficits in the late stages of Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 23631045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1549. Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2006 Dec;4 Spec No 1:S61-70.

[Rehabilitation in the elderly subject with Parkinson's disease].

[Article in French]

Laumonnier A(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre Hospitalier Saint-Louis, La Rochelle a.laumonnier@wanadoo.fr

In the elderly, the aging of the locomotor, cardiorespiratory, and sensory 
apparatus, the cognitive and psychic changes, and the interaction of several 
pathologies require adaptation of the rehabilitation techniques in Parkinson's 
disease. Rehabilitation should be initiated early and directed toward functional 
objectives defined by a pluridisciplinary team. To maintain movements is a 
fundamental aim and must take into account the tiredness of the old subject. 
Gymnic, active and passive techniques are proposed to preserve the posture, 
balance and walk. The prevention of falls is a major goal to avoid the risks of 
grabatisation and trauma. Multiple respiratory disorders are related to 
disturbances of swallowing and affect the deficiencies of voice and speech. The 
objectives of care are different if the patient presents a parkinsonan syndrome 
different from Parkinson's disease or if dementia is associated. The treatment 
by neurostimulation in old subjects also raises new questions for 
rehabilitation.

PMID: 23631048 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1550. CMAJ. 2006 Dec 5;175(12):1545-52. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.060542.

Recognition and management of neuropsychiatric complications in Parkinson's 
disease.

Ferreri F(1), Agbokou C, Gauthier S.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, McGill Centre for Studies in Aging, 
Douglas Hospital, Verdun, Quebec, Canada.

Parkinson's disease is primarily considered a motor disease characterized by 
rest tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and postural disturbances. However, 
neuropsychiatric complications, including mood and anxiety disorders, fatigue, 
apathy, psychosis, cognitive impairment, dementia, sleep disorders and 
addictions, frequently complicate the course of the illness. The 
pathophysiologic features of these complications are multifaceted and include 
neuropathophysiologic changes of a degenerative disease, exposure to 
antiparkinsonian treatments and emotional reactions to having a disabling 
chronic illness. Changes in mental status have profound implications for the 
well-being of patients with Parkinson's disease and of their caregivers. 
Treatment is often efficacious but becomes a challenge in advanced stages of 
Parkinson's disease. In this article, we review the key clinical features of 
neuropsychiatric complications in Parkinson's disease as well as what is known 
about their epidemiologic characteristics, risk factors, pathophysiologic 
features and management.

DOI: 10.1503/cmaj.060542
PMCID: PMC1660590
PMID: 17146092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1551. J Child Neurol. 2006 Dec;21(12):1068-73. doi: 10.1177/7010.2006.00244.

Huntington disease in a 9-year-old boy: clinical course and neuropathologic 
examination.

Wojaczyńska-Stanek K(1), Adamek D, Marszał E, Hoffman-Zacharska D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, 
Katowice, Poland. wojaczynska-stanek@wp.pl

Huntington disease is a dominantly inherited, neurodegenerative disorder, 
usually with onset in the fourth to fifth decade of life but in a small 
proportion of patients before the age of 20 years. The early-onset form, 
juvenile Huntington disease, is clinically different from that of more common 
adult-onset forms and includes cognitive decline, parkinsonism, myoclonus, and 
seizures. We report a case of a boy with juvenile Huntington disease with a very 
early age at disease onset (3 years). The suspected clinical diagnosis was 
confirmed by DNA analysis, which revealed (CAG)(n) expansion into the range 
characteristic of juvenile Huntington disease (95 repeats). The clinical course 
of the disease was typical for the juvenile form of Huntington disease, but the 
diagnosis was not so obvious because there was no history of any 
neurodegenerative disorder in the family. The child died at the age of 11 years. 
The detailed neuropathologic investigations performed postmortem showed the 
characteristic features of Huntington disease. As the patient's de novo mutation 
was very unlikely to occur, genetic counseling and the possibility of predictive 
testing were proposed to the family. Indirect molecular data indicate the 
familial character of the disease, with strong anticipation of transmission.

DOI: 10.1177/7010.2006.00244
PMID: 17156701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1552. Neurology. 2006 Dec 12;67(11):1935-41. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000247041.63081.98.

Survival and mortality differences between dementia with Lewy bodies vs 
Alzheimer disease.

Williams MM(1), Xiong C, Morris JC, Galvin JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington 
University School of Medicine, 4488 Forest Park, Suite 130, St. Louis, MO 63108, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) progresses more 
rapidly than Alzheimer disease (AD).
METHODS: We compared 315 participants (63 with DLB and 252 with AD) enrolled in 
a prospective longitudinal study of memory and aging with annual clinical and 
cognitive assessments and followed until death. The main outcome measure was 
dementia progression to institutionalization and death. Neuropathologic 
examinations were performed on all participants in this study. Subject 
classification (DLB vs AD) was based on neuropathology.
RESULTS: Patients with DLB had an increased risk of mortality vs patients with 
AD (hazard ratio [HR] 1.88, 95% CI: 1.4 to 2.5). The median survival time for 
DLB was 78.0 years and for AD was 84.6 years (chi(2) = 19.9, p < 0.001) with 
significant modification effects due to gender (HR 1.51, 95% CI: 1.0 to 2.3) and 
the presence of at least 1 APOE epsilon4 allele (HR 1.50, 95% CI: 1.0 to 2.2). 
Survival after dementia onset was also different between DLB and AD (7.3 vs 8.5 
years; chi(2) = 5.4, p < 0.02). DLB cases had similar risks of 
institutionalization and survival in long-term care facilities to AD cases. 
Self-reports of depression and the presence of extrapyramidal signs were 
important covariates. The rate of cognitive decline as measured by psychometric 
performance and clinical staging methods did not differ between DLB and AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) increases the risk of mortality 
compared with Alzheimer disease (AD), but the two groups did not differ in rate 
of cognitive decline. The greater risk for noncognitive disease progression for 
DLB compared with AD suggests clinically meaningful differences for the two 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000247041.63081.98
PMID: 17159097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1553. Neurology. 2006 Dec 12;67(11):1949-54. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000247046.90574.0f.

Body mass index in older persons is associated with Alzheimer disease pathology.

Buchman AS(1), Schneider JA, Wilson RS, Bienias JL, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Armour 
Academic Facility, Suite 1038, 600 S. Paulina St., Chicago, IL 60612, USA. 
Aron_S_Buchman@rush.edu

OBJECTIVE: We examined the extent to which body mass index (BMI) in older 
persons is associated with common age-related neuropathologies known to 
contribute to dementia including Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology, cerebral 
infarction, and Lewy body disease.
METHODS: We studied brain autopsies from 298 deceased Catholic clergy 
participating in the Religious Orders Study, a longitudinal clinical-pathologic 
investigation. BMI was assessed at annual clinical evaluations during an average 
follow-up of 4.9 years (SD = 2.7 years). Each person's average BMI, derived from 
all evaluations, was used in analyses. Multiple regression analyses were used to 
examine the relation of common postmortem neuropathologic findings to average 
BMI prior to death.
RESULTS: Mean age at death was 85.7 years (SD = 6.8 years), and average BMI 
during the course of the study was 26.0 (SD = 5.1). A series of linear 
regression models was performed with average BMI as the outcome and controlling 
for age, sex, and education. Level of AD pathology was associated with BMI 
proximate to death (estimate = -1.15; SE = 0.42; p = 0.007). However, Lewy body 
pathology (estimate = -0.45; SE = 0.73; p = 0.53) and cerebral infarctions 
(estimate = -0.10; SE = 0.61; p = 0.88) were not associated with average BMI. 
The association of AD pathology with BMI was unchanged after controlling for 
dementia, chronic diseases, and physical activity.
CONCLUSION: Body mass in old age is associated with Alzheimer disease pathology 
in persons with and without dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000247046.90574.0f
PMID: 17159099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1554. Microbiology (Reading). 2006 Dec;152(Pt 12):3507-3515. doi: 
10.1099/mic.0.29176-0.

Organization of the biosynthetic gene cluster in Streptomyces sp. DSM 4137 for 
the novel neuroprotectant polyketide meridamycin.

Sun Y(1), Hong H(1), Samborskyy M(1), Mironenko T(1), Leadlay PF(1), Haydock 
SF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Cambridge, 80 Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1GA, UK.

Erratum in
    Microbiology. 2007 Feb;153(Pt 2):631. Samboskyy, Markiyan [corrected to 
Samborskyy, Markiyan].

Meridamycin is a non-immunosuppressant, FKBP-binding macrocyclic polyketide, 
which has major potential as a neuroprotectant in a range of neurodegenerative 
disorders including dementia, Parkinson's disease and ischaemic stroke. A 
biosynthetic cluster predicted to encode biosynthesis of meridamycin was cloned 
from the prolific secondary-metabolite-producing strain Streptomyces sp. DSM 
4137, not previously known to produce this compound, and specific gene deletion 
was used to confirm the role of this cluster in the biosynthesis of meridamycin. 
The meridamycin modular polyketide synthase consists of 14 extension modules 
distributed between three giant multienzyme proteins. The terminal module is 
flanked by a highly unusual cytochrome P450-like domain. The characterization of 
the meridamycin biosynthetic locus in this readily manipulated streptomycete 
species opens the way to the engineering of new, altered meridamycins of 
potential therapeutic importance.

DOI: 10.1099/mic.0.29176-0
PMID: 17159202 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1555. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2006;44(12):1472-80. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2006.258.

Analytical performance and clinical utility of the INNOTEST PHOSPHO-TAU181P 
assay for discrimination between Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Vanderstichele H(1), De Vreese K, Blennow K, Andreasen N, Sindic C, Ivanoiu A, 
Hampel H, Bürger K, Parnetti L, Lanari A, Padovani A, DiLuca M, Bläser M, Olsson 
AO, Pottel H, Hulstaert F, Vanmechelen E.

Author information:
(1)Innogenetics NV, Industriepark Zwijnaarde 7, 9052 Gent, Belgium. 
hugovdr@innogenetics.be

BACKGROUND: Total tau (T-tau) and beta-amyloid((1-42)) (Abeta(1-42)) levels in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) can differentiate Alzheimer's disease (AD) from normal 
aging or depressive pseudo-dementia. Differential diagnosis from dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) in clinical settings is difficult.
METHODS: The analytical performance of the INNOTEST PHOSPHO-TAU(181P) assay was 
validated in terms of selectivity, sensitivity, specificity, precision, 
robustness, and stability. Clinical utility of the assay alone, or combined with 
T-tau and Abeta(1-42), for discrimination of AD (n=94) from patients suffering 
from DLB (n=60) or from age-matched control subjects (CS) (n=60) was assessed in 
a multicenter study.
RESULTS: CSF concentrations of tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 (P-tau(181P)) 
in AD was significantly higher than in DLB and CS. Discriminant analysis, a 
classification tree, and logistic regression showed that P-tau(181P) was the 
most statistically significant single variable of the three biomarkers for 
discrimination between AD and DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: P-tau(181P) quantification is a robust and reliable assay that may 
be useful in discriminating AD from DLB.

DOI: 10.1515/CCLM.2006.258
PMID: 17163825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1556. Neurobiol Aging. 2008 Mar;29(3):408-17. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.10.022. Epub 2006 Dec 12.

Early alpha-synuclein lipoxidation in neocortex in Lewy body diseases.

Dalfó E(1), Ferrer I.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei Anatomia Patològica, IDIBELL-Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge, Spain.

Previous studies in Lewy body diseases (LBDs), including Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), have shown oxidative stress damage 
more extended than the expected for the distribution of Lewy pathology. Since 
malondialdehyde (MDA) can form adducts with lysine residues of proteins, MDA-Lys 
immunoprecipitation and alpha-synuclein immunoblotting has been carried out in 
frontal cortex and substantia nigra homogenates from five patients with PD, five 
DLB, three iPD and seven aged-matched controls to decipher the extent of 
lipoxidized alpha-synuclein in LBDs. MDA-Lys-lipoxidation of alpha-synuclein in 
the substantia nigra and frontal cortex has been found in all DLB and PD cases 
examined, but also in the frontal cortex in 3/3 and in the substantia nigra in 
2/3 cases with iPD. In addition, one control case had MDA-Lys-modified 
alpha-synuclein in the frontal cortex, and another in the substantia nigra. This 
work provides evidence of extended lipoxidative modification of alpha-synuclein 
in LBDs. Moreover, it demonstrates that alpha-synuclein lipoxidation is an early 
event in LBDs which precedes alpha-synuclein solubility modification and 
aggregation, and formation of Lewy bodies and neurites.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.10.022
PMID: 17166629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1557. Arch Neurol. 2006 Dec;63(12):1763-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.12.1763.

Motor dysfunction in mild cognitive impairment and the risk of incident 
Alzheimer disease.

Aggarwal NT(1), Wilson RS, Beck TL, Bienias JL, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush Institute for Healthy Aging, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. neelum_t_aggarwal@rsh.net

BACKGROUND: Little is known about motor function in mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) and its relation to the risk of Alzheimer disease (AD).
OBJECTIVE: To examine motor function in persons with MCI and its relation to 
risk of AD.
DESIGN: Longitudinal cohort study.
SETTING: More than 40 Catholic religious orders across the United States.
PARTICIPANTS: We studied 816 older Catholic clergy members from the Religious 
Orders Study. At the baseline evaluation, they were classified as having no 
cognitive impairment (n = 558), MCI (n = 198), or dementia (n = 60).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Motor function was assessed at baseline using 
performance-based measures of upper and lower extremity function and a modified 
version of the motor section of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, 
from which previously established measures of parkinsonian signs were derived. 
Clinical evaluations for dementia and AD were repeated annually for up to 10 
years. All analyses controlled for age, sex, educational level, and possession 
of at least 1 apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele.
RESULTS: At baseline, individuals with MCI had impaired motor function relative 
to those without cognitive impairment and superior motor function vs those with 
dementia. Among those with MCI, baseline levels of lower extremity motor 
performance, parkinsonian gait, and bradykinesia were inversely related to risk 
of AD, even after controlling for clinical stroke. Thus, a person with impaired 
lower limb performance or parkinsonian gait (10th percentile) was 2 to 3 times 
more likely to develop AD than a person with good lower limb function (90th 
percentile).
CONCLUSIONS: Persons with MCI also have impaired motor function, and the degree 
of impairment in lower extremity function is related to the risk of AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.63.12.1763
PMID: 17172617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1558. BioDrugs. 2006;20(6):327-33. doi: 10.2165/00063030-200620060-00002.

The therapeutic potential of intrabodies in neurologic disorders: focus on 
Huntington and Parkinson diseases.

Messer A(1), McLear J.

Author information:
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, Albany, New York 
12201-2002, USA. messer@wadsworth-org

Single-chain Fv and single-domain antibodies retain the binding specificity of 
full-length antibodies but they can be cloned, selected, engineered, and 
manipulated as genes. When expressed intracellularly in mammalian cells these 
intracellular antibodies, or intrabodies, have the potential to alter the 
folding, interactions, modifications, or subcellular localization of their 
targets. These reagents have previously been developed as therapeutics against 
cancer and HIV. Since misfolded and accumulated intracellular proteins 
characterize several major neurodegenerative disorders, including Huntington 
disease (HD) and Parkinson disease, these disorders are prime candidates for 
intrabody therapy. In this article we review the extension of intrabody 
technology to the nervous system. Studies of HD have been used to develop the 
approach and anti-synuclein strategies are in the early stages of development. 
Such neurodegenerative diseases are therefore poised for engineered antibody 
approaches, which can provide a pipeline of novel therapeutics and new drug 
discovery tools.

DOI: 10.2165/00063030-200620060-00002
PMID: 17176119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1559. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007 Apr;78(4):363-6. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.103440. Epub 2006 Dec 18.

Parkinson's disease and driving ability.

Singh R(1), Pentland B, Hunter J, Provan F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurorehabilitation, Astley Ainslie Hospital, 133 Grange Loan, 
Edinburgh EH9 2HL, UK. rajiv.singh@lpct.scot.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVES: To explore the driving problems associated with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and to ascertain whether any clinical features or tests predict driver 
safety.
METHODS: The driving ability of 154 individuals with PD referred to a driving 
assessment centre was determined by a combination of clinical tests, reaction 
times on a test rig and an in-car driving test.
RESULTS: The majority of cases (104, 66%) were able to continue driving although 
46 individuals required an automatic transmission and 10 others needed car 
modifications. Ability to drive was predicted by the severity of physical 
disease, age, presence of other associated medical conditions, particularly 
dementia, duration of disease, brake reaction, time on a test rig and score on a 
driving test (all p<0.001). The level of drug treatment and the length of 
driving history were not correlated. Discriminant analysis revealed that the 
most important features in distinguishing safety to drive were severe physical 
disease (Hoehn and Yahr stage 3), reaction time, moderate disease associated 
with another medical condition and high score on car testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Most individuals with PD are safe to drive, although many benefit 
from car modifications or from using an automatic transmission. A combination of 
clinical tests and in-car driving assessment will establish safety to drive, and 
a number of clinical correlates can be shown to predict the likely outcome and 
may assist in the decision process. This is the largest series of consecutive 
patients seen at a driving assessment centre reported to date, and the first to 
devise a scoring system for on-road driving assessment.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.103440
PMCID: PMC2077772
PMID: 17178820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


1560. J Nurs Scholarsh. 2006;38(4):328-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.2006.00123.x.

Chronic dementing conditions, genomics, and new opportunities for nursing 
interventions.

Schutte DL(1), Holston EC.

Author information:
(1)The University of Iowa College of Nursing, Room 484NB, Iowa City, IA 52242, 
USA. debra-schutte@uiowa.edu

PURPOSE: To (a) provide an overview of chronic dementing conditions; (b) discuss 
the etiologic and clinical characteristics of Alzheimer disease (AD) and 
Parkinson disease (PD) within the framework of the family systems genetic 
illness model; and (c) to explore opportunities to enhance outcomes through the 
integration of genomics information and technologies into nursing practice.
DESIGN: An integrated review of the literature, including the organizing 
construct of the family systems genetic illness model.
FINDINGS: AD and PD are both influenced by genetic and environmental factors; in 
a small percentage of families, gene mutations are the primary etiologic factor. 
Genetic testing is an option for some families experiencing early-onset, 
familial disease. Presymptomatic and diagnostic genetic testing have limited 
clinical utility for the more common late-onset AD and PD.
CONCLUSIONS: The current abilities of healthcare professionals to effectively 
intervene in people with AD and PD are limited by an incomplete understanding of 
the biologic basis of these diseases. Advances in genomics research and 
technology are providing the information and tools necessary to understand the 
molecular basis of these devastating disorders toward the goal of more specific 
and effective interventions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1547-5069.2006.00123.x
PMID: 17181080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1561. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Feb 1;16(3):295-306. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddl463. Epub 2006 Dec 
21.

Two sites in the MAPT region confer genetic risk for Guam ALS/PDC and dementia.

Sundar PD(1), Yu CE, Sieh W, Steinbart E, Garruto RM, Oyanagi K, Craig UK, Bird 
TD, Wijsman EM, Galasko DR, Schellenberg GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gerontology and Geriatric Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

Unusual forms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS-G), Parkinsonism dementia 
complex (PDC-G) and Guam dementia (GD) are found in Chamorros, the indigenous 
people of Guam. Neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau are 
a neuropathologic feature of these closely related disorders. To determine if 
variation in the gene that encodes microtubule-associated protein tau gene 
(MAPT) contributes to risk for these disorders, we genotyped nine single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sites and one insertion/deletion in the 5' end of 
MAPT in 54 ALS-G, 135 PDC-G, 153 GD and 258 control subjects, all of whom are 
Chamorros. Variation at three SNPs (sites 2, 6 and 9) influenced risk for ALS-G, 
PDC-G and GD. SNP2 acts through a dominant mechanism and is independent of the 
risk conferred by SNPs 6 and 9, the latter two acting by a recessive mechanism. 
Persons with the high-risk SNP6 and SNP9 AC/AC diplotype had an increased risk 
of 3-fold [95% confidence interval (CI)=1.10-8.25] for GD, 4-fold (95% 
CI=1.40-11.64) for PDC-G and 6-fold (95% CI=1.44-32.14) for ALS-G, compared to 
persons with other diplotypes after adjusting for SNP2. Carriers of the SNP2 G 
allele had an increased risk of 1.6-fold (95% CI=1.00-2.62) for GD, 2-fold (95% 
CI=1.28-3.66) for PDC-G, and 1.5-fold (95% CI=0.74-3.00) for ALS-G, compared to 
non-carriers after adjusting for SNPs 6 and 9. Others have shown that SNP6 is 
also associated with risk for progressive supranuclear palsy. These two 
independent cis-acting sites presumably influence risk for Guam 
neuro-degenerative disorders by regulating MAPT expression.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddl463
PMID: 17185385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1562. Soz Praventivmed. 2006;51(4):210-20. doi: 10.1007/s00038-006-5096-4.

Magnetic field exposure and neurodegenerative diseases--recent epidemiological 
studies.

Hug K(1), Röösli M, Rapp R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Basel, 
Switzerland. kerstin.hug@unibas.ch

Comment in
    Soz Praventivmed. 2006;51(4):183-4.

OBJECTIVES: To analyse the results of recent studies not yet included in a 2003 
report of the International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation Protection 
(ICNIRP) on occupational exposure to low-frequency electromagnetic fields as 
potential risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODS: A literature search was conducted in the online databases of PubMed, 
ISI Web of Knowledge, DIMDI and COCHRANE, as well as in specialised databases 
and journals. Eight studies published between January 2000 and July 2005 were 
included in the review.
RESULTS: The findings of these studies contribute to the evidence of an 
association between occupational magnetic field exposure and the risk of 
dementia. Regarding amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, the recent results confirm 
earlier observations of an association with electric and electronic work and 
welding. Its relationship with magnetic field exposure remains unsolved. There 
are only few findings pointing towards an association between magnetic field 
exposure and Parkinson's disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The epidemiological evidence for an association between 
occupational exposure to low-frequency electromagnetic fields and the risk of 
dementia has increased during the last five years. The impact of potential 
confounders should be evaluated in further studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00038-006-5096-4
PMID: 17193783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1563. Mt Sinai J Med. 2006 Nov;73(7):985-92.

Dementia: a brief review.

Grossman H(1), Bergmann C, Parker S.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai 
Medical Center, New York, NY 10029, USA. hillel.grossman@mssm.edu

Dementia is an increasingly common diagnosis in our aging population, and the 
numbers are expected to rise exponentially in coming years. Alzheimer's disease 
alone now affects 4.5 million people in the US, while millions more are 
currently affected by vascular dementia, Lewy Body disease and frontotemporal 
dementia. Each of these is a distinct entity, though overlapping symptoms and 
comorbidities occur frequently. Within the past two decades research has 
progressed rapidly on multiple fronts, including epidemiology, etiology, 
pathology, diagnosis and treatment. It is important for clinicians to recognize 
early signs and symptoms of dementia, and to note critical differences among 
them. Dementia research has moved beyond description of symptoms and 
clinicopathological correlation to the elucidation of risk factors, the 
pathobiology of the disease process, and most important, to the first generation 
of dementia treatments. Our purpose here is to review the current state of 
knowledge and directions of research for the four major dementias noted above. 
We are entering an era of dementia care that will be based upon the 
identification of potentially modifiable risk factors and early disease markers, 
and the application of new disease-specific diagnostic tools and treatment 
modalities.

PMID: 17195884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1564. J Clin Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;67(11):1784-800. doi: 10.4088/jcp.v67n1118.

Alzheimer's disease a century later.

Caselli RJ(1), Beach TG, Yaari R, Reiman EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Arizona Alzheimer's Disease 
Consortium, Scottsdale 85259, USA. Caselli.Richard@Mayo.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Psychiatry. 2006 Nov;67(11):1782-3.

OBJECTIVE: To provide a current survey of the clinical and pathologic features, 
known genetic and suggested pathogenic contributions, diagnosis, and treatment 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related forms of dementia.
DATA SOURCES: PubMed was searched for specific indexing terms identified by the 
authors as relevant to the topic. Also included were diagnostic and consensus 
criteria and classic references long standing in the Alzheimer's disease 
literature.
DATA SYNTHESIS: AD is the most common form of disabling cognitive impairment in 
older persons, and its prevalence is rapidly growing as people live to older 
ages. Clinically, the disorder is characterized by a gradual but progressive 
decline in memory and other cognitive domains and the frequent occurrence of 
noncognitive behavioral symptoms. Neuropathologically, the cardinal features of 
AD include neuritic plaques, neuro-fibrillary tangles, and the loss of synapses 
and neurons. The clinical evaluation of AD includes a history and physical 
examination, laboratory tests, and structural brain imaging to exclude less 
common forms of dementia. The clinical management of AD includes medication and 
nonmedication strategies for addressing cognitive, behavioral, and other 
commonly associated symptoms of patients as well as lifestyle changes such as 
driving cessation and residential care. Genetic causes of familial Alzheimer's 
disease as well as genes that predispose to late-onset and sporadic Alzheimer's 
disease have led to greater understanding of the pathophysiology of the 
neurodegenerative process.
CONCLUSIONS: While there has been great promise in the scientific understanding, 
early detection, and tracking of AD and in the discovery of promising 
disease-slowing treatments, there remains an unmet urgent need to identify 
effective primary and secondary prevention therapies in order to avert a 
financially overwhelming public health problem.

DOI: 10.4088/jcp.v67n1118
PMID: 17196061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1565. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2007 May;13(4):230-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.10.007. Epub 2006 Dec 29.

Clinical-pathologic study of biomarkers in FTDP-17 (PPND family with N279K tau 
mutation).

Arvanitakis Z(1), Witte RJ, Dickson DW, Tsuboi Y, Uitti RJ, Slowinski J, Hutton 
ML, Lin SC, Boeve BF, Cheshire WP, Pooley RA, Liss JM, Caviness JN, Strongosky 
AJ, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

The objective of this clinical-pathologic study was to identify biomarkers for a 
pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND) kindred of frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) harboring the N279K tau mutation. 
Five affected subjects, one at-risk who later became symptomatic, and one 
at-risk asymptomatic mutation carrier, had abnormal (18)fluorodeoxyglucose PET 
demonstrating asymmetric temporal lobe hypometabolism. All except the 
asymptomatic mutation carrier had abnormal brain MRI. Parkinsonism, myoclonus, 
anosmia, insomnia, speech, and autonomic dysfunction were identified. Autopsy of 
six affected subjects showed frontotemporal degeneration with extensive 
tauopathy. Further studies of FTDP-17 patients are needed to replicate these 
findings.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.10.007
PMID: 17196872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1566. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Mar 6;414(2):174-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.12.015. Epub 
2006 Dec 15.

Phenylephrine and pilocarpine eye drop test for dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer's disease.

Hanyu H(1), Hirao K, Shimizu S, Kanetaka H, Sakurai H, Iwamoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, 6-7-1 
Nishishinjuku, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0023, Japan. h-hanyu@tokyo-med.ac.jp

Pupillary response test using dilute phenylephrine, a sympathetic agonist, and 
dilute pilocarpine, a cholinergic agonist, were performed in 24 patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 40 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), and 
23 normal elderly subjects. The mydriatic response to 0.5% phenylephrine was 
significantly greater in the DLB group than in the AD and control groups. The 
mydriatic change correlated inversely with the reduction in cardiac 
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine uptake. In contrast, miotic response to 0.0625% 
pilocarpine was significantly greater in the DLB and AD groups than in the 
control group. The pupil assay using combined phenylephrine and pilocarpine eye 
drop test may be useful in the detection of patients with DLB and AD and in 
distinguishing between them.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2006.12.015
PMID: 17197083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1567. J Med Genet. 2007 Jan;44(1):e63. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2005.039263.

Is alpha-T catenin (VR22) an Alzheimer's disease risk gene?

Bertram L, Mullin K, Parkinson M, Hsiao M, Moscarillo TJ, Wagner SL, Becker KD, 
Velicelebi G, Blacker D, Tanzi RE.

Comment on
    J Med Genet. 2005 Oct;42(10):787-92.

BACKGROUND: Recently, conflicting reports have been published on the potential 
role of genetic variants in the alpha-T catenin gene (VR22; CTNNA3) on the risk 
for Alzheimer's disease. In these papers, evidence for association is mostly 
observed in multiplex families with Alzheimer's disease, whereas case-control 
samples of sporadic Alzheimer's disease are predominantly negative.
METHODS: After sequencing VR22 in multiplex families with Alzheimer's disease 
linked to chromosome 10q21, we identified a novel non-synonymous (Ser596Asn; 
rs4548513) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). This and four non-coding SNPs 
were assessed in two independent samples of families with Alzheimer's disease, 
one with 1439 subjects from 437 multiplex families with Alzheimer's disease and 
the other with 489 subjects from 217 discordant sibships.
RESULTS: A weak association with the Ser596Asn SNP in the multiplex sample, 
predominantly in families with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (p = 0.02), was 
observed. However, this association does not seem to contribute substantially to 
the chromosome 10 Alzheimer's disease linkage signal that we and others have 
reported previously. No evidence was found of association with any of the four 
additional SNPs tested in the multiplex families with Alzheimer's disease. 
Finally, the Ser596Asn change was not associated with the risk for Alzheimer's 
disease in the independent discordant sibship sample.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study to report evidence of an association 
between a potentially functional, non-synonymous SNP in VR22 and the risk for 
Alzheimer's disease. As the underlying effects are probably small, and are only 
seen in families with multiple affected members, the population-wide 
significance of this finding remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2005.039263
PMCID: PMC2597918
PMID: 17209133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


1568. Ther Umsch. 2007 Jan;64(1):5-8. doi: 10.1024/0040-5930.64.1.5.

[Clinical criteria of Parkinson's disease].

[Article in German]

Ransmayr G(1).

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Neurologie und Psychiatrie, Allgemeines Krankenhaus der Stadt 
Linz. gerhard.ransmayr@akh.linz.at

The clinical criteria of Parkinson's disease are akinesia in combination with at 
least one of the following three symptoms: tremor (asymmetrical resting tremor), 
rigidity, impairment of posture, gait and balance. Symptomatic and atypical 
parkinsonian syndromes are ruled out by history, clinical examination, cranial 
CT, MRI, SPECT or PET. Patients with Parkinson's disease respond to levodopa or 
dopaminagonists throughout the course of the disease. Parkinson's disease is 
also characterised by various vegetative symptoms, impairment of olfaction, 
anxiety, depression, and with increasing age also by cognitive deficits and 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1024/0040-5930.64.1.5
PMID: 17221818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1569. Semin Neurol. 2007 Feb;27(1):42-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2006-956754.

Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Weisman D(1), McKeith I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences and the Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, 
University of California, San Diego, CA 92093, USA.

Synucleinopathies, with and without dementia, encompass a wide range of diseases 
including Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, rapid eye movement (REM) 
sleep behavior disorder, and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). DLB is a 
neurodegenerative disorder resulting in slowly progressive and unrelenting 
dementia until death. Prevalence studies suggest that it is the second most 
common dementing illness in the elderly. The neuropathologic findings of DLB 
show a wide anatomic range. Lewy bodies and Lewy-related pathology are found 
from the brain stem to the cortex and, in many cases, associated with concurrent 
Alzheimer's disease pathology. A recent international consortium on DLB has 
resulted in revised criteria for the clinical and pathological diagnosis of DLB 
incorporating new information about the core clinical features and improved 
methods for their assessment. The presentation of DLB is typically one of 
cortical and subcortical cognitive impairments, with worse visuospatial and 
executive dysfunction than Alzheimer's disease. There may be relative sparing of 
memory especially in the early stages. Core clinical features of DLB include 
fluctuating attention, recurrent visual hallucinations, and parkinsonism. 
Suggestive features include REM sleep behavior disorder, severe neuroleptic 
sensitivity, and low dopamine transporter uptake in the basal ganglia on 
functional neuroimaging. Additional supportive features that commonly occur in 
DLB, but with lower specificity, include repeated falls and syncope, transient, 
unexplained loss of consciousness, severe autonomic dysfunction, hallucinations 
in other modalities, systematized delusions, depression, relative preservation 
of medial temporal lobe structures on structural neuroimaging, reduced occipital 
activity on functional neuroimaging, prominent slow wave activity on 
electroencephalogram, and low uptake myocardial scintigraphy. Management of DLB 
includes pharmacological and nonpharmacological interventions for its cognitive, 
neuropsychiatric, motor, and sleep disturbances.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2006-956754
PMID: 17226740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1570. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2007 Feb;33(1):43-55. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2006.00795.x.

Increased level of active GSK-3beta in Alzheimer's disease and accumulation in 
argyrophilic grains and in neurones at different stages of neurofibrillary 
degeneration.

Leroy K(1), Yilmaz Z, Brion JP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Histology, Neuroanatomy and Neuropathology, Université Libre de 
Bruxelles, Campus Erasme, 808 route de Lennik, B-1070 Brussels, Belgium.

The somatodendritic accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau proteins is an early 
event preceding the appearance of neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and might be necessary for their formation. Glycogen synthase 
kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) is a physiological kinase for tau that generates many 
tau phosphorylation sites identified in NFT and in other tau-positive 
inclusions. We have studied the cellular distribution and the expression of the 
active form of GSK-3beta (GSK-3 pTyr216) in AD patients, in argyrophilic grain 
disease and in diffuse Lewy body disease. By Western blotting analysis, a 
significant increase in the level of GSK-3 (pTyr216) was observed in the frontal 
cortex of AD patients. A population of neurones showed a somatodendritic 
accumulation of GSK-3 (pTyr216) but not of the inactive form of GSK-3beta (GSK-3 
pSer9). Most of these GSK-3 (pTyr216)-positive cells were positive for six 
different phosphotau epitopes known to be generated by GSK-3beta. By using a 
quadruple labelling method using GSK-3 (pTyr216) and phosphotau immunolabelling 
combined with Gallyas and DAPI staining, we examined neurones containing a 
somatodendritic GSK-3 (pTyr216) immunoreactivity at different stages of 
neurodegeneration. A majority of neurones at the pretangle stage without 
Gallyas-positive inclusions were GSK-3 (pTyr216) positive and this GSK-3 
(pTyr216) immunoreactivity remained in most cells containing Gallyas and 
phosphotau-positive inclusions excepted in extracellular NFT. A GSK-3 (pTyr216) 
immunoreactivity was present in argyrophilic grains but not in cortical Lewy 
bodies. These results directly suggest that the activity of GSK-3beta is 
increased in AD and that somatodendritic accumulation and activation of 
GSK-3beta is an early event preceding and accompanying the formation of NFT and 
of other tau-positive inclusions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2006.00795.x
PMID: 17239007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1571. Neurology. 2007 Jan 23;68(4):288-91. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000252358.03285.9d.

Conversion from subtypes of mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer dementia.

Fischer P(1), Jungwirth S, Zehetmayer S, Weissgram S, Hoenigschnabl S, Gelpi E, 
Krampla W, Tragl KH.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Aging Research, Medical University Vienna, 
Vienna, Austria. Peter.Fischer@meduniwien.ac.at

Comment in
    Neurology. 2007 Jul 24;69(4):409.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the rates of conversion to Alzheimer dementia (AD) between 
subtypes of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in a community-based birth cohort 
investigated at age 75 and followed up after 30 months.
METHODS: The Vienna Trans-Danube Aging Study investigated every inhabitant of 
the area on the left shore of the river Danube who was born between May 1925 and 
June 1926. With use of the official voting registry, 1505 subjects were 
contacted and 697 participated. Data refer to the cohort of 581 nondemented 
individuals who completed extensive neuropsychological examination at baseline. 
Follow-up after 30 months was possible in 476 probands (35 deceased).
RESULTS: The 141 patients with MCI at baseline were classified into two 
subtypes. At follow-up, 41 of these patients with MCI were diagnosed with AD. 
Conversion rates to AD were 48.7% (CI: 32.4 to 65.2) for amnestic MCI and 26.8% 
(CI: 17.6 to 37.8) for nonamnestic MCI. Another 49 AD cases originated from 
cognitive health at baseline (12.6%; CI: 9.4 to 16.3).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) showed a high 
probability to be diagnosed with Alzheimer dementia (AD) after 30 months. 
Subtypes of MCI were not useful in defining early stages of various types of 
dementia: Not only amnestic MCI but also nonamnestic MCI converted frequently to 
AD, and conversion to vascular dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies was not 
restricted to nonamnestic MCI.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000252358.03285.9d
PMID: 17242334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1572. Neurology. 2007 Mar 20;68(12):916-22. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000254458.17630.c5. 
Epub 2007 Jan 24.

Phenotypic variation in a large Swedish pedigree due to SNCA duplication and 
triplication.

Fuchs J(1), Nilsson C, Kachergus J, Munz M, Larsson EM, Schüle B, Langston JW, 
Middleton FA, Ross OA, Hulihan M, Gasser T, Farrer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department of Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, Center for Neurology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The "Lister family complex," an extensive Swedish family with 
autosomal dominant Parkinson disease, was first described by Henry Mjönes in 
1949. On the basis of clinical, molecular, and genealogic findings on a Swedish 
and an American family branch, we provide genetic evidence that explains the 
parkinsonism in this extended pedigree.
METHODS: Clinical methods included a detailed neurologic exam of the proband of 
the Swedish family branch, MRI, and ([123]I)-beta-CIT SPECT imaging. Genomic 
analysis included alpha-synuclein sequencing, SNCA real-time PCR dosage, 
chromosome 4q21 microsatellite analysis, and high-resolution microarray 
genotyping. The geographic origin and ancestral genealogy of each pedigree were 
researched in the medical literature and Swedish Parish records.
RESULTS: The proband of the Swedish family branch presented with early 
dysautonomia followed by progressive parkinsonism suggestive of multiple system 
atrophy. Molecular analysis identified a genomic duplication of <0.9 Mb 
encompassing alpha-synuclein and multimerin 1 (SNCA-MMRN1), flanked by long 
interspersed repeat sequences (LINE L1). Microsatellite variability within the 
genomic interval was identical to that previously described for a Swedish 
American family with an alpha-synuclein triplication. Subsequent genealogic 
investigation suggested that both kindreds are ancestrally related to the Lister 
family complex.
CONCLUSION: Our findings extend clinical, genetic, and genealogical research on 
the Lister family complex. The genetic basis for familial parkinsonism is an 
SNCA-MMRN11 multiplication, but whereas SNCA-MMRN1 duplication in the Swedish 
proband (Branch J) leads to late-onset autonomic dysfunction and parkinsonism, 
SNCA-MMRN1 triplication in the Swedish American family (Branch I) leads to 
early-onset Parkinson disease and dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000254458.17630.c5
PMID: 17251522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1573. Twin Res Hum Genet. 2006 Dec;9(6):985-7. doi: 10.1375/183242706779462417.

Update on the NAS-NRC Twin Registry.

Page WF(1).

Author information:
(1)Medical Follow-up Agency, Institute of Medicine, 500 Fifth Street NW, 
Washington, DC 20001, USA. wpage@nas.edu

The National Academy of Sciences-National Research Council (NAS-NRC) Twin 
Registry is one of the oldest, national population-based twin registries in the 
United States. It consists of 15,924 white male twin pairs born in the years 
1917 to 1927 (inclusive), both of whom served in the armed forces, mostly during 
World War II. This article updates activity in this registry since the earlier 
2002 article in Twin Research. The results of clinically based studies on 
dementia, Parkinson's disease, age-related macular degeneration, and primary 
osteoarthritis were published, as well as articles based on previously collected 
questionnaire data on chronic fatigue syndrome, functional limitations, and 
healthy aging. In addition, risk factor studies are being planned to merge 
clinical data with earlier collected risk factor data from questionnaires. 
Examination data from the subset of National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute 
(NHLBI) twins resulted in a number of articles, including the relationship of 
endogenous sex hormones to coronary heart disease and morphological changes in 
aging brain structures. The NEO Five-Factor Personality Inventory (a 
paper-and-pencil self-administered questionnaire) has been fielded for the first 
time. A push to consolidate the various data holdings of the registry is being 
made.

DOI: 10.1375/183242706779462417
PMID: 17254441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1574. Mov Disord. 2007 Mar 15;22(4):566-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.21319.

Neuropsychiatric and cognitive features in autosomal-recessive early 
parkinsonism due to PINK1 mutations.

Ephraty L(1), Porat O, Israeli D, Cohen OS, Tunkel O, Yael S, Hatano Y, Hattori 
N, Hassin-Baer S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Sagol Neuroscience Center, Tel-Aviv University, 
Tel-Aviv, Israel.

Autosomal-recessive early-onset Parkinsonism (AREP) due to PINK1 mutations is 
characterized by an early-onset, slowly progressive disease, with a good 
response to levodopa. Psychiatric and cognitive disturbances associated with 
AREP have rarely been reported in the literature. We describe 2 brothers from a 
Jewish-Iraqi consanguineous family with a homozygous PINK1 nonsense mutation. 
Both patients presented with anxiety and dysphoria accompanied by a gait 
disturbance that developed subsequently into a clinical depression. During the 
course of the disease, both developed drug-induced behavioral disturbances of 
the hedonistic homeostatic dysregulation type and 1 had drug-induced psychosis. 
The first patient had been diagnosed with mild mental retardation and during the 
22 years of disease had further deteriorated; the second developed frontal-type 
dementia at an early age, 20 years after onset. Their father had a psychiatric 
disorder but no Parkinsonism. This report expands the phenotypic profile of 
PINK1-related disease, presenting unique psychiatric and cognitive features as 
part of the clinical picture.

(c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21319
PMID: 17260336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1575. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Nov;1089:324-42. doi: 10.1196/annals.1386.036.

Estrogen, beta-amyloid metabolism/trafficking, and Alzheimer's disease.

Xu H(1), Wang R, Zhang YW, Zhang X.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurosciences and Aging, Burnham Institute for Medical Research, 
10901 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, CA 92037, USA. xuh@burnham.org

Estrogen plays key regulatory roles in a variety of biological actions besides 
its classic function as a sex hormone. Recently, estrogen has been linked to 
neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Several lines of evidence support the notion that brain estrogen 
exerts neuroprotective effects against various types of neurotoxicity in 
different cellular and animal models. Despite some controversies, estrogen 
replacement therapy (ERT) at an early stage, especially when given prior to 
menopause, has been shown to reduce the risk of AD in postmenopausal women. In 
addition, multiple lines of evidence have proven the neuroprotective effects of 
estrogen, such as enhancing neurotrophin signaling and synaptic activities 
pertinent to memory functions and protecting neurons against oxidative injuries 
and beta-amyloid toxicity; the latter is widely accepted as the prime culprit 
known to trigger the pathogenesis of AD. Here we will summarize our findings 
that estrogen decreased generation and secretion of beta-amyloid peptides in 
cultured cells and primary neurons and that administration of estrogen in 
estrogen-deprived mice reversed the elevated levels of brain Abeta. We will also 
discuss the molecular and cellular mechanisms underlying estrogen's effects on 
Abeta metabolism, which is highlighted by our demonstration that estrogen 
increases intracellular trafficking of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) 
and hence reduces maximal Abeta generation within the trans-Golgi network (TGN), 
a subcellular compartment in which APP is known to be cleaved by the secretase 
enzymes to generate Abeta.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1386.036
PMID: 17261779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1576. Mov Disord. 2007 Apr 15;22(5):660-5. doi: 10.1002/mds.21373.

Smoking and cognitive function in Parkinson's disease.

Weisskopf MG(1), Grodstein F, Ascherio A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
MA 02215, USA. mweissko@hsph.harvard.edu

The risk of dementia among Parkinson's disease (PD) patients is greatly elevated 
compared to controls, yet little is known about determinants of cognitive 
function among PD patients. We assessed the relation between cigarette smoking 
prior to disease onset and later cognitive function among PD patients (n = 286) 
and age- and sex-matched controls (n = 1144) participating in the Nurses' Health 
Study and Health Professionals Follow-up Study. Both groups completed 
telephone-administered assessments of cognitive function. We used linear 
regression to calculate mean differences in cognitive test scores across smoking 
categories, adjusted for age, education, sex, age at onset of PD, and years 
since diagnosis. PD patients scored significantly worse on all tests than their 
matched controls. In analyses only among PD cases, but not among controls, 
current smokers at PD onset scored worse than never smokers on the Telephone 
Interview for Cognitive Status (difference = -0.82, 95% CI: -1.33, -0.30, P = 
0.002) as well as on a global score combining results of all tests (difference = 
-0.36, 95% CI: -0.72, 0.01, P = 0.06). This difference was equivalent to the 
difference in global score observed among controls approximately 10 years apart 
in age. Analyses of pack-years of smoking prior to disease onset gave similar 
results. These findings, nested in prospective cohort studies, suggest that 
cigarette smoking prior to disease onset is associated with worse cognitive 
function in PD.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21373
PMID: 17266085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1577. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2007 May;13(4):224-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.10.006. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Polymorphisms of catechol-0-methyltransferase (COMT), monoamine oxidase B 
(MAOB), N-acetyltransferase 2 (NAT2) and cytochrome P450 2D6 (CYP2D6) gene in 
patients with early onset of Parkinson's disease.

Bialecka M(1), Klodowska-Duda G, Honczarenko K, Gawrońska-Szklarz B, Opala G, 
Safranow K, Droździk M.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Szczecin, Poland.

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the contribution of MAOB, COMT, 
NAT2 and CYP2D6 gene polymorphisms to early onset Parkinson's disease (PD). The 
study enrolled 134 patients with Parkinson's disease (early onset-EOPD--67 
patients, and late onset--LOPD--patients), and 66 healthy individuals. 
Polymerane chain reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) 
methods were used for genotyping. Univariate analysis revealed a significant 
two-fold higher EOPD risk among carriers of MAOB allele A or AA genotype. 
Multivariate analysis revealed that MAOB allele A was an independent factor 
predisposing to EOPD. It was shown that neither NAT2, CYP2D6 nor COMT genotype 
was associated with PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.10.006
PMID: 17270484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1578. Neurol India. 2007 Jan-Mar;55(1):11-6. doi: 10.4103/0028-3886.30420.

Tau and tauopathies.

Robert M(1), Mathuranath PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical College, Trivandrum, Kerala, India. 
robert_mathew90@yahoo.co.in

Tau protein is a neuronal microtubule-associated protein (MAP), which localizes 
primarily in the axon. It is one of the major and most widely distributed MAPs 
in the central nervous system. Its biochemistry and molecular pathology is being 
increasingly studied. Tau is a key component of neurofbrillary tangles in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Disorders with neuronal, oligodendroglial or 
astrocytic filamentous tau inclusions are now grouped under the common rubric of 
tauopathies. The discovery of mutations in the tau gene, located on Chromosome 
17 and its relationship to frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism (FTDP-17) 
has enhanced the importance of tau protein in cognitive neurology. Aberrant 
aggregates of tau have been documented in most of the neurodegenerative diseases 
with filamentous inclusions. The role of cerebrospinal fluid tau in the 
diagnosis of dementias is being investigated quite extensively. Recently, it has 
been shown that Abeta immunotherapy leads to the clearance of early tau 
pathology. It is becoming clearer that understanding tau better will lead to 
better understanding of many neurodegenerative diseases that may help develop 
interventional strategies.

DOI: 10.4103/0028-3886.30420
PMID: 17272893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1579. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Mar 30;415(3):205-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.01.026. Epub 
2007 Jan 14.

Abnormal levels of prohibitin and ATP synthase in the substantia nigra and 
frontal cortex in Parkinson's disease.

Ferrer I(1), Perez E, Dalfó E, Barrachina M.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei Anatomia Patològica, IDIBELL-Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge, Facultad de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, 
carrer Feixa Llarga s/n, 08907 Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain. 8082ifa@comb.es

Prohibitin and ATP synthase protein levels were examined in the substantia nigra 
and frontal cortex (area 8) in five cases of Parkinson's disease (PD), five 
cases of dementia with Lewy bodies pure form (pDLB), five cases of early 
Alzheimer's disease (AD stage IIA, B), nine cases with advanced AD (stages 
V/VIC), and nine controls. A significant reduction of prohibitin and ATP 
synthase was observed in the substantia nigra in PD cases. In contrast, 
increased prohibitin and ATP synthase levels were found in the frontal cortex in 
PD, and increased prohibitin but not ATP synthase in the frontal cortex in pDLB. 
Superoxide dismutase 2 (SOD2) expression levels were also increased in the 
frontal cortex in PD and pDLB. No modifications in prohibitin and ATP synthase 
levels were found in the frontal cortex in sporadic AD. These findings 
demonstrate disease-specific modifications in the expression of 
mitochondrial-related proteins in the frontal cortex at stages of PD in which 
there is no alpha-synuclein aggregation in the form of Lewy bodies and Lewy 
neurites in this area. These findings emphasize the presence of mitochondrial 
modifications before the appearance of histological hallmarks of PD, and point 
to the possibility of a more extended molecular pathology in PD than currently 
accepted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.01.026
PMID: 17284347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1580. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007 Oct;78(10):1064-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.108076. Epub 2007 Feb 7.

Profile of cognitive impairment in dementia associated with Parkinson's disease 
compared with Alzheimer's disease.

Bronnick K(1), Emre M, Lane R, Tekin S, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, Helse 
Stavanger, Norway. bronnick@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To compare the profile of cognitive impairment in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) with dementia associated with Parkinson's disease (PDD).
METHODS: Neuropsychological assessment was performed in 488 patients with PDD 
and 488 patients with AD using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the 
Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog). Logistic 
regression analysis was used to investigate whether the diagnosis could be 
accurately predicted from the cognitive profile. Additionally, the cognitive 
profiles were compared with a normative group using standardised effect sizes 
(Cohen's d).
RESULTS: Diagnosis was predicted from the cognitive profile, with an overall 
accuracy of 74.7%. Poor performance of the AD patients on the orientation test 
in ADAS-cog best discriminated between the groups, followed by poor performance 
of the PDD patients on the attentional task in MMSE. Both groups showed memory 
impairment, AD patients performing worse than PDD patients.
CONCLUSION: The cognitive profile in PDD differs significantly from that in AD. 
Performance on tests of orientation and attention are best in differentiating 
the groups.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.108076
PMCID: PMC2117535
PMID: 17287236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.


1581. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2006 Dec;4(4):330-46. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2006.12.001.

Rasagiline (TVP-1012): a new selective monoamine oxidase inhibitor for 
Parkinson's disease.

Guay DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. guayx001@umn.edu

Comment in
    Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2007 Jun;5(2):174-5; author reply 175-6.

OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the chemistry, pharmacodynamics, 
pharmacokinetics, clinical efficacy, tolerability, drug-interaction potential, 
indications, dosing, and potential role of rasagiline mesylate, a new selective 
monoamine oxidase (MAO) type B (MAO-B) inhibitor, in the treatment of 
Parkinson's disease.
METHODS: A MEDLINE/PUBMED search (1986 through September 2006) was conducted to 
identify studies involving rasagiline written in English. Additional references 
were obtained from the bibliographies of these studies. All studies evaluating 
any aspect of rasagiline, including in vitro, in vivo (animal), and human 
studies, were reviewed.
RESULTS: Rasagiline mesylate was developed with the goal of producing a 
selective MAO-B inhibitor that is not metabolized to (presumed) toxic 
metabolites (eg, amphetamine and methamphetamine, which are byproducts of the 
metabolism of selegiline, another selective MAO-B inhibitor). In vitro and in 
vivo data have confirmed the drug's selectivity for MAO-B. Rasagiline is almost 
completely eliminated by oxidative metabolism (catalyzed by cytochrome P-450 
[CYP] isozyme 1A2) followed by renal excretion of conjugated parent compound and 
metabolites. Drug clearance is sufficiently slow to allow once-daily dosing. 
Several studies have documented its efficacy as monotherapy for early-stage 
disease and as adjunctive therapy in L-dopa recipients with motor fluctuations. 
As monotherapy, rasagiline is well tolerated with an adverse-effect profile 
similar to that of placebo. As adjunctive therapy, it exhibits the expected 
adverse effects of dopamine excess, which can be ameliorated by reducing the 
L-dopa dosage. CYP1A2 inhibitors slow the elimination of rasagiline and mandate 
dosage reduction. Hepatic impairment has an analogous effect. The recommended 
dosage regimens for monotherapy and adjunctive therapy are 1 and 0.5 mg PO QD, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite the well-documented selectivity of rasagiline, the 
manufacturer recommends virtually all of the dietary (vis-à-vis tyramine) and 
drug restrictions of the nonselective MAO inhibitors. Although useful, selective 
MAO-B inhibitors have a limited role in Parkinson's disease. Of greater interest 
is the potential neuroprotective effect of rasagiline and its major metabolite, 
1(R)-aminoindan, which may have great utility in a wide variety of 
neurodegenerative disorders of aging. In addition, bifunctional molecules 
combining selective MAO-B inhibition (based on the active moiety of rasagiline) 
with acetylcholinesterase inhibition or iron chelation may eventually be useful 
in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2006.12.001
PMID: 17296539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1582. Brain. 2007 Mar;130(Pt 3):816-27. doi: 10.1093/brain/awl347. Epub 2007 Feb 15.

Atypical parkinsonism in Guadeloupe: a common risk factor for two closely 
related phenotypes?

Lannuzel A(1), Höglinger GU, Verhaeghe S, Gire L, Belson S, Escobar-Khondiker M, 
Poullain P, Oertel WH, Hirsch EC, Dubois B, Ruberg M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital of Pointe-à-Pitre, Guadeloupe, F.W.I. 
annie.lannuzel@wanadoo.fr

In Guadeloupe, there is an abnormally high frequency of atypical parkinsonism. 
Only one-third of the patients that develop parkinsonian symptoms were reported 
to present the classical features of idiopathic Parkinson disease and one-third 
a syndrome resembling progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). The others were 
unclassifiable, according to established criteria. We carried out a 
cross-sectional study of 160 parkinsonian patients to: (i) define more precisely 
the clinical phenotypes of the PSP-like syndrome and the parkinsonism that was 
considered unclassifiable in comparison with previously known disorders; (ii) 
define the neuropsychological and brain imaging features of these patients; 
(iii) evaluate to what extent a candidate aetiological factor, the mitochondrial 
complex I inhibitor annonacin contained in the fruit and leaves of the tropical 
plant Annona muricata (soursop) plays a role in the neurological syndrome. 
Neuropsychological tests and MRI were used to classify the patients into those 
with Parkinson's disease (31%), Guadeloupean PSP-like syndrome (32%), 
Guadeloupean parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC, 31%) and other 
parkinsonism-related disorders (6%). Patients with a PSP-like syndrome developed 
levodopa-resistant parkinsonism, associated with early postural instability and 
supranuclear oculomotor dysfunction. They differed, however, from classical PSP 
patients by the frequency of tremor (>50%), dysautonomia (50%) and the 
occurrence of hallucinations (59%). PDC patients had levodopa-resistant 
parkinsonism associated with frontosubcortical dementia, 52% of these patients 
had hallucinations, but, importantly, none had oculomotor dysfunction. The 
pattern of neuropsychological deficits was similar in both subgroups. Cerebral 
atrophy was seen in the majority of the PSP-like and PDC patients, with 
enlargement of the third ventricle and marked T2-hypointensity in the basal 
ganglia, particularly the substantia nigra. Consumption of soursop was 
significantly greater in both PSP-like and PDC patients than in controls and 
Parkinson's disease patients. In conclusion, atypical Guadeloupean parkinsonism 
comprises two forms of parkinsonism and dementia that differ clinically by the 
presence of oculomotor signs, but have similar cognitive profiles and 
neuroimaging features, suggesting that they may constitute a single disease 
entity, and both were similarly exposed to annonaceous neurotoxins, notably 
annonacin.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awl347
PMID: 17303592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1583. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Mar 1;16(5):555-66. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm011. Epub 2007 Feb 
19.

Cytoskeleton proteins are modulators of mutant tau-induced neurodegeneration in 
Drosophila.

Blard O(1), Feuillette S, Bou J, Chaumette B, Frébourg T, Campion D, Lecourtois 
M.

Author information:
(1)Inserm U614 (IFRMP), University of Rouen & Department of Genetics, Rouen 
University Hospital, Institute for Biomedical Research, Rouen, France.

Tauopathies, including Alzheimer's disease and fronto-temporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), are a group of neurodegenerative 
disorders characterized by the presence of intraneuronal filamentous inclusions 
of aberrantly phosphorylated-tau. Tau is a neuronal microtubule-associated 
protein involved in microtubule assembly and stabilization. Currently, the 
molecular mechanisms underlying tau-mediated cellular toxicity remain elusive. 
To address the determinants of tau neurotoxicity, we first characterized the 
cellular alterations resulting from the over-expression of a mutant form of 
human tau associated with FTDP-17 (tau V337M) in Drosophila. We found that the 
over-expression of tau V337M, in Drosophila larval motor neurons, induced 
disruption of the microtubular network at presynaptic nerve terminals and 
changes in neuromuscular junctions morphological features. Secondly, we 
performed a misexpression screen to identify genetic modifiers of the tau 
V337M-mediated rough eye phenotype. The screening of 1250 mutant Drosophila 
lines allowed us to identify several components of the cytoskeleton, and 
particularly from the actin network, as specific modifiers of tau V337M-induced 
neurodegeneration. Furthermore, we found that numerous tau modulators identified 
in our screen were involved in the maintenance of synaptic function. Taken 
together, these findings suggest that disruption of the microtubule network in 
presynaptic nerve terminals could constitute early events in the pathological 
process leading to synaptic dysfunction in tau V337M pathology.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm011
PMID: 17309878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1584. Neurology. 2007 Feb 20;68(8):620-1. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000254614.39759.3d.

Distinctive MRI findings in pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND).

Frank AR(1), Wszolek ZK, Jack CR Jr, Boeve BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN, USA

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000254614.39759.3d
PMID: 17310038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1585. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2007 Sep;78(9):936-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.107326. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

CSF neurofilament proteins in the differential diagnosis of dementia.

de Jong D(1), Jansen RW, Pijnenburg YA, van Geel WJ, Borm GF, Kremer HP, Verbeek 
MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 6500 HB, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Neurofilament (NF) proteins are major cytoskeletal constituents of 
neurons. Increased CSF NF levels may reflect neuronal degeneration.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the diagnostic value of CSF NF analysis to 
discriminate in relatively young dementia patients between frontotemporal lobe 
degeneration (FTLD) and early onset Alzheimer's disease (EAD; onset < or = 65 
years of age), and in elderly dementia patients between dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and late onset AD (LAD; onset > 65 years of age).
METHODS: In CSF of 28 FTLD, 37 EAD, 18 DLB and 33 LAD patients, and 26 control 
subjects, we analysed NF light chain (NFL), phosphorylated NF heavy chain 
(pNFH), amyloid beta42 protein (Abeta42), total tau and tau phosphorylated at 
threonine 181 (p-tau181).
RESULTS: CSF NFL levels were higher in FTLD patients compared with EAD patients 
(p<0.001), and diagnostic accuracy of p-tau181 and Abeta42 analysis improved 
with addition of NFL analysis (sensitivity 86%, specificity 100%). CSF pNFH 
levels were elevated in DLB, LAD and FTLD compared with controls (p<0.05) but no 
significant differences were found between the dementia groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In the diagnostic workup of relatively young dementia patients, CSF 
NFL levels may play a role in the discrimination between FTLD and EAD, 
especially in combination with Abeta42 and p-tau181 analysis.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.107326
PMCID: PMC2117885
PMID: 17314187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.


1586. J Neurol Sci. 2007 Jun 15;257(1-2):97-104. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.01.016. Epub 
2007 Feb 21.

MRI confirms mild cognitive impairments prodromal for Alzheimer's, vascular and 
Parkinson-Lewy body dementias.

Meyer JS(1), Huang J, Chowdhury MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, and Cerebrovascular 
Research Laboratories, Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Houston, Texas 77098, USA. johnstirlingmeyer@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: MRI assessments were correlated with serial Combined Mini-Mental 
Cognitive Capacity Screening Examinations (CMC). Vascular-MCI (VMCI), 
Neurodegenerative MCI (NMCI) and Parkinson-Lewy body MCI (PLB-MCI) were compared 
during conversions to dementia. Mild cognitive impairments (MCI) are 
identifiable prodromes for all dementia subtypes. MRI abnormalities are 
characterized among MCI subjects prodromal for dementia of Alzheimer's disease 
(DAT), vascular dementia (VaD) and Parkinson-Lewy body dementia (PLBD).
METHODS: Aging volunteers (n=166) were recruited from ongoing longitudinal 
studies of aging, stroke, cerebrovascular disease and dementia. Cognitively 
normal (CN, n=52), MCIs of neurodegenerative (N-MCI, n=30), vascular (V-MCI, 
n=35) and Parkinson-Lewy Body (PLB-MCI, n=8) subtypes, plus converted DAT 
(n=19), VaD (n=17) and PLBD (n=5) were all diagnosed according to established 
protocol recommendations. Cerebral MRI abnormalities were likewise 
intercorrelated utilizing quantitative volumetric measurements.
RESULTS: V-MCI and converted VaD showed extensive leukoaraiosis with more 
lacunar infarcts than subjects with N-MCI or PLB-MCI. N-MCI, prodromal for DAT, 
showed medial temporal atrophy, greater enlargement of temporal horns, and fewer 
vascular lesions. PLB-MCI, prodromal for PLBD, displayed third ventricular 
enlargement greater than N-MCI and V-MCI, with similar but less severe atrophy 
of medial temporal lobe than N-MCI and fewer vascular lesions than V-MCI. 
Cognitive Impairments due to PLB with vascular features (V-PLB-CI) showed more 
lacunar and microvascular lesions involving both white matter and basal ganglia 
with greater frontal horn enlargement.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms different MCI subtypes prior to conversion to 
different dementias listed, recognizable by specific MRI abnormalities.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.01.016
PMID: 17316690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1587. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2007;44 Suppl 1:359-64. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2007.01.049.

Drug adverse events and drop-out risk: a clinical case.

Scoyni RM(1), Aiello L, Trani I, Felli B, Masin AM, Camponi V, Dignazio L, 
Cortese M, Pacitti MT, Carratelli D, Morocutti C.

Author information:
(1)Casa di Cura Villa Grazia Alzheimer, Roma, Italy. rscoyni@yahoo.com

We report a brief discussion on a clinical case of a female patient, 85 years 
old, affected by severe cognitive impairment and chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD). The patient was not taking drugs at home (apart from promazine: 
10 drops when necessary to control her behavioral diseases). A previous 
neuropsychological evaluation had shown a severe cognitive impairment 
MMSE=16/30; ADL=3/6; IADL=0/8) due to multiple brain ischemic areas (confirmed 
in 2003 by MRI neuroimaging). When the patient was admitted to our center she 
was able to perform some basic activities of daily living such as eating and 
walking and was not too confused. She was included in cognitive rehabilitation 
groups. Since she showed signs of Parkinsonism, a therapy based on omeprazol 
20mg, acetylsalicylic acid, donepezil 10mg, pramipexol 0.18 mg, nimodipine 10 
drops, levodopa+carbidopa 100/25mg was started. A few days later she became 
sleepy during daytime and, once, she lost her balance and fell. She was not 
self-sufficient any more. At first this was attributed to a lung infection that 
the patient had, but her state continue after the infection was completely cured 
with appropriate antibiotics therapy. At that point an adverse drug reaction was 
suspected and therapy with pramipexol 0.18 mg was interrupted. In a few days the 
patient regained her previous level of consciousness and self-sufficiency. We 
consider this a typical case of complex management in a patient with dementia 
and comorbidity in which adverse drug reactions can play an important role in 
lowering the level of cognitive functions. In this case the relationship with 
the family of the patient was made difficult by the attitude of the patient's 
daughter who decided, after the onset of the adverse drug reaction, to interrupt 
her mother's stay in our center even at risk of the worst consequences.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2007.01.049
PMID: 17317475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1588. J Neurol Sci. 2007 Jun 15;257(1-2):80-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.01.045. Epub 
2007 Feb 26.

Neuropathological evaluation of mixed dementia.

Jellinger KA(1), Attems J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, 18, Kenyongasse, A-1070 Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Mixed dementia (MD) refers to a combination of definite Alzheimer disease (AD) 
and vascular encephalopathy, but the distinction between both disorders is 
controversial. For the diagnosis of MD the clinical/neuroimaging criteria of 
possible AD plus cerebrovascular disease (CVD) as separate entities are used, 
but causal relations between vascular brain lesions and dementia are unclear. We 
proposed the combination of autopsy-proven AD with multiple vascular or ischemic 
lesions with about 30-50 ml of infarcted/damaged brain tissue. The 
population-based prevalence of MD is unknown. In retrospective and prospective 
autopsy studies, it ranges from 2 to 58% with reasonable means of 6-12%. In a 
consecutive autopsy series of 1500 demented elderly subjects, 830 of which with 
clinically probable AD, in Vienna, Austria, 41.5 to 52.0% showed "pure" AD, 7% 
atypical AD, 16-20% AD plus cerebrovascular lesions, and 9% AD plus Lewy body 
pathology; MD was diagnosed in 4.6 and 2.4%, and "pure" vascular dementia (VaD) 
in 11 and 2.0%, respectively, while 16.3/6.1% were other dementing disorders, 
and 1% showed no specific pathology. Like the MRC-CFAS and other studies, this 
indicates frequent coexistence of AD with multiple cerebrovascular lesions in 
cognitively impaired patients. In both AD and VaD, vascular lesions frequently 
involved subcortical regions (basal ganglia, thalamus, hippocampus, and white 
matter) or were multiple microinfarcts, whereas in MD, large/hemispheral 
infarcts and multiple microinfarcts were more frequent, suggesting different 
pathogenic mechanisms. In early/mild AD, critically located small vascular 
lesions may induce/promote cognitive decline, but in full-blown AD they appear 
of minor importance. Discussion of the major pathogenic factors inducing AD, VaD 
and MD suggests synergistic relations between these disorders. However, 
currently available morphological criteria for AD and VaD are of limited value 
for the diagnosis of MD and generally accepted and validated histopathological 
criteria for the diagnosis of VaD and MD are currently not available. Therefore, 
more distinct and critically evaluated clinico-pathological criteria are 
warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.01.045
PMID: 17324442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1589. Neuropsychologia. 2007 Apr 9;45(8):1632-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.01.006. Epub 2007 Jan 14.

Decision-making with explicit and stable rules in mild Alzheimer's disease.

Delazer M(1), Sinz H, Zamarian L, Benke T.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Anichstrasse 
35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria. margarete.delazer@uibk.ac.at

Decision-making in mild dementia of Alzheimer's type (DAT) was assessed in a 
gambling task with stable and explicit rules [Game of Dice Task; Brand, M., 
Labudda, K., Kalbe, E., Hilker, R., Emmans, D., Fuchs, G., et al. (2004). 
Decision-making impairments in patients with Parkinson's disease. Behavioural 
Neurology, 15, 77-85]. DAT patients in an early stage of the disease chose safe 
alternatives as frequently as healthy elderly persons and did not show risky 
behaviour as has been reported for other neurological patient groups. However, a 
more detailed analysis disclosed important differences between DAT and healthy 
elderly. Compared to healthy controls, DAT patients shifted more frequently 
between safe and risky alternatives and showed less consistent response 
patterns. Frequent changes between strategies indicate that decisions were taken 
randomly, that no advantageous strategy was established and that no consistent 
response pattern was developed over time. As regards performance changes over 
the task, healthy participants had a stronger tendency towards safe and 
advantageous responses than DAT patients. While healthy controls showed learning 
as the task proceeded, DAT patients did not adapt their strategies. The 
proportion of "consistently safe responders" was significantly higher in the 
control group than in the DAT group. Analysis of reaction times indicated that 
differences in response behaviour were not due to fast and impulsive decision 
taking in the DAT group. DAT patients' response pattern may be attributed to 
deficits in learning and in executive functions. The frequency of changes 
between safe and risky choices proved to be a fair predictor for the distinction 
between mild DAT and healthy aging.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2007.01.006
PMID: 17328931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1590. Occup Environ Med. 2007 Oct;64(10):666-72. doi: 10.1136/oem.2006.027003. Epub 
2007 Mar 1.

Environmental risk factors for Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism: the 
Geoparkinson study.

Dick FD(1), De Palma G, Ahmadi A, Scott NW, Prescott GJ, Bennett J, Semple S, 
Dick S, Counsell C, Mozzoni P, Haites N, Wettinger SB, Mutti A, Otelea M, Seaton 
A, Söderkvist P, Felice A; Geoparkinson study group.

Author information:
(1)Dr F Dick, Department of Environmental and Occupational Medicine, Aberdeen 
University Medical School, Foresterhill, Aberdeen AB25 2ZP, UK; 
f.dick@abdn.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the associations between Parkinson's disease and other 
degenerative parkinsonian syndromes and environmental factors in five European 
countries.
METHODS: A case-control study of 959 prevalent cases of parkinsonism (767 with 
Parkinson's disease) and 1989 controls in Scotland, Italy, Sweden, Romania and 
Malta was carried out. Cases were defined using the United Kingdom Parkinson's 
Disease Society Brain Bank criteria, and those with drug-induced or vascular 
parkinsonism or dementia were excluded. Subjects completed an 
interviewer-administered questionnaire about lifetime occupational and hobby 
exposure to solvents, pesticides, iron, copper and manganese. Lifetime and 
average annual exposures were estimated blind to disease status using a 
job-exposure matrix modified by subjective exposure modelling. Results were 
analysed using multiple logistic regression, adjusting for age, sex, country, 
tobacco use, ever knocked unconscious and family history of Parkinson's disease.
RESULTS: Adjusted logistic regression analyses showed significantly increased 
odds ratios for Parkinson's disease/parkinsonism with an exposure-response 
relationship for pesticides (low vs no exposure, odds ratio (OR) = 1.13, 95% CI 
0.82 to 1.57, high vs no exposure, OR = 1.41, 95% CI 1.06 to 1.88) and ever 
knocked unconscious (once vs never, OR = 1.35, 95% CI 1.09 to 1.68, more than 
once vs never, OR = 2.53, 95% CI 1.78 to 3.59). Hypnotic, anxiolytic or 
antidepressant drug use for more than 1 year and a family history of Parkinson's 
disease showed significantly increased odds ratios. Tobacco use was protective 
(OR = 0.50, 95% CI 0.42 to 0.60). Analyses confined to subjects with Parkinson's 
disease gave similar results.
CONCLUSIONS: The association of pesticide exposure with Parkinson's disease 
suggests a causative role. Repeated traumatic loss of consciousness is 
associated with increased risk.

DOI: 10.1136/oem.2006.027003
PMCID: PMC2078401
PMID: 17332139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1591. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2007 Aug;13(6):348-54. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2007.01.003. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Both early and late cognitive dysfunction affects the electroencephalogram in 
Parkinson's disease.

Caviness JN(1), Hentz JG, Evidente VG, Driver-Dunckley E, Samanta J, Mahant P, 
Connor DJ, Sabbagh MN, Shill HA, Adler CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 13400 East Shea Boulevard, Scottsdale, 
AZ, USA. jcaviness@mayo.edu

We sought to define quantitative electroencephalographic (EEG) measures as 
biomarkers of both early and late cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease (PD). 
PD subjects classified as cognitively normal (PD-CogNL), mild cognitive 
impairment (PD-MCI), and dementia (PD-D) were studied. Cognitive status and 
neuropsychological testing was correlated with background rhythm and frequency 
band EEG power across five frequency bands. We conclude that global EEG measures 
have potential use as biomarkers in the study of both early and late cognitive 
deterioration in PD, including for evaluating its treatment. PD-MCI has mean 
quantitative EEG characteristics that represent an intermediate 
electrophysiological state between PD-CogNL and PD-D.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2007.01.003
PMID: 17347022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1592. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2007 Aug;13(6):323-32. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.12.014. Epub 2007 Mar 8.

Non-motor dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.

Ziemssen T(1), Reichmann H.

Author information:
(1)Neurological University Clinic, Technische Universität Dresden, 
Fetscherstrasse 74, D-01307 Dresden, Germany. Ziemssen@web.de

In the field of neurology, Parkinson's disease (PD) is commonly perceived to be 
a disorder affecting only the (extrapyramidal) motor system, characteristically 
manifesting as bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor and postural instability. Although 
non-motor symptoms such as behavioural abnormalities, dysautonomia, sleep 
disturbances and sensory dysfunctions are also common and quite disabling 
manifestations of the disease, they are often not formally assessed and thus are 
frequently misdiagnosed and/or under diagnosed. For this reason, in this review 
we have concentrated on the pathophysiological and clinical basis of non-motor 
involvement such as olfactory dysfunction, depression, dementia, dysautonomia 
and sleep disorders in PD. The early recognition of these symptoms may well 
perhaps lead to an earlier diagnosis of PD, but in any case should lead to more 
prompt and effective treatment of the relatively unrecognized non-motor problems 
associated with PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.12.014
PMID: 17349813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1593. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2007 Apr;28(4):180-7. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2007.02.004. 
Epub 2007 Mar 12.

The endocannabinoid system in targeting inflammatory neurodegenerative diseases.

Centonze D(1), Finazzi-Agrò A, Bernardi G, Maccarrone M.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Clinics, Department of Neurosciences, University of Rome Tor 
Vergata, Rome 00133, Italy.

The classical divide between degenerative and inflammatory disorders of the CNS 
is vanishing as accumulating evidence shows that inflammatory processes are 
important in the pathophysiology of primarily degenerative disorders, and 
neurodegeneration complicates primarily inflammatory diseases of the brain and 
spinal cord. Here, we review the contribution of degenerative and inflammatory 
processes to CNS disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis and HIV-associated dementia. 
An early combination of neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory approaches to 
these disorders seems particularly desirable because isolated treatment of one 
pathological process might worsen another. We also discuss the apparently unique 
opportunity to modify neurodegeneration and neuroinflammation simultaneously by 
pharmacological manipulation of the endocannabinoid system in the CNS and in 
peripheral immune cells. Current knowledge of this system and its involvement in 
the above CNS disorders are also reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2007.02.004
PMID: 17350694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1594. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;23(5):281-8. doi: 10.1159/000100850. Epub 2007 
Mar 14.

Cognitive changes in Parkinson's disease patients with visual hallucinations.

Ramirez-Ruiz B(1), Junque C, Marti MJ, Valldeoriola F, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the decline in specific neuropsychological functions in 
nondemented Parkinson's disease (PD) patients with a history of visual 
hallucinations (VH).
METHODS: Twenty PD patients with VH, 20 PD patients without VH and 18 normal 
controls were followed up over a 1-year period and assessed for cognitive 
decline.
RESULTS: Forty-five percent of nondemented hallucinating PD patients developed 
dementia during the 1-year period between baseline and follow-up evaluations. Of 
the nondemented hallucinating PD patients nearly 70% showed impairment in 
multiple cognitive domains. The progressive decline in hallucinating PD patients 
affected mainly visual memory for faces and visuoperceptive-visuospatial 
functions.
CONCLUSION: Our results support a fast impairment of complex visual functions in 
hallucinating PD patients, but also a progressive decline in multiple cognitive 
domains, which have been identified as a risk of developing dementia in PD.

Copyright 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000100850
PMID: 17351320 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1595. Neurologist. 2007 Mar;13(2):98-101. doi: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000257848.06462.46.

"Idiopathic" rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder is associated with 
future development of neurodegenerative diseases.

Hickey MG(1), Demaerschalk BM, Caselli RJ, Parish JM, Wingerchuk DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Scottsdale, Arizona 
85259, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether a diagnosis of idiopathic rapid-eye-movement 
sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is associated with a future risk of development of 
neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODS: We addressed the objective through development of a structured 
critically appraised topic that included a clinical scenario, structured 
question, search strategy, critical appraisal, results, summary of best 
evidence, commentary, and bottom-line conclusions. Participants included 
consultant and resident neurologists, clinical epidemiologists, medical 
librarians, and clinical content experts.
RESULTS: A retrospective study of 44 consecutive patients diagnosed with 
idiopathic RBD demonstrated that 20 patients (45%) developed a neurologic 
disorder, most commonly Parkinson disease or Lewy body dementia, after a mean of 
11.5 years from reported symptom onset and 5.1 years after RBD diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Currently available evidence is limited to cross-sectional and 
retrospective analyses of patients with RBD. Although ascertainment biases and 
the retrospective nature of the available evidence limits quantitative analyses, 
the diagnosis of idiopathic RBD portends a risk of greater than 45% for future 
development of a clinically defined neurodegenerative disease. This finding has 
significant implications for clinical neurologic and sleep disorder practice and 
neurodegenerative disease research.

DOI: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000257848.06462.46
PMID: 17351532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1596. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2007 Feb;163(2):155-67. doi: 10.1016/s0035-3787(07)90387-2.

[Olfaction and neurological diseases: a review of the literature].

[Article in French]

Demarquay G(1), Ryvlin P, Royet JP.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Neurologie Fonctionnelle et d'Epileptologie, Hôpital Neurologique 
Pierre Wertheimer, Lyon. genevieve.demarquay@chu-lyon.fr

Olfactory disorders are often misjudged and rarely rated in the clinical 
setting. They are nevertheless described in a wide range of neurological 
disorders, and their evaluation can be useful for diagnosis. Usually 
irreversible olfactory dysfunction is a well-known complication after head 
trauma. Severe changes in olfactory tests are observed in Parkinson's disease. 
Dysfunction is present at disease onset and evidenced with all behavioral tests. 
Regarding other parkinsonian syndromes, olfactory performances are severely 
impaired in Lewy body disease, less pronounced in multiple system atrophy and 
usually preserved in corticobasal degeneration. Olfactory deficits are an early 
feature in Alzheimer's disease and worsen with disease progression. Rarely 
reported by patients, they must be searched for with olfactory tests. Though 
epilepsy is mainly known for its olfactory hallucinatory disorders, alterations 
of olfactory abilities are also described, especially in mesial temporal 
epilepsy. Disorders of olfactory perception are finally reported in patients 
with multiple sclerosis and migraine. After a reminder of anatomical data on the 
olfactory system, and the different methods of testing used to rate olfactory 
performances, the current review focuses on the type of olfactory dysfunction 
and damaged brain areas of the olfactory system encountered in the main 
neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0035-3787(07)90387-2
PMID: 17351535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1597. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2007 Mar;7(2):167-72. doi: 10.1007/s11910-007-0013-7.

Pathophysiologic mechanisms in REM sleep behavior disorder.

Mahowald MW(1), Schenck CH, Bornemann MA.

Author information:
(1)Minnesota Regional Sleep Disorders Center, Hennepin County Medical Center, 
Minneapolis, MN 55415, USA. mahow002@umn.edu

REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a fascinating experiment in nature 
predicted by animal studies in 1964. A defining feature of REM sleep is active 
paralysis of all somatic musculature (sparing the diaphragm to permit 
respiration). RBD is characterized by the absence of REM atonia, permitting the 
appearance of dream-enacting behaviors. These oneiric behaviors may be violent 
or injurious. RBD typically affects men over the age of 50 years. Longitudinal 
follow-up has shown that the majority of individuals with RBD will eventually 
develop additional signs and symptoms of a number of neurodegenerative 
disorders, most notably one of the synucleinopathies (Parkinson's disease, 
dementia with Lewy body disease, multiple system atrophy, or pure autonomic 
failure), often after a prolonged interval lasting more than 10 years. RBD is 
also a common manifestation of narcolepsy. RBD may be induced by medications, 
especially the tricyclic antidepressants and serotonin-specific reuptake 
inhibitors. In most cases, clonazepam is a highly effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-007-0013-7
PMID: 17355839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1598. Cogn Behav Neurol. 2007 Mar;20(1):68-72. doi: 10.1097/WNN.0b013e3180335f8e.

Educational level as a modulator of cognitive performance and neuropsychyatric 
features in Parkinson disease.

Cohen OS(1), Vakil E, Tanne D, Nitsan Z, Schwartz R, Hassin-Baer S.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's disease and Movement Disorders Clinic, Chaim Sheba Medical 
Center, Tel-Hashomer, Israel. oren.cohen@sheba.health.gov.il

OBJECTIVES: To test a possible association between the educational level (EL), 
cognitive performance, and neuropsychiatric features in Parkinson disease (PD).
BACKGROUND: An inverse association has been reported between EL and cognitive 
dysfunction in patients with senile dementia of Alzheimer type but it is yet 
unsettled whether education has a similar effect on cognition in PD.
METHODS: Seventy-two PD patients (45 males, mean age 68.7+/-11.6 y) underwent a 
detailed neurologic examination, a battery of neuropsychologic tests, and 
questionnaires for the evaluation of psychosis, sleep disturbances, and 
depression. According to the number of educational years, patients were divided 
into 3 groups: low EL (0 to 8 y), (15 patients), intermediate EL (9 to 12 y) (28 
patients), and high EL (>/=13 y) (29 patients).
RESULTS: Patients with a higher EL had a better cognitive function and an 
association was found between the patients' EL and their scores in various 
neuropsychologic tests mainly those sensitive to frontal lobe dysfunction. Low 
education was associated with an increased risk for hallucinations and a trend 
for more depression, delusions, and sleep disturbances.
CONCLUSIONS: The association between high educational attainment and the lower 
risk of cognitive dysfunction suggest that education might modulate cognitive 
performance in PD.

DOI: 10.1097/WNN.0b013e3180335f8e
PMID: 17356347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1599. J Alzheimers Dis. 2007 Mar;11(1):97-116. doi: 10.3233/jad-2007-11113.

Alterations in expression of glutamatergic transporters and receptors in 
sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Jacob CP(1), Koutsilieri E, Bartl J, Neuen-Jacob E, Arzberger T, Zander N, Ravid 
R, Roggendorf W, Riederer P, Grünblatt E.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry and National Parkinson Foundation Centre of 
Excellence Research Laboratories, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg, Germany. psychpol@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

Excitatory neurotransmitter dysfunction has been discussed to be involved in the 
pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In the current study we 
investigated gene and protein expression patterns of glutamatergic receptors and 
transporters in brains of AD patients in various stages of disease using gene 
chip arrays, real time PCR and immunohistochemistry. We found marked impairment 
in the expression of excitatory amino acid transporters (EAAT1 and EAAT 2) at 
both gene and protein levels in hippocampus and gyrus frontalis medialis of AD 
patients, already in early clinical stages of disease. The loss of EAAT 
immunoreactivity was particularly obvious in the vicinity of amyloid plaques. In 
contrast, EAAT expression was up-regulated in the cerebellum of these patients. 
Furthermore, a significant up-regulation of the glutamatergic kainate (GRIK4) 
receptor observed by gene arrays was confirmed by quantitative RT-PCR in late 
stages in the hippocampus of AD patients. Moreover, there were down-regulations 
of other glutamatergic receptors such as NMDA (GRINL1A) and AMPA (GRIA4) 
receptors. Our data show marked changes in the functional elements of the 
glutamatergic synapses such as glutamatergic receptors and transporters and 
indicate impaired glutamate clearing rendering neurons susceptible to excess 
extracellular glutamate and support further the involvement of excitotoxic 
mechanisms in the pathogenesis of AD.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2007-11113
PMID: 17361039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1600. Lancet Neurol. 2007 Apr;6(4):288-9. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70060-1.

An advance in molecular imaging of dementias.

Albin RL.

Comment on
    Lancet Neurol. 2007 Apr;6(4):305-13.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70060-1
PMID: 17362826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


