3301. Med Hypotheses. 2014 Feb;82(2):138-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.11.021. Epub 
2013 Dec 1.

Facilitative effects of bi-hemispheric tDCS in cognitive deficits of Parkinson 
disease patients.

Leite J(1), Gonçalves OF(2), Carvalho S(3).

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychophysiology Laboratory, CIPsi, School of Psychology (EPsi), 
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal. Electronic address: jorgel@psi.uminho.pt.
(2)Department of Counseling and Applied Educational Psychology, Bouvé College of 
Health Sciences, Northeastern University, Boston, USA; Neuropsychophysiology 
Laboratory, CIPsi, School of Psychology (EPsi), University of Minho, Braga, 
Portugal.
(3)Neuropsychophysiology Laboratory, CIPsi, School of Psychology (EPsi), 
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder, primarily 
characterized by motor symptoms such as tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia, 
stiffness, slowness and impaired equilibrium. Although the motor symptoms have 
been the focus in PD, slight cognitive deficits are commonly found in 
non-demented and non-depressed PD patients, even in early stages of the disease, 
which have been linked to the subsequent development of pathological dementia. 
Thus, strongly reducing the quality of life (QoL). Both levodopa therapy and 
deep brain stimulation (DBS) have yield controversial results concerning the 
cognitive symptoms amelioration in PD patients. That does not seems to be the 
case with transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), although better 
stimulation parameters are needed. Therefore we hypothesize that simultaneously 
delivering cathodal tDCS (or ctDCS), over the right prefrontal cortex delivered 
with anodal tDCS (or atDCS) to left prefrontal cortex could be potentially 
beneficial for PD patients, either by mechanisms of homeostatic plasticity and 
by increases in the extracellular dopamine levels over the striatum.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.11.021
PMID: 24332532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3302. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Sep;22(9):926-35. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.072. 
Epub 2013 Dec 12.

The dementia cognitive fluctuation scale, a new psychometric test for clinicians 
to identify cognitive fluctuations in people with dementia.

Lee DR(1), McKeith I(1), Mosimann U(2), Ghosh-Nodial A(1), Grayson L(1), Wilson 
B(1), Thomas AJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Building, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle 
University, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Old Age Psychiatry, University Hospital of Psychiatry, 
University of Bern, Bern, Switzerland.
(3)Biomedical Research Building, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle 
University, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: alan.thomas@newcastle.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: Cognitive fluctuation (CF) is a common feature of dementia and a 
core diagnostic symptom for dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). CF remains 
difficult to accurately and reliably detect clinically. This study aimed to 
develop a psychometric test that could be used by clinicians to facilitate the 
identification of CF and improve the recognition and diagnosis of DLB and 
Parkinson disease, and to improve differential diagnosis of other dementias.
METHODS: We compiled a 17-item psychometric test for identifying CF and applied 
this measure in a cross-sectional design. Participants were recruited from the 
North East of England, and assessments were made in individuals' homes. We 
recruited people with four subtypes of dementia and a healthy comparison group, 
and all subjects were administered this pilot scale together with other standard 
ratings. The psychometric properties of the scale were examined with exploratory 
factor analysis. We also examined the ability of individual items to identify CF 
to discriminate between dementia subtypes. The sensitivity and specificity of 
discriminating items were explored along with validity and reliability analyses.
RESULTS: Participants comprised 32 comparison subjects, 30 people with Alzheimer 
disease, 30 with vascular dementia, 29 with DLB, and 32 with dementia associated 
with Parkinson disease. Four items significantly discriminated between dementia 
groups and showed good levels of sensitivity (range: 78.6%-80.3%) and 
specificity (range: 73.9%-79.3%). The scale had very good levels of test-retest 
(Cronbach's alpha: 0.82) and interrater (0.81) reliabilities. The four items 
loaded onto three different factors. These items were: 1) marked differences in 
functioning during the daytime; 2) daytime somnolence; 3) daytime drowsiness; 
and 4) altered levels of consciousness during the day.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified four items that provide valid, sensitive, and 
specific questions for reliably identifying CF and distinguishing the Lewy body 
dementias from other major causes of dementia (Alzheimer disease and vascular 
dementia).

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.072
PMID: 24332982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3303. Brain. 2014 Feb;137(Pt 2):565-75. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt337. Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Combined insular and striatal dopamine dysfunction are associated with executive 
deficits in Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive impairment.

Christopher L(1), Marras C, Duff-Canning S, Koshimori Y, Chen R, Boileau I, 
Segura B, Monchi O, Lang AE, Rusjan P, Houle S, Strafella AP.

Author information:
(1)1 Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorder Unit and E.J. Safra Parkinson 
Disease Program, Toronto Western Hospital, UHN, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
M5T 2S8, Canada.

The ability to dynamically use various aspects of cognition is essential to 
daily function, and reliant on dopaminergic transmission in cortico-striatal 
circuitry. Our aim was to investigate both striatal and cortical dopaminergic 
changes in patients with Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive impairment, who 
represent a vulnerable group for the development of dementia. We hypothesized 
severe striatal dopamine denervation in the associative (i.e. cognitive) region 
and cortical D2 receptor abnormalities in the salience and executive networks in 
Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive impairment compared with cognitively 
normal patients with Parkinson's disease and healthy control subjects. We used 
positron emission tomography imaging with dopaminergic ligands 
(11)C-dihydrotetrabenazine, to investigate striatal dopamine neuron integrity in 
the associative subdivision and (11)C-FLB 457, to investigate cortical D2 
receptor availability in patients with Parkinson's disease (55-80 years of age) 
with mild cognitive impairment (n = 11), cognitively normal patients with 
Parkinson's disease (n = 11) and age-matched healthy control subjects (n = 14). 
Subjects were administered a neuropsychological test battery to assess cognitive 
status and determine the relationship between dopaminergic changes and cognitive 
performance. We found that patients with mild cognitive impairment had severe 
striatal dopamine depletion in the associative (i.e. cognitive) subdivision as 
well as reduced D2 receptor availability in the bilateral insula, a key 
cognitive hub, compared to cognitively normal patients and healthy subjects 
after controlling for age, disease severity and daily dopaminergic medication 
intake. Associative striatal dopamine depletion was predictive of D2 receptor 
loss in the insula of patients with Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive 
impairment, demonstrating interrelated striatal and cortical changes. Insular D2 
levels also predicted executive abilities in these patients as measured using a 
composite executive z-score obtained from neuropsychological testing. 
Furthermore we assessed cortical thickness to ensure that D2 receptor changes 
were not confounded by brain atrophy. There was no difference between groups in 
cortical thickness in the insula, or any other cortical region of interest. 
These findings suggest that striatal dopamine denervation combined with insular 
D2 receptor loss underlie mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease and 
in particular decline in executive function. Furthermore, these findings suggest 
a crucial and direct role for dopaminergic modulation in the insula in 
facilitating cognitive function.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt337
PMCID: PMC4454524
PMID: 24334314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3304. Nutr Clin Pract. 2014 Feb;29(1):142-5. doi: 10.1177/0884533613515725. Epub 2013 
Dec 13.

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube replacement unexpected serious events.

Triantafyllou K(1), Papanikolaou IS, Stasinos I, Polymeros D, Dimitriadis GD.

Author information:
(1)Konstantinos Triantafyllou, Hepatogastroenterology Unit, Second Department of 
Internal Medicine and Research Institute, Attikon University General Hospital, 1 
Rimini str, 12462 Haidari, Greece. Email: ktriant@med.uoa.gr.

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tubes are replaced due to clogging, 
breaking, and dislodgement. There are potential complications associated with 
these procedures, including intraperitoneal placement of the tube and 
peritonitis, which can occur even in the presence of a well established stoma 
site. Herein we present a case series of 3 patients with mature gastrocutaneous 
tracks, who developed peritonitis following tube replacement. In the absence of 
a consensus or international guidelines regarding the management of patients 
requiring percoutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy tube replacement, emphasis should 
be given on prevention of severe adverse events and on early anticipation of 
their occurrence. Clinical experience indicates that recognition of high-risk 
procedures, selection of the appropriate replacement method and confirmation of 
correct tube placement can improve patients' safety and reduce the complications 
rate.

DOI: 10.1177/0884533613515725
PMID: 24336485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3305. Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2013 Dec;99(4):247-55. doi: 
10.1002/bdrc.21052.

Animal models of brain maldevelopment induced by cycad plant genotoxins.

Kisby GE(1), Moore H, Spencer PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences, 
College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Northwest, Lebanon, Oregon, 
97355.

Erratum in
    Birth Defects Res C Embryo Today. 2014 Mar;102(1):113.

Cycads are long-lived tropical and subtropical plants that contain 
azoxyglycosides (e.g., cycasin, macrozamin) and neurotoxic amino acids (notably 
β-N-methylamino-l-alanine l-BMAA), toxins that have been implicated in the 
etiology of a disappearing neurodegenerative disease, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex that has been present in high 
incidence among three genetically distinct populations in the western Pacific. 
The neuropathology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia 
complex includes features suggestive of brain maldevelopment, an experimentally 
proven property of cycasin attributable to the genotoxic action of its aglycone 
methylazoxymethanol (MAM). This property of MAM has been exploited by 
neurobiologists as a tool to study perturbations of brain development. Depending 
on the neurodevelopmental stage, MAM can induce features in laboratory animals 
that model certain characteristics of epilepsy, schizophrenia, or ataxia. 
Studies in DNA repair-deficient mice show that MAM perturbs brain development 
through a DNA damage-mediated mechanism. The brain DNA lesions produced by 
systemic MAM appear to modulate the expression of genes that regulate 
neurodevelopment and contribute to neurodegeneration. Epigenetic changes 
(histone lysine methylation) have also been detected in the underdeveloped brain 
after MAM administration. The DNA damage and epigenetic changes produced by MAM 
and, perhaps by chemically related substances (e.g., nitrosamines, nitrosoureas, 
hydrazines), might be an important mechanism by which early-life exposure to 
genotoxicants can induce long-term brain dysfunction.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bdrc.21052
PMCID: PMC4183057
PMID: 24339036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.


3306. Voen Med Zh. 2013 Sep;334(9):29-34.

[Early diagnosis of dementia with the help of MR-morphometry in patients with 
Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Russian]

Trufanov AG, Odinak MM, Litvinenko IV, Rezvantsev MV, Voronkov LV.

54 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease were examined. 1,5 Tesla MRI 
with T1 gradient-echo protocol and following calculating by FreeSurfer software 
was performed. Dementia was revealed in 23 patients. Significant changes of 
different zones of brain-cortex were revealed in patients with Parkinson's 
disease accompanied by dementia. Changes were revealed in the hemispheres, 
particularly in frontal, temporal and occipital lobes. Thickness of lingual 
medial occipitotemporal gyrus can be used as a criterion for dementia prognosis. 
Individual patient monitoring and cortex alteration evaluation allow 
prognosticating increasing risk of cognitive disorders development and 
prescribing proper therapy.

PMID: 24341200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3307. Neurology. 2014 Jan 21;82(3):263-70. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000034. Epub 
2013 Dec 18.

Predicting dementia in Parkinson disease by combining neurophysiologic and 
cognitive markers.

Olde Dubbelink KT(1), Hillebrand A, Twisk JW, Deijen JB, Stoffers D, Schmand BA, 
Stam CJ, Berendse HW.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam (K.T.E.O.D., 
D.S., H.W.B.), Department of Clinical Neurophysiology and Magnetoencephalography 
Center (A.H., C.J.S.), and Department of Clinical Epidemiology and Biostatistics 
(J.W.R.T.). VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam; Department of Clinical 
Neuropsychology (J.B.D.), VU University, Amsterdam; and Department of Psychology 
(B.A.S.), University of Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the ability of neurophysiologic markers in conjunction with 
cognitive assessment to improve prediction of progression to dementia in 
Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: Baseline cognitive assessments and magnetoencephalographic recordings 
from 63 prospectively included PD patients without dementia were analyzed in 
relation to PD-related dementia (PDD) conversion over a 7-year period. We 
computed Cox proportional hazard models to assess the risk of converting to 
dementia conveyed by cognitive and neurophysiologic markers in individual as 
well as combined risk factor analyses.
RESULTS: Nineteen patients (30.2%) developed dementia. Baseline cognitive 
performance and neurophysiologic markers each individually predicted conversion 
to PDD. Of the cognitive test battery, performance on a posterior (pattern 
recognition memory score < median; hazard ratio (HR) 6.80; p = 0.001) and a 
fronto-executive (spatial span score < median; HR 4.41; p = 0.006) task most 
strongly predicted dementia conversion. Of the neurophysiologic markers, beta 
power < median was the strongest PDD predictor (HR 5.21; p = 0.004), followed by 
peak frequency < median (HR 3.97; p = 0.016) and theta power > median (HR 2.82; 
p = 0.037). In combination, baseline cognitive performance and neurophysiologic 
measures had even stronger predictive value, with the combination of impaired 
fronto-executive task performance and low beta power being associated with the 
highest dementia risk (both risk factors vs none: HR 27.3; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Combining neurophysiologic markers with cognitive assessment can 
substantially improve dementia risk profiling in PD, providing potential 
benefits for clinical care as well as for the future development of therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000034
PMID: 24353335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3308. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2014;37(5-6):276-85. doi: 10.1159/000357128. Epub 
2013 Dec 14.

Early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease associated with 
dementia using cerebral perfusion SPECT.

Song IU(1), Chung YA, Chung SW, Jeong J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Since patterns of cognitive dysfunction in mild Parkinson's disease 
associated with dementia (PDD) are similar to those in mild Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), it is difficult to accurately differentiate between these two types of 
dementia in their early phases using neuropsychological tests. The purpose of 
the current study was to investigate differences in cerebral perfusion patterns 
of patients with AD and PDD at the earliest stages using single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT).
METHODS: We consecutively recruited 31 patients with mild PDD, 32 patients with 
mild probable AD and 33 age-matched healthy subjects. All subjects underwent 
(99m)Tc-hexamethylpropyleneamine oxime perfusion SPECT and completed general 
neuropsychological tests.
RESULTS: We found that both mild PDD and AD patients showed distinct 
hypoperfusion in frontal, parietal and temporal regions, compared with healthy 
subjects. More importantly, hypoperfusion in occipital and cerebellar regions 
was observed only in mild PDD.
CONCLUSION: The observation of a significant decrease in cerebral perfusion in 
occipital and cerebellar regions in patients with mild PDD is likely useful to 
differentiate between PDD and AD at the earliest stages.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000357128
PMID: 24356537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3309. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Feb 7;560:86-91. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.12.028. Epub 
2013 Dec 19.

Immunogenicity of epitope vaccines targeting different B cell antigenic 
determinants of human α-synuclein: feasibility study.

Ghochikyan A(1), Petrushina I(2), Davtyan H(3), Hovakimyan A(4), Saing T(2), 
Davtyan A(4), Cribbs DH(5), Agadjanyan MG(6).

Author information:
(1)The Institute for Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Huntington 
Beach, CA 92647, United States. Electronic address: aghochikyan@immed.org.
(2)The Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University 
of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United States.
(3)The Institute for Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Huntington 
Beach, CA 92647, United States; The Institute for Memory Impairments and 
Neurological Disorders, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United 
States.
(4)The Institute for Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Huntington 
Beach, CA 92647, United States.
(5)The Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University 
of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United States; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United States.
(6)The Institute for Molecular Medicine, Department of Immunology, Huntington 
Beach, CA 92647, United States; The Institute for Memory Impairments and 
Neurological Disorders, University of California, Irvine, CA 92697, United 
States. Electronic address: magadjanyan@immed.org.

Immunotherapeutic approaches reducing α-synuclein deposits may provide 
therapeutic benefit for Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB). Immunization with 
full-length human α-synuclein (hα-Syn) protein in a Parkinson's disease mouse 
model decreased the accumulation of the aggregated forms of this protein in 
neurons and reduced neurodegeneration. To enhance the immunogenicity of 
candidate vaccines and to avoid the risk of autoreactive anti-hα-Syn T-helper 
(Th) cell responses, we generated three peptide-based epitope vaccines composed 
of different B-cell epitopes of hα-Syn fused with a "non-self" Th epitope from 
tetanus toxin (P30). Immunization of mice with these epitope vaccines produced 
high titers of anti-hα-Syn antibodies that bound to Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy 
neurites (LNs) in brain tissue from DLB cases and induced robust Th cell 
responses to P30, but not to hα-Syn. Further development of these first 
generation epitope vaccines may facilitate induction of anti-hα-Syn 
immunotherapy without producing potentially harmful autoreactive Th cell 
responses.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.12.028
PMCID: PMC3928627
PMID: 24361548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: Authors declare that they 
have no conflicts of interest.


3310. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2013 Dec;28(8):750-8. doi: 
10.1177/1533317513504611.

Stability of clinical etiologic diagnosis in dementia and mild cognitive 
impairment: results from a multicenter longitudinal database.

Koepsell TD(1), Gill DP, Chen B.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA.

Many new therapies for dementia target a specific pathologic process and must be 
applied early. Selection of specific therapy is based on the clinical etiologic 
diagnosis. We sought to determine the stability of the clinical etiologic 
diagnosis over time and to identify factors associated with instability. We 
identified 4141 patients with dementia or mild cognitive impairment who made at 
least 2 visits approximately a year apart to a dementia research center, 
receiving a clinical etiologic diagnosis on each visit. We assessed concordance 
of etiologic diagnoses across visits, κ-statistics, and transition probabilities 
among diagnoses. The primary clinical etiologic diagnosis remained stable for 
91% of patients but with a net shift toward dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer's disease. Lower diagnostic stability was significantly associated 
with older age, nonwhite race, milder disease at presentation, more underlying 
conditions contributing to cognitive decline, lack of a consistent 
spouse/partner informant, and being evaluated by different clinicians on 
different visits. Multistate Markov modeling generally confirmed these 
associations. Clinical etiologic diagnoses were generally stable. However, 
several readily ascertained characteristics were associated with higher 
instability. These associations may be useful to clinicians for anticipating 
when an etiologic diagnosis may be more prone to future change.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317513504611
PMCID: PMC3876285
PMID: 24363072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


3311. Ann Nucl Med. 2014 Apr;28(3):203-11. doi: 10.1007/s12149-013-0796-3. Epub 2013 
Dec 21.

Diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies: diagnostic performance of combined 
¹²³I-IMP brain perfusion SPECT and ¹²³I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy.

Sakamoto F(1), Shiraishi S, Yoshida M, Tomiguchi S, Hirai T, Namimoto T, 
Hashimoto M, Ikeda M, Uetani H, Yamashita Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Graduate School of Life Sciences, 
Kumamoto University, 1-1-1 Honjyo, Kumamoto, 860-0821, Japan, 
fumisaka@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: We assessed the value of combining (123)I-IMP brain perfusion SPECT 
and (123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy for the discrimination of dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) from other types of dementia.
METHODS: We subjected 252 consecutive patients with clinically suspected DLB to 
both (123)I-IMP brain perfusion SPECT and (123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy. 
Patients with Parkinson's disease were included. The 252 patients were randomly 
assigned to an estimation (n = 152) or a validation group (n = 100). Using 
univariate analysis, we first analyzed the relationship between various 
variables and the presence or absence of DLB in estimation group and then 
proceeded to multivariate analysis to obtain a combined index that predicted the 
likelihood of DLB. The diagnostic value of the index was assessed by calculating 
the area under the receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC) with the 
cutoff value selected from the ROC curve. We then tested the predictive accuracy 
of the index in validation group.
RESULTS: The combined index was an arithmetic expression that combined the age, 
early (123)I-MIBG heart-to-mediastinum uptake (E-H/M) ratio, and the parietal 
lobe hypoperfusion score. Values for the AUC of the combined index, the E-H/M 
ratio, the parietal lobe hypoperfusion score, and the patient age in validation 
group were 0.95, 0.90, 0.72, and 0.73, respectively. There was a significant 
difference in the AUC of the combined index among other indices (p < 0.05). The 
sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy of the combined index for a diagnosis of 
probable DLB in validation group were 88, 87, and 87 %, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The combinational diagnosis based on (123)I-IMP brain perfusion 
SPECT, (123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy, and the patient age is a simple and 
reliable means for predicting probable DLB.

DOI: 10.1007/s12149-013-0796-3
PMCID: PMC4483188
PMID: 24363079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3312. Neurology. 2014 Jan 28;82(4):308-16. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000066. Epub 
2013 Dec 20.

Characterizing mild cognitive impairment in incident Parkinson disease: the 
ICICLE-PD study.

Yarnall AJ(1), Breen DP, Duncan GW, Khoo TK, Coleman SY, Firbank MJ, Nombela C, 
Winder-Rhodes S, Evans JR, Rowe JB, Mollenhauer B, Kruse N, Hudson G, Chinnery 
PF, O'Brien JT, Robbins TW, Wesnes K, Brooks DJ, Barker RA, Burn DJ; ICICLE-PD 
Study Group.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Ageing and Health (A.J.Y., G.W.D., M.J.F., D.J.B.), 
Industrial Statistics Research Unit (S.Y.C.), and Institute of Genetic Medicine 
(G.H., P.F.C.), Newcastle University; John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair 
(D.P.B., J.R.E., R.A.B.), Department of Clinical Neurosciences (C.N., S.W.-R., 
J.B.R.), Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute (C.N., S.W.-R., J.B.R., 
T.W.R.), MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit (C.N., S.W.-R., J.B.R.), 
Departments of Psychiatry (J.T.O.) and Psychology (T.W.R.), University of 
Cambridge, UK; School of Medicine (T.K.K.), Griffith University, Australia; 
Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik (B.M.), Kassel, and Göttingen University; Institute for 
Neuropathology (N.K.), Prion and Dementia Research Unit, University Medical 
Centre Göttingen, Germany; Centre for Human Psychopharmacology (K.W.), Swinburne 
University, Melbourne, Australia; and Department of Medicine (D.J.W.), Imperial 
College London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the frequency of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in 
Parkinson disease (PD) in a cohort of newly diagnosed incident PD cases and the 
associations with a panel of biomarkers.
METHODS: Between June 2009 and December 2011, 219 subjects with PD and 99 
age-matched controls participated in clinical and neuropsychological assessments 
as part of a longitudinal observational study. Consenting individuals underwent 
structural MRI, lumbar puncture, and genotyping for common variants of COMT, 
MAPT, SNCA, BuChE, EGF, and APOE. PD-MCI was defined with reference to the new 
Movement Disorder Society criteria.
RESULTS: The frequency of PD-MCI was 42.5% using level 2 criteria at 1.5 SDs 
below normative values. Memory impairment was the most common domain affected, 
with 15.1% impaired at 1.5 SDs. Depression scores were significantly higher in 
those with PD-MCI than the cognitively normal PD group. A significant 
correlation was found between visual Pattern Recognition Memory and 
cerebrospinal β-amyloid 1-42 levels (β standardized coefficient = 0.350; p = 
0.008) after controlling for age and education in a linear regression model, 
with lower β-amyloid 1-42 and 1-40 levels observed in those with PD-MCI. 
Voxel-based morphometry did not reveal any areas of significant gray matter loss 
in participants with PD-MCI compared with controls, and no specific genotype was 
associated with PD-MCI at the 1.5-SD threshold.
CONCLUSIONS: In a large cohort of newly diagnosed PD participants, PD-MCI is 
common and significantly correlates with lower cerebrospinal β-amyloid 1-42 and 
1-40 levels. Future longitudinal studies should enable us to determine those 
measures predictive of cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000066
PMCID: PMC3929202
PMID: 24363137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3313. Handb Clin Neurol. 2014;119:577-84. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-4086-3.00038-2.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs exposure and the central nervous system.

Auriel E(1), Regev K(1), Korczyn AD(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel. Electronic 
address: amoskor@post.tau.ac.il.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are among the most commonly used 
agents in clinical practice. They are employed as anti-inflammatory, analgesic, 
and antipyretic agents for a wide spectrum of clinical conditions. Their 
anti-inflammatory properties are primarily due to inhibition of prostaglandin 
synthesis. In this paper we review the neurological effects associated with the 
use of NSAIDs. Acute CNS toxicity related to NSAID use is pervasive and varied. 
A prospective study looking at ibuprofen overdose noted that 30% of patients 
experience CNS effects ranging from drowsiness to coma. Case reports have 
identified numerous neurologic sequelae including ataxia, vertigo, dizziness, 
recurrent falls, nystagmus, headache, encephalopathy, and disorientation. 
Seizures have also been reported, mostly after overdose ingestions, but even 
therapeutic doses have occasionally been associated with seizures. One of the 
important neurologic side-effects attributed to the use of NSAIDs is aseptic 
meningitis. The clinical signs of drug-induced meningitis are similar to those 
of infectious meningitis and include fever, headache, photophobia, and stiff 
neck. The laboratory findings are also similar, including cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) pleocytosis of several hundred or thousand cells, mainly neutrophils, 
elevated levels of protein, normal or low glucose levels and negative cultures. 
Drug-induced meningitis is a transient disorder with an excellent prognosis. 
Most or all drugs used for the treatment of headache, including NSAIDs, may 
cause a condition known as medication overuse headache - a refractory chronic 
daily headache that tends to resolve following discontinuation of the 
analgesics. Reye's syndrome is a rare severe illness occurring mainly in 
children and adolescents and characterized by abnormal liver function, vomiting, 
and encephalopathy, with a mortality rate approaching 40%. The pathogenesis is 
currently unknown, but commonly the syndrome is preceded by a viral episode, 
with an intermediate latent period of 3-5 days. An association with aspirin use 
is strongly suggested. Aspirin, the classic and most commonly used NSAID, has a 
well-documented effect in inhibiting intravascular clotting, thus reducing the 
occurrence of ischemic strokes and other vascular events. NSAIDs, however, have 
a double impact on coagulation. On the one hand, most agents inhibit the 
synthesis of thromboxane in the platelets, thereby inhibiting coagulation. On 
the other hand, they also inhibit the production of prostacyclin by endothelial 
cells, resulting in a prothrombotic state. Selective inhibition of COX-2 by 
drugs such as rofecoxib (Vioxx) and valdecoxib (Bextra) results in specific 
inhibition of synthesis of prostaglandins participating in inflammation and was 
found to lead to vascular complications including an increased risk for stroke. 
The connection between inflammation and neuronal degeneration is well 
established. Most studies, including the prospective Rotterdam study, have found 
an inverse correlation between the use of NSAIDs and the risk for dementia. Two 
meta-analyses have found 40% and 25% reduction, respectively, in the risk of 
Alzheimer's disease among NSAID users. However, some large, well designed 
studies failed to confirm these results, and some even found that NSAID use is 
associated with cognitive decline. The clinical impact of NSAIDs on Parkinson's 
disease (PD) remains unclear. While some studies showed that chronic NSAID use 
is protective against PD, other studies could not confirm the existence of a 
significant relationship. A recent meta-analysis indicated that the use of 
non-aspirin NSAID, particularly ibuprofen, reduces the risk of PD by 15% while 
the use of aspirin did not show any effect.

© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-7020-4086-3.00038-2
PMID: 24365321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3314. Subcell Biochem. 2014;77:115-25. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-7920-4_10.

Immunochemical detection of lipid hydroperoxide- and aldehyde-modified proteins 
in diseases.

Sugiyama A(1), Sun J.

Author information:
(1)Course of Veterinary Laboratory Medicine, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Faculty of Agriculture, Tottori University, Minami 4-101 m Koyama-cho, Tottori, 
680-8553, Japan, sugiyama@muses.tottori-u.ac.jp.

Polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) is easily peroxidized by free radicals and 
enzymes. When this occurs, it results in the compromised integrity of cellular 
membranes and leads to lipid hydroperoxide as a major reaction product, which is 
decomposed into aldehyde. Lipid hydroperoxide-modified lysine is known to be an 
early product of the lipid peroxidation process, suggesting that it might be a 
PUFA-oxidative stress marker during the initial stage of oxidative stress. Lipid 
hydroperoxides cause or enhance ROS-mediated DNA fragmentation. The 
α,β-unsaturated aldehydes are end products of PUFA peroxidation. They are highly 
reactive and readily attack and modify the protein amino acid residues into 
aldehyde-modified proteins. Lipid peroxidation-derived α,β-unsaturated aldehydes 
are capable of inducing cellular stress-responsive processes such as cell 
signaling and apoptosis. The lipid hydroperoxide- and aldehyde-modified proteins 
have been immunohistochemically detected in diverse pathological situations such 
as atherosclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and chemical 
material-induced liver injury and renal tubular injury in humans and 
experimental animals. These findings suggest that the expression of the lipid 
hydroperoxide- and aldehyde-modified proteins is closely associated with the 
pathogenesis of these diseases in humans and experimental animals.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-7920-4_10
PMID: 24374923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3315. Int Arch Med. 2014 Nov 24;7:49. doi: 10.1186/1755-7682-7-49. eCollection 2014.

Differences in early and late stages of information processing between slow 
versus fast participants.

Portella C(1), Machado S(2), Paes F(3), Cagy M(4), Sack AT(5), Sandoval-Carrillo 
A(6), Salas-Pacheco J(6), Silva AC(3), Piedade R(7), Ribeiro P(8), Nardi AE(3), 
Arias-Carrión O(9).

Author information:
(1)Brain Mapping and Sensory Motor Integration, Institute of Psychiatry of 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (IPUB/UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil ; 
UNIABEU/Fisioterapia, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(2)Panic & Respiration Laboratory, Institute of Psychiatry, Federal University 
of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil ; Institute of Phylosophy (IFILO), 
Federal University of Uberlândia (UFU), Minas Gerais, Brazil ; Physical Activity 
Neuroscience, Physical Activity Postgraduate Program, Salgado de Oliveira 
University (UNIVERSO), Niterói, Brazil ; Quiropraxia Program of Faculty of 
Health Sciences, Central University (UCEN), Santiago, Chile ; National Institute 
for Translational Medicine (INCT-TM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Panic & Respiration Laboratory, Institute of Psychiatry, Federal University 
of Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil ; National Institute for Translational 
Medicine (INCT-TM), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(4)Biomedical Engineering, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (COPPE/UFRJ), 
Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(5)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Faculty of Psychology and Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, The Netherlands.
(6)Instituto de Investigación Científica, Universidad Juárez del Estado de 
Durango, Durango, México.
(7)Brain Mapping and Sensory Motor Integration, Institute of Psychiatry of 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (IPUB/UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(8)Brain Mapping and Sensory Motor Integration, Institute of Psychiatry of 
Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (IPUB/UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, Brazil ; 
School of Physical Education, Bioscience Department (EEFD/UFRJ), Rio de Janeiro, 
Brazil.
(9)Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento y Sueño (TMS), Hospital General Dr. 
Manuel Gea González/IFC-UNAM, Mexico City, Mexico ; Unidad de Trastornos del 
Movimiento y Sueño (TMS), Hospital General Ajusco Medio, Secretaría de Salud, 
Mexico City, Mexico.

The human brain is a system consisting of various interconnected neural 
networks, with functional specialization coexisting with functional integration 
occurring both; temporally and spatially at many levels. The current study 
ranked and compared fast and slow participants in processing information by 
assessing latency and amplitude of early and late Event-Related Potential (ERP) 
components, including P200, N200, Premotor Potential (PMP) and P300. In 
addition, the Reaction Time (RT) of participants was compared and related to the 
respective ERP components. For this purpose, twenty right-handed and healthy 
individuals were subjected to a classical ERP "Oddball" paradigm. Principal 
Component Analysis (PCA) and Discriminant Function analyses (DFA) used PRE 
components and the Reaction Time (RT) to classify individuals. Our results 
indicate that latencies of P200 (O2 electrode), N200 (O2), PMP (C3) and P300 
(Pz) components are significantly reduced in the group of fast responding 
participants. In addition, the P200 amplitude is significantly increased in the 
group of fast responding participants. Based on these findings, we suggest that 
the ERP is able to detect even minimal impairments, in the processing of 
somatosensory information and cognitive and motor stages. Hence, the study of 
ERP might also be capable of assessing sensorimotor dysfunctions in healthy 
old-aged people and in neuropsychiatric patients (suffering from dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, and other neurological disorders).

DOI: 10.1186/1755-7682-7-49
PMCID: PMC4362839
PMID: 25838842


3316. J Clin Mov Disord. 2014 Oct 29;1:2. doi: 10.1186/2054-7072-1-2. eCollection 
2014.

Hydrocephalic Parkinsonism: lessons from normal pressure hydrocephalus mimics.

Starr BW(1), Hagen MC(2), Espay AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Gardner Family Center for Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders, 
Department of Neurology, University of Cincinnati, 260 Stetson St, Suite 2300, 
Cincinnati, OH 45267-0525 USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH USA.

BACKGROUND: Hydrocephalus is an under-recognized presentation of progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: We describe four normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH)-like presentations 
of pathology-proven PSP (n = 3) and DLB (n = 1) and review the literature on the 
hydrocephalic presentation of these atypical parkinsonisms.
RESULTS: Despite the presence of ventriculomegaly disproportionate to the extent 
of parenchymal atrophy, all patients demonstrated early postural impairment 
and/or oculomotor abnormalities that encouraged a diagnostic revision. 
Hallucinations were the only early atypical manifestation of the hydrocephalic 
DLB presentation.
CONCLUSIONS: Early postural impairment, falls, oculomotor impairment, and/or 
hallucinations are inconsistent with the diagnosis of NPH and suggest PSP or DLB 
as the underlying NPH mimic. We postulate that previously reported cases of 
"dual" pathology (e.g., NPH and PSP) actually represent the hydrocephalic 
presentation of selected neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1186/2054-7072-1-2
PMCID: PMC4677733
PMID: 26788328


3317. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 May;127(5):621-32. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1236-0. Epub 
2014 Jan 3.

CSF Apo-E levels associate with cognitive decline and MRI changes.

Toledo JB(1), Da X, Weiner MW, Wolk DA, Xie SX, Arnold SE, Davatzikos C, Shaw 
LM, Trojanowski JQ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, HUP, Maloney 3rd, 36th and Spruce Streets, Philadelphia, PA, 
19104-4283, USA.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele is the most important genetic risk factor for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and it is thought to do so by modulating levels of its 
product, apolipoprotein E (Apo-E), and regulating amyloid-β (Aβ) clearance. 
However, information on clinical and biomarker correlates of Apo-E proteins is 
scarce. We examined the relationship of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma 
Apo-E protein levels, and APOE genotype to cognition and AD biomarker changes in 
311 AD neuroimaging initiative subjects with CSF Apo-E measurements and 565 
subjects with plasma Apo-E measurements. At baseline, higher CSF Apo-E levels 
were associated with higher total and phosphorylated CSF tau levels. CSF Apo-E 
levels were associated with longitudinal cognitive decline, MCI conversion to 
dementia, and gray matter atrophy rate in total tau/Aβ1-42 ratio and APOE 
genotype-adjusted analyses. In analyses stratified by APOE genotype, our results 
were only significant in the group without the ε4 allele. Baseline CSF Apo-E 
levels did not predict longitudinal CSF Aβ or tau changes. Plasma Apo-E levels 
show a mild correlation with CSF Apo-E levels, but were not associated with 
longitudinal cognitive and MRI changes. Based on our analyses, we speculate that 
increased CSF Apo-E2 or -E3 levels might represent a protective response to 
injury in AD and may have neuroprotective effects by decreasing neuronal damage 
independent of tau and amyloid deposition in addition to its effects on amyloid 
clearance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-013-1236-0
PMCID: PMC3988233
PMID: 24385135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest Dr. Arnold reports grants 
from NIH, the American Health Assistance Foundation and the Marian S Ware 
Alzheimer’s Programseveral pharmaceutical companies , other from Universities, 
pharmaceutical companies and advisory/speaking honoraria from Universities, 
pharmaceutical companies and law firms. Dr. Trojanowski reports grants from NIH, 
Bristol Myer Squib, Astra Zeneca and several non-profits, outside the submitted 
work; In addition, Dr. Trojanowski has a patent Modified avidin-biotin 
technique, Method of stabilizing microtubules to treat Alzheimer's disease, 
Method of detecting abnormally phosphorylated tau, Method of screening for 
Alzheimer's disease or disease associated with the accumulation of paired 
helical filaments, Compositions and methods for producing and using homogeneous 
neuronal cell transplants, Rat comprising straight filaments in its brain, 
Compositions and methods for producing and using homogeneous neuronal cell 
transplants to treat neurodegenerative disorders and brain and spinal cord 
injuries, Diagnostic methods for Alzheimer's disease by detection of multiple 
MRNAs, Methods and compositions for determining lipid peroxidation levels in 
oxidant stress syndromes and diseases, Compositions and methods for producing 
and using homogenous neuronal cell transplants, Method of identifying, 
diagnosing and treating alpha-synuclein positive neurodegenerative disorders, 
Mutation-specific functional impairments in distinct tau isoforms of hereditary 
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome-17: genotype 
predicts phenotype, Microtubule stabilizing therapies for neurodegenerative 
disorders, and Treatment of Alzheimer's and related diseases with an antibody 
pending, and a patent Amyloid plaque aggregation inhibitors and diagnostic 
imaging agents sold to Avid to Eli Lily. Dr. Weiner reports stock/stock options 
from Elan, Synarc, travel expenses from Novartis, Tohoku University, Fundacio 
Ace, Travel eDreams, MCI Group, NSAS, Danone Trading, ANT Congress, NeuroVigil, 
CHRU-Hopital Roger Salengro, Siemens, AstraZeneca, Geneva University Hospitals, 
Lilly, University of California, San Diego–ADNI, Paris University, Institut 
Catala de Neurociencies Aplicades, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
Ipsen, Clinical Trials on Alzheimer’s Disease, Pfizer, AD PD meeting, Paul 
Sabatier University, board membership for Lilly, Araclon, Institut Catala de 
Neurociencies Aplicades, Gulf War Veterans Illnesses Advisory Committee, VACO, 
Biogen Idec, Pfizer, consultancy from AstraZeneca, Araclon, Medivation/Pfizer, 
Ipsen, TauRx Therapeutics, Bayer Healthcare, Biogen Idec, ExonHit Therapeutics, 
Servier, Synarc, Pfizer, Janssen, honoraria from NeuroVigil, Insitut Catala de 
Neurociencies Aplicades, PMDA/Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare, 
Tohoku University, commercial research support from Merck, Avid; government 
research support, DOD, VA, outside the submitted work. Other authors report no 
conflicts of interest.


3318. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 26;8(12):e83914. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083914. 
eCollection 2013.

Ubiquitination increases parkin activity to promote autophagic α-synuclein 
clearance.

Lonskaya I(1), Desforges NM(1), Hebron ML(1), Moussa CE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Laboratory for Dementia and Parkinsonism, 
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC, United States of America.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a movement disorder associated with genetic and age 
related causes. Although autosomal recessive early onset PD linked to parkin 
mutations does not exhibit α-Synuclein accumulation, while autosomal dominant 
and sporadic PD manifest with α-Synuclein inclusions, loss of dopaminergic 
substantia nigra neurons is a common denominator in PD. Here we show that 
decreased parkin ubiquitination and loss of parkin stability impair interaction 
with Beclin-1 and alter α-Synuclein degradation, leading to death of 
dopaminergic neurons. Tyrosine kinase inhibition increases parkin ubiquitination 
and interaction with Beclin-1, promoting autophagic α-Synuclein clearance and 
nigral neuron survival. However, loss of parkin via deletion increases 
α-Synuclein in the blood compared to the brain, suggesting that functional 
parkin prevents α-Synuclein release into the blood. These studies demonstrate 
that parkin ubiquitination affects its protein stability and E3 ligase activity, 
possibly leading to α-Synuclein sequestration and subsequent clearance.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083914
PMCID: PMC3873413
PMID: 24386307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Charbel Moussa has a 
pending application to use nilotinib and bosutinib as a treatment for 
neurodegenerative diseases. The PCT application number PCT/US13/039283 was filed 
on May 2, 2013 and claims priority to two provisional patent applications filed 
on May 2, 2012 and March 1, 2013. The title is “Treating neural diseases with 
tyrosine kinase inhibitors.” The authors also confirm that they adhere to all 
the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in the 
guide for authors.


3319. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2014 Jan 1;6(1):65-74. doi: 10.2741/s415.

Parkinson's disease: a review.

Beitz JM(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing-Camden, Rutgers University, 311 N. 5th Street, Camden, NJ 
08102.

Parkinson's Disease is the second most common progressive neurodegenerative 
disorder affecting older American adults and is predicted to increase in 
prevalence as the United States population ages. Resulting from a 
pathophysiologic loss or degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia 
nigra of the midbrain and the development of neuronal Lewy Bodies, idiopathic 
Parkinson's Disease is associated with risk factors including aging, family 
history, pesticide exposure and environmental chemicals (e.g., synthetic heroin 
use). Its ultimate cause(s) is (are) unknown. Characterized by both motor and 
non-motor symptoms, PD patients classically display rest tremor, rigidity, 
bradykinesia, and stooping posture. PD can also be associated with 
neurobehavioral disorders (depression, anxiety), cognitive impairment 
(dementia), and autonomic dysfunction (e.g., orthostasis and hyperhidrosis). 
Recent decades have witnessed a proliferation of medical pharmacologic therapies 
and innovative surgical interventions like deep brain stimulation (DBS). 
However, definitive disease-modifying therapy is still lacking. Experimental 
therapies are being developed and tested with limited results. Knowledge of 
strategies to promote optimal quality of life for PD patients is of paramount 
importance for caregivers, health providers and patients themselves.

DOI: 10.2741/s415
PMID: 24389262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3320. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Feb 21;561:86-90. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.12.051. Epub 
2014 Jan 3.

BDNF G196A (Val66Met) polymorphism associated with cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease.

Białecka M(1), Kurzawski M(2), Roszmann A(3), Robowski P(4), Sitek EJ(5), 
Honczarenko K(6), Mak M(7), Deptuła-Jarosz M(8), Gołąb-Janowska M(9), Droździk 
M(10), Sławek J(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Powstańców Wlkp 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: 
monika-bialecka@post.pl.
(2)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Powstańców Wlkp 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: 
mkurz@pum.edu.pl.
(3)Department of Neurological-Psychiatric Nursing, Medical University of Gdańsk, 
Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462, Poland; Department of Neurology, St. Adalbert 
Hospital, Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462 Gdańsk, Poland. Electronic address: 
annaroszmann@gmail.com.
(4)Department of Neurological-Psychiatric Nursing, Medical University of Gdańsk, 
Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462, Poland; Department of Neurology, St. Adalbert 
Hospital, Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462 Gdańsk, Poland. Electronic address: 
piotr.amg@wp.pl.
(5)Department of Neurological-Psychiatric Nursing, Medical University of Gdańsk, 
Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462, Poland; Department of Neurology, St. Adalbert 
Hospital, Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462 Gdańsk, Poland. Electronic address: 
emsitek@gmail.com.
(6)Clinic of Neurology, Pomeranian Medical University, Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-251 
Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: khonczar@pum.edu.pl.
(7)Clinic of Psychiatry, Pomeranian Medical University, Broniewskiego 26, 71-460 
Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: monika.mak@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Neurology, Marie Curie Regional Hospital, Arkońska 4, 71-455 
Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: jaroszki@interia.pl.
(9)Clinic of Neurology, Pomeranian Medical University, Unii Lubelskiej 1, 71-251 
Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: monikagj@op.pl.
(10)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Powstańców Wlkp 72, 70-111 Szczecin, Poland. Electronic address: 
drozdzik@pum.edu.pl.
(11)Department of Neurological-Psychiatric Nursing, Medical University of 
Gdańsk, Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462, Poland; Department of Neurology, St. 
Adalbert Hospital, Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462 Gdańsk, Poland. Electronic 
address: jaroslawek@gumed.edu.pl.

Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is a neurotrophin widely expressed in 
the mammalian brain, regulating neuronal survival and known to influence 
dopaminergic neurons and cognitive processes. The present study investigated the 
BDNF Val66Met polymorphism associations with PD risk, and cognitive impairment 
in PD. A total of 486 study subjects (244 PD and 242 age and sex matched 
controls) were included in the study. UPDRS score, Hoehn-Yahr staging and the 
Schwab-England scale were used to assess motor abilities and activity during 
daily life. The patients were classified into groups with dementia (PDD, n=69) 
and without it (nPDD, n=166) on the basis of neuropsychological assessment. The 
most common functional polymorphism in BDNF Val66Met (rs6265, G196A) gene was 
determined using TaqMan real-time PCR assay. Frequencies of evaluated BDNF 
alleles and genotypes were similar in PD and the controls. The mean age of 
disease onset among BDNF Met/Met carriers was later (65.00±6.13) in comparison 
to Val/Val (57.45±10.68) and Val/Met (56.33±10.91) subjects (p=0.077). The 
studied BDNF polymorphism was not associated with cognitive status in PD 
patients. However, patients with Met/Met alleles demonstrated better delayed 
recall of information than patients with Val/Val alleles. The results of 
multivariate logistic regression analysis revealed age (p=0.0003) and the 
disease stage (p=0.002) as independent risk factors predisposing to PD dementia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.12.051
PMID: 24394906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3321. Mov Disord. 2014 Jul;29(8):1010-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.25776. Epub 2014 Jan 2.

Multiple organ involvement by alpha-synuclein pathology in Lewy body disorders.

Gelpi E(1), Navarro-Otano J, Tolosa E, Gaig C, Compta Y, Rey MJ, Martí MJ, 
Hernández I, Valldeoriola F, Reñé R, Ribalta T.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Tissue Bank of the Biobanc-Hospital Clinic-Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

Lewy body (LB) diseases are characterized by alpha-synuclein (AS) aggregates in 
the central nervous system (CNS). Involvement of the peripheral autonomic 
nervous system (pANS) is increasingly recognized, although less studied. The aim 
of this study was to systematically analyze the distribution and severity of AS 
pathology in the CNS and pANS. Detailed postmortem histopathological study of 
brain and peripheral tissues from 28 brain bank donors (10 with Parkinson's 
disease [PD], 5 with dementia with LB [DLB], and 13 with non-LB diseases 
including atypical parkinsonism and non-LB dementia). AS aggregates were found 
in the pANS of all 15 LB disease cases (PD, DLB) in stellate and sympathetic 
ganglia (100%), vagus nerve (86.7%), gastrointestinal tract (86.7%), adrenal 
gland and/or surrounding fat (53.3%), heart (100%), and genitourinary tract 
(13.3%), as well as in 1 case of incidental Lewy body disease (iLBD). A 
craniocaudal gradient of AS burden in sympathetic chain and gastrointestinal 
tract was observed. DLB cases showed higher amounts of CNS AS aggregates than PD 
cases, but this was not the case in the pANS. No pANS AS aggregates were 
detected in Alzheimer's disease (AD) cases with or without CNS AS aggregates. 
All pathologically confirmed LB disease cases including 1 case of iLBD had AS 
aggregates in the pANS with a craniocaudal gradient of pathology burden in 
sympathetic chain and gastrointestinal tract. AS was not detected in the pANS of 
any AD case. These findings may help in the search of peripheral AS aggregates 
in vivo for the early diagnosis of PD.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25776
PMID: 24395122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3322. Mov Disord. 2014 Mar;29(3):351-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.25748. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Predictors of cognitive impairment in an early stage Parkinson's disease cohort.

Hu MT(1), Szewczyk-Królikowski K, Tomlinson P, Nithi K, Rolinski M, Murray C, 
Talbot K, Ebmeier KP, Mackay CE, Ben-Shlomo Y.

Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Division of Clinical 
Neurology, University of Oxford, Oxford, United Kingdom; Department of Clinical 
Neurology, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom; Oxford Parkinson's 
Disease Centre, Oxford, United Kingdom.

The impact of Parkinson's disease (PD) dementia is substantial and has major 
functional and socioeconomic consequences. Early prediction of future cognitive 
impairment would help target future interventions. The Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA), the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), and fluency tests 
were administered to 486 patients with PD within 3.5 years of diagnosis, and the 
results were compared with those from 141 controls correcting for age, sex, and 
educational years. Eighteen-month longitudinal assessments were performed in 155 
patients with PD. The proportion of patients classified with normal cognition, 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and dementia varied considerably, depending on 
the MoCA and MMSE thresholds used. With the MoCA total score at screening 
threshold, 47.7%, 40.5%, and 11.7% of patients with PD were classified with 
normal cognition, MCI, and dementia, respectively; by comparison, 78.7% and 
21.3% of controls had normal cognition and MCI, respectively. Cognitive 
impairment was predicted by lower education, increased age, male sex, and 
quantitative motor and non-motor (smell, depression, and anxiety) measures. 
Longitudinal data from 155 patients with PD over 18 months showed significant 
reductions in MoCA scores, but not in MMSE scores, with 21.3% of patients moving 
from normal cognition to MCI and 4.5% moving from MCI to dementia, although 
13.5% moved from MCI to normal; however, none of the patients with dementia 
changed their classification. The MoCA may be more sensitive than the MMSE in 
detecting early baseline and longitudinal cognitive impairment in PD, because it 
identified 25.8% of those who experienced significant cognitive decline over 18 
months. Cognitive decline was associated with worse motor and non-motor 
features, suggesting that this reflects a faster progressive phenotype.

© 2014 The Authors. International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society 
published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25748
PMCID: PMC4235340
PMID: 24395708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3323. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 21;111(3):1144-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1322614111. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Tau pathology involves protein phosphatase 2A in parkinsonism-dementia of Guam.

Arif M(1), Kazim SF, Grundke-Iqbal I, Garruto RM, Iqbal K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, NY 10314.

Parkinsonism-dementia (PD) of Guam is a neurodegenerative disease with 
parkinsonism and early-onset Alzheimer-like dementia associated with 
neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated 
protein, tau. β-N-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) has been suspected of being 
involved in the etiology of PD, but the mechanism by which BMAA leads to tau 
hyperphosphorylation is not known. We found a decrease in protein phosphatase 2A 
(PP2A) activity associated with an increase in inhibitory phosphorylation of its 
catalytic subunit PP2Ac at Tyr(307) and abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau in 
brains of patients who had Guam PD. To test the possible involvement of BMAA in 
the etiopathogenesis of PD, we studied the effect of this environmental 
neurotoxin on PP2A activity and tau hyperphosphorylation in mouse primary 
neuronal cultures and metabolically active rat brain slices. BMAA treatment 
significantly decreased PP2A activity, with a concomitant increase in tau kinase 
activity resulting in elevated tau hyperphosphorylation at PP2A favorable sites. 
Moreover, we found an increase in the phosphorylation of PP2Ac at Tyr(307) in 
BMAA-treated rat brains. Pretreatment with metabotropic glutamate receptor 5 
(mGluR5) and Src antagonists blocked the BMAA-induced inhibition of PP2A and the 
abnormal hyperphosphorylation of tau, indicating the involvement of an 
Src-dependent PP2A pathway. Coimmunoprecipitation experiments showed that BMAA 
treatment dissociated PP2Ac from mGluR5, making it available for phosphorylation 
at Tyr(307). These findings suggest a scenario in which BMAA can lead to tau 
pathology by inhibiting PP2A through the activation of mGluR5, the consequent 
release of PP2Ac from the mGluR5-PP2A complex, and its phosphorylation at 
Tyr(307) by Src.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1322614111
PMCID: PMC3903234
PMID: 24395787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3324. J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4(2):151-60. doi: 10.3233/JPD-130270.

Italian version of the Parkinson Neuropsychometric Dementia Assessment (PANDA): 
a useful instrument to detect cognitive impairments in Parkinson's Disease.

Pignatti R(1), Bertella L(2), Scarpina F(3), Mauro A(4), Portolani E(5), 
Calabrese P(6).

Author information:
(1)Neurocentro della Svizzera Italiana, Ente Ospedaliero Cantonale, Lugano, TI, 
Switzerland.
(2)Unità operativa di neuropsicologia e logopedia, Clinica Hildebrand, Centro di 
Riabilitazione Brissago, TI, Switzerland.
(3)Laboratory of Psychology, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Piancavallo, 
VB, Italy.
(4)Division of Neurology and Neuro-Rehabilitation, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, Piancavallo, VB, Italy Department of Neurosciences, University of 
Turin, Italy.
(5)Department of Psychology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Milano, 
Italy.
(6)Division of molecular and cognitive neuroscience, University of Basel, BS, 
Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is frequently characterized by cognitive 
and affective dysfunctions. The "Parkinson Neuropsychometric Dementia 
Assessment" (PANDA) is a screening tool designed for the early detection of mild 
cognitive impairment as well as dementia in PD. The PANDA is already validated 
in German and in French.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present work was to provide normative data for the 
Italian-speaking population, Swiss regions included; moreover, the effectiveness 
of the PANDA compared to the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) was tested.
METHODS: One-hundred and eleven PD patients with and without cognitive 
impairment and one-hundred and three matched healthy subjects participated at 
this study; all patients underwent an extensive neuropsychological evaluation.
RESULTS: A PANDA total score of 13 appeared to be the most fitting cut-off with 
a sensitivity of 96.6% and a specificity of 82.2%; with the MMSE, the same value 
of sensitivity but with a specificity of 72,4% was reached only by adopting a 
cut-off of 28. Moreover, a PANDA range of 13-17 appeared to be suggestive for 
possible cognitive disturbance.
CONCLUSIONS: The present work provides evidence for the effectiveness of the 
PANDA in evaluating cognitive deficits also in PD Italian-speaking patients, 
even when their pathological degree is still initial or very mild.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-130270
PMID: 24398655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3325. Restor Neurol Neurosci. 2014;32(2):337-65. doi: 10.3233/RNN-130354.

Chronic neurodegenerative consequences of traumatic brain injury.

Chauhan NB(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research, Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA 
Department of Pediatrics, University of Illinois at Chicago, IL, USA Children's 
Hospital of the University of Illinois, Chicago, IL, USA.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a serious public health concern and a major 
cause of death and disability worldwide. Each year, an estimated 1.7 million 
Americans sustain TBI of which ~52,000 people die, ~275,000 people are 
hospitalized and 1,365,000 people are treated as emergency outpatients. 
Currently there are ~5.3 million Americans living with TBI. TBI is more of a 
disease process than of an event that is associated with immediate and long-term 
sensomotor, psychological and cognitive impairments. TBI is the best known 
established epigenetic risk factor for later development of neurodegenerative 
diseases and dementia. People sustaining TBI are ~4 times more likely to develop 
dementia at a later stage than people without TBI. Single brain injury is linked 
to later development of symptoms resembling Alzheimer's disease while repetitive 
brain injuries are linked to later development of chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy (CTE) and/or Dementia Pugilistica (DP). Furthermore, genetic 
background of ß-amyloid precursor protein (APP), Apolipoprotein E (ApoE), 
presenilin (PS) and neprilysin (NEP) genes is associated with exacerbation of 
neurodegenerative process after TBI. This review encompasses acute effects and 
chronic neurodegenerative consequences after TBI.

DOI: 10.3233/RNN-130354
PMID: 24398724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3326. Nervenarzt. 2014 Jan;85(1):19-25. doi: 10.1007/s00115-013-3891-8.

[REM sleep behavior disorder as a prodromal stage of α-synucleinopathies: 
symptoms, epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis and therapy].

[Article in German]

Oertel WH(1), Depboylu C, Krenzer M, Vadasz D, Ries V, Sixel-Döring F, Mayer G.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Philipps-Universität, Baldingerstr., 35043, Marburg, 
Deutschland, oertelw@med.uni-marburg.de.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is defined as a 
parasomnia characterized by loss of REM sleep-associated atonia and the presence 
of motor activity during dreaming typically presenting with an aggressive dream 
content. Epidemiological data on the prevalence of RBD are insufficient but it 
can be idiopathic or symptomatic. A video-audio polysomnography is essential for 
diagnosis. Clonazepam and melatonin are available as pharmaceutical treatment. 
Recent studies demonstrated that individuals suffering from idiopathic RBD carry 
a high specific risk (up to 80 %) for developing a neurodegenerative disorder of 
the α-synucleinopathy type (e.g. Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies 
and multiple system atrophy) within 10-20 years. The current article provides a 
short overview of symptoms, epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis and therapy 
of RBD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-013-3891-8
PMID: 24399499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3327. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Feb;62:489-507. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.018. Epub 2013 
Oct 24.

AD-linked, toxic NH2 human tau affects the quality control of mitochondria in 
neurons.

Amadoro G(1), Corsetti V(2), Florenzano F(3), Atlante A(4), Ciotti MT(5), 
Mongiardi MP(5), Bussani R(6), Nicolin V(7), Nori SL(8), Campanella M(9), 
Calissano P(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Translational Pharmacology (IFT), CNR, Via Fosso del Cavaliere 
100-00133, Rome, Italy; European Brain Research Institute (EBRI), Via del Fosso 
di Fiorano 64-65-00143, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: g.amadoro@inmm.cnr.it.
(2)European Brain Research Institute (EBRI), Via del Fosso di Fiorano 
64-65-00143, Rome, Italy.
(3)European Brain Research Institute (EBRI), Via del Fosso di Fiorano 
64-65-00143, Rome, Italy; Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology (IBCN), 
CNR, IRCSS Fondazione Santa Lucia, Via del Fosso di Fiorano 64-65-00143, Rome, 
Italy.
(4)Insitute of Biomembrane and Bioenergetic (IBBE), CNR, Via Amendola 
165/A-70126, Bari, Italy.
(5)Institute of Cellular Biology and Neurobiology (IBCN), CNR, IRCSS Fondazione 
Santa Lucia, Via del Fosso di Fiorano 64-65-00143, Rome, Italy.
(6)UCO Anatomy and Pathological Histology, Hospital of Cattinara, Strada di 
Fiume 447-34149, Trieste Italy.
(7)University of Trieste, Clinical Department of Medical, Surgical and Health 
Science-section of Human Morphology, Via Manzoni 16-34138, Trieste, Italy.
(8)University of Salerno, Department of Pharmaceutical and Biomedical Sciences 
(FARMABIOMED), NANOMATES, Via Ponte don Melillo 1-85084, Fisciano (SA), Italy.
(9)European Brain Research Institute (EBRI), Via del Fosso di Fiorano 
64-65-00143, Rome, Italy; Department of Comparative Biomedical Sciences, The 
Royal Veterinary College, and Consortium for Mitochondrial Research, University 
College London, Royal College Street, NW1 0TU, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Feb;74:102-3.

Functional as well as structural alterations in mitochondria size, shape and 
distribution are precipitating, early events in progression of Alzheimer's 
Disease (AD). We reported that a 20-22kDa NH2-tau fragment (aka NH2htau), 
mapping between 26 and 230 amino acids of the longest human tau isoform, is 
detected in cellular and animal AD models and is neurotoxic in hippocampal 
neurons. The NH2htau -but not the physiological full-length protein- interacts 
with Aβ at human AD synapses and cooperates with it in inhibiting the 
mitochondrial ANT-1-dependent ADP/ATP exchange. Here we show that the NH2htau 
also adversely affects the interplay between the mitochondria dynamics and their 
selective autophagic clearance. Fragmentation and perinuclear mislocalization of 
mitochondria with smaller size and density are early found in dying 
NH2htau-expressing neurons. The specific effect of NH2htau on quality control of 
mitochondria is accompanied by (i) net reduction in their mass in correlation 
with a general Parkin-mediated remodeling of membrane proteome; (ii) their 
extensive association with LC3 and LAMP1 autophagic markers; (iii) bioenergetic 
deficits and (iv) in vitro synaptic pathology. These results suggest that 
NH2htau can compromise the mitochondrial biology thereby contributing to AD 
synaptic deficits not only by ANT-1 inactivation but also, indirectly, by 
impairing the quality control mechanism of these organelles.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.10.018
PMID: 24411077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3328. Neurocase. 2015 Feb;21(1):120-33. doi: 10.1080/13554794.2013.873063. Epub 2014 
Jan 13.

Reward processing in neurodegenerative disease.

Perry DC(1), Kramer JH.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology , University of California , San Francisco , CA , 
USA.

Representation of reward value involves a distributed network including cortical 
and subcortical structures. Because neurodegenerative illnesses target specific 
anatomic networks that partially overlap with the reward circuit, they would be 
predicted to have distinct impairments in reward processing. This review 
presents the existing evidence of reward processing changes in neurodegenerative 
diseases including mild cognitive impairment (MCI), Alzheimer's disease, 
frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's 
disease, and Huntington's disease, as well as in healthy aging. Carefully 
distinguishing the different aspects of reward processing (primary rewards, 
secondary rewards, reward-based learning, and reward-based decision-making) and 
using tasks that differentiate the stages of processing reward will lead to 
improved understanding of this fundamental process and clarify a contributing 
cause of behavioral change in these illnesses.

DOI: 10.1080/13554794.2013.873063
PMCID: PMC4301575
PMID: 24417286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3329. Scand J Public Health. 2014 May;42(3):287-94. doi: 10.1177/1403494813516831. 
Epub 2014 Jan 16.

Falls and comorbidity: the pathway to fractures.

Jørgensen TS(1), Hansen AH, Sahlberg M, Gislason GH, Torp-Pedersen C, Andersson 
C, Holm E.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Geriatric Medicine, Nykøbing-Falster Hospital, Denmark.

AIMS: To compare nationwide time trends and mortality in hip and proximal 
humeral fractures; to explore associations between incidences of falls risk 
related comorbidities (FRICs) and incidence of fractures.
METHODS: The study is a retrospective cohort study using nationwide Danish 
administrative registries from 2000 through 2009. Individuals aged 65 years or 
older who experienced a hip or a proximal humeral fracture were included. 
Incidence of hip and of proximal humeral fractures, incidence of FRICs (ischemic 
heart disease, COPD, dementia, depression, diabetes, heart failure, 
osteoporosis, Parkinson's disease and stroke) and incidence rate ratios (IRR) 
for fractures in patients with FRICs, and all-cause mortality up to 10 years 
after a hip or a proximal humeral fracture were analysed.
RESULTS: A total of 89,150 patients experienced hip fractures and 48,581 
proximal humeral fractures. From 2000 through 2009, the incidence of hip 
fractures per 100,000 individuals declined by 198 (787 to 589, OR = 0.75, CI: 
0.72-0.80) among males and by 483 (1758 to 1275, OR = 0.74, CI: 0.72-0.77) among 
females. Incidences of FRICs decreased. The absolute reduction in fractures was 
most pronounced for the age group above 75 years (2393 to 1884, OR = 0.81, CI: 
0.78-0.83), but the relative reduction was more pronounced in the age group of 
65-75 years old (496 to 342, OR = 0.70, CI: 0.66-0.74). IRRs for hip fractures 
and for proximal humeral fractures were significantly elevated in patients with 
FRICs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the overall reduction in fractures can be 
explained by reduction in falls related comorbidity.

DOI: 10.1177/1403494813516831
PMID: 24434943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3330. Biometals. 2014 Feb;27(1):25-31. doi: 10.1007/s10534-013-9702-7. Epub 2014 Jan 
17.

Predictive association of copper metabolism proteins with Alzheimer's disease 
and Parkinson's disease: a preliminary perspective.

Pal A(1), Kumar A, Prasad R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, PGIMER, Chandigarh, 160012, India.

Neurodegenerative diseases, Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease 
(PD), constitute a major worldwide health problem. Several hypothesis have been 
put forth to elucidate the basis of onset and pathogenesis of AD and PD; 
however, till date, none of these seems to clearly elucidate the complex 
pathoetiology of these disorders. Notably, copper dyshomeostasis has been shown 
to underlie the pathophysiology of several neurodegenerative diseases including 
AD and PD. Numerous studies have concluded beyond doubt that imbalance in copper 
homeostatic mechanisms in conjunction with aging causes an acceleration in the 
copper toxicity elicited oxidative stress, which is detrimental to the central 
nervous system. Amyloid precursor protein and α-synuclein protein involved in AD 
and PD are copper binding proteins, respectively. In this review, we have 
discussed the possible association of copper metabolism proteins with AD and PD 
along with briefly outlining the expanding proportion of "copper interactome" in 
human biology. Using network biology, we found that copper metabolism proteins, 
superoxide dismutase 1 and ceruloplasmin may represent direct and indirect link 
with AD and PD, respectively.

DOI: 10.1007/s10534-013-9702-7
PMID: 24435851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3331. Eur J Epidemiol. 2014 Jan;29(1):57-62. doi: 10.1007/s10654-014-9878-3. Epub 2014 
Jan 18.

Irritable bowel syndrome correlates with increased risk of Parkinson's disease 
in Taiwan.

Lai SW(1), Liao KF, Lin CL, Sung FC.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan, 
wei@mail.cmuh.org.tw.

This study investigated whether an association exists between irritable bowel 
syndrome (IBS) and the risk of Parkinson's disease. This is a retrospective 
cohort study using the dataset of the Taiwan National Health Insurance Program 
from 2000 to 2010. We identified 23,875 patients (aged 20 years or older) with 
newly diagnosed IBS as the IBS group and 95,500 subjects without IBS as the 
non-IBS group for comparison. The main outcome was incident Parkinson's disease 
compared between both groups by the end of 2010. We measured the hazard ratio 
(HR) to evaluate the association between IBS and Parkinson's disease. The 
overall incidence of Parkinson's disease in the IBS group was 1.76-fold higher 
than that in the non-IBS group (16.4 vs. 9.33 per 10,000 person-years). The 
multivariable Cox proportional hazards regression analysis revealed that the 
adjusted HR of Parkinson's disease associated with IBS was 1.48 (95% CI 1.27, 
1.72), compared with the non-IBS group. Age, women, hypertension, dementia, 
cerebrovascular disease and depression were also significantly associated with 
Parkinson's disease. Patients with irritable bowel syndrome are at an increased 
risk of developing Parkinson's disease. Further studies are required to explore 
the pathophysiological connection between these disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s10654-014-9878-3
PMID: 24442494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3332. BMJ Open. 2014 Jan 21;4(1):e003976. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003976.

White matter integrity and cognition in Parkinson's disease: a cross-sectional 
study.

Auning E(1), Kjærvik VK, Selnes P, Aarsland D, Haram A, Bjørnerud A, Hessen E, 
Esnaashari A, Fladby T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, Akershus University Hospital, Lørenskog, 
Norway.

OBJECTIVE: We used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to test the following 
hypotheses: (1) there is decreased white matter (WM) integrity in non-demented 
Parkinson's disease (PD), (2) WM integrity is differentially reduced in PD and 
early Alzheimer's disease (AD) and (3) DTI changes in non-demented PD are 
specifically associated with cognitive performance.
METHODS: This study included 18 non-demented patients with PD, 18 patients with 
mild cognitive impairment due to incipient AD and 19 healthy elderly normal 
control (NC) participants in a cross-sectional design. The participants 
underwent DTI, and tract-based spatial statistics was used to analyse and 
extract radial diffusivity and fractional anisotropy. Correlations between 
scores from a battery of neuropsychological tests and DTI were performed in the 
PD group.
RESULTS: Patients with PD had significant differences in DTI in WM underlying 
the temporal, parietal and occipital cortex as compared with NC. There were no 
significant differences between the PD and AD groups in the primary region of 
interest analyses, but compared with NC there was a tendency for more anterior 
changes in AD in contrast to more posterior changes in PD. In a secondary 
whole-brain analysis there were frontoparietal areas with significant 
differences between AD and PD. In patients with PD, there were significant 
correlations between DTI parameters in WM underlying the prefrontal cortex and 
executive and visuospatial abilities.
CONCLUSIONS: In early, non-demented PD we found reduced WM integrity underlying 
the temporal, parietal and occipital cortices. In addition, WM integrity changes 
in prefrontal areas were associated with executive and visuospatial ability. 
These findings support that DTI may be an important biomarker in early PD, and 
that WM changes are related to cognitive impairment in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003976
PMCID: PMC3902504
PMID: 24448846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3333. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2013;115(11):1127-34.

[Depression in dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakai K(1), Yamane Y(2), Yamamoto Y(3), Maeda K(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Therapy, Takarazuka University of Medical and Health 
Care.
(2)Ibogawa Hospital.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Kobe University, Graduate School of Medicine.
(4)Department of Medical Rehabilitation, Kobe Gakuin University.

Depression is a risk factor for dementia in general, including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), its premorbid signs are commonly observed, and the morbidity of 
depression is higher in dementia patients. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is 
considered to have an even higher depression prevalence and premorbid depression 
rate than other dementias such as AD. This led to depression being listed as a 
supportive feature in the 2005 criteria for the clinical diagnosis of DLB. 
However, studies investigating the difference in depression between AD and DLB 
failed to show consistent results. We examined the Geriatric Depression Scale 
score, which is designed specifically to rate depression in the elderly, for DLB 
and AD patients. The scores for DLB patients were twice as high as those for AD 
patients. There was no correlation between the GDS score and age, sex, or 
Mini-Mental Sate Examination scores. Depression-specific symptoms were more 
frequent in the DLB group than non-specific symptoms, while less than one third 
of DLB patients with very high GDS scores were diagnosed with depression or 
prescribed antidepressants for depressive symptoms. Other researchers reported 
that depression of DLB was associated with a higher prevalence of psychiatric 
symptoms other than major depression, and suggested that depression of DLB might 
be a part of psychiatric syndrome. There has been no systematic study on the 
validity or risk of pharmacological therapy, as well as the necessity of 
intervention, for depression or a high GDS score in DLB. Therefore, intervention 
must rely on the clinical decision of each doctor. In spite of the paucity of 
current findings, studies on depression of DLB may play a key role in the 
elucidation of its neuropathology and psychopathology and offer a new view point 
on understanding depression itself.

PMID: 24450145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3334. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2013;115(11):1142-9.

[Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Tachibana H(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of General Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College 
of Medicine.

Cognitive impairment is a common finding in Parkinson's disease (PD), even in 
the early stages. The concept of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in PD was 
recently formalized with diagnosis being reached after impairments in 
neuropsychological tasks become significant in at least one domain. The brain 
profile of cognitive deficits involves executive functions (e. g., planning, set 
shifting, set maintenance, problem solving), attention and memory function. 
Memory deficits are characterized by impairments in delayed recall, temporal 
ordering and conditional associate learning. PD patients demonstrate relatively 
preserved recognition. Visuospatial dysfunctions have also been reported, while 
language is largely preserved. The existence of two distinct mild cognitive 
syndromes has also been suggested. One of these affects mainly the 
frontostriatal executive deficits that are modulated by dopaminergic medications 
and by a genetically determined level of prefrontal cortex dopamine release. The 
other affects the more-posterior cortical abilities, such as visuospatial and 
memory functions, and is suggested to be associated with an increased risk for 
conversion to dementia. Cross-sectional studies have commonly reported dementia 
in 20-30% of PD patients, although the 8-year cumulative incidence of dementia 
may be as high as 78%. Factors associated with dementia in PD are age at onset, 
age at the time of examination, akinetic-rigid form PD, depression, 
hallucination, rapid eye movement sleep behavioral disorder and severe olfactory 
deficits. Clinical features generally involve the same type of deficits as those 
found in MCI patients, which are more severe and more extensive. The 
phenomenology of the dementia syndrome is similar to that seen in dementia with 
Lewy bodies, and clinicopathological correlation studies have revealed varying 
results with regard to neurochemical deficits and the pathological substrate 
underlying cognitive impairment and dementia. Early cognitive impairment, 
particularly in the form of executive dysfunction, is indicative of mainly 
fronto-striatal pathologic changes and might originate during nigrostriatal and 
subsequent mesocortical dopamine denervation. A potential parallel noradrenergic 
deficit and cholinergic deficit disturbance in patients without dementia might 
also contribute to MCI. Extensive pathological changes in Lewy bodies lead to 
widespread cortical and subcortical degeneration and profound cholinergic 
deficits, and might lead to the development of dementia. Several studies have 
revealed a significant correlation between dementia and Alzheimer-type 
pathology.

PMID: 24450147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3335. Curr Gene Ther. 2014 Feb;14(1):24-34. doi: 10.2174/1566523214666140120121733.

Gene therapy and cell reprogramming for the aging brain: achievements and 
promise.

Pardo J, Morel GR, Astiz M, Schwerdt JI, León ML, Rodríguez SS, Hereñú CB, Goya 
RG(1).

Author information:
(1)INIBIOLP, Faculty of Medicine, UNLP, CC 455, 1900 La Plata, Argentina. 
goya@isis.unlp.edu.ar.

In the central nervous system, cholinergic and dopaminergic (DA) neurons are 
among the cells most susceptible to the deleterious effects of age. Thus, the 
basal forebrain cholinergic system is known to undergo moderate 
neurodegenerative changes during normal aging as well as severe atrophy in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Parkinson's disease (PD), a degeneration of 
nigro-striatal DA neurons is the most conspicuous reflection of the 
vulnerability of DA neurons to age. Overall, there is growing evidence that a 
progressive decline in cognitive function and central DA activity represents 
basic features of normal aging both in humans and laboratory rodents. 
Spontaneous or environmental neurotoxin-mediated exacerbation of these processes 
contributes to the symptoms of AD and PD, respectively. In this context, 
neurotrophic factors that can prevent or delay the decline in cognitive function 
and central DA activity are of clinical interest. Among them, Insulin-like 
Growth Factor I and Glial cell line-Derived Neurotrophic Factor are emerging as 
powerful neuroprotective molecules. This article discusses the experimental 
evidence supporting the neuroprotective relevance of these and related factors 
in the aging brain. The availability of induced pluripotent stem cells offers a 
new promise for the treatment of pathologies associated with the loss of 
specific cell types as for instance, nigral DA neurons (in PD) or basal 
forebrain cholinergic neurons (BFCN) in the early stages of AD. Recent studies 
documenting the use of cell reprogramming for the generation of multipotent 
neuronal precursors as well as functional BFCN and DA neurons are reviewed.

DOI: 10.2174/1566523214666140120121733
PMID: 24450294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3336. Neurology. 2014 Feb 18;82(7):620-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000130. Epub 2014 
Jan 22.

Abnormal metabolic network activity in REM sleep behavior disorder.

Holtbernd F(1), Gagnon JF, Postuma RB, Ma Y, Tang CC, Feigin A, Dhawan V, 
Vendette M, Soucy JP, Eidelberg D, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)From the Center for Neurosciences (F.H., Y.M., C.C.T., A.F., V.D., D.E.), The 
Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, Manhasset, NY; Center for Advanced 
Research in Sleep Medicine (J.-F.G., R.B.P., M.V., J.M.), Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur 
de Montréal; Department of Psychology (J.-F.G., M.V.), Université du Québec à 
Montréal; Department of Neurology (R.B.P.), Montreal General Hospital; Montreal 
Neurological Institute (J.-P.S.), McGill University; and Department of 
Psychiatry (J.M.), University of Montreal, Montréal, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the Parkinson disease-related covariance pattern 
(PDRP) expression is abnormally increased in idiopathic REM sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) and whether increased baseline activity is associated with 
greater individual risk of subsequent phenoconversion.
METHODS: For this cohort study, we recruited 2 groups of RBD and control 
subjects. Cohort 1 comprised 10 subjects with RBD (63.5 ± 9.4 years old) and 10 
healthy volunteers (62.7 ± 8.6 years old) who underwent resting-state metabolic 
brain imaging with (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose PET. Cohort 2 comprised 17 subjects 
with RBD (68.9 ± 4.8 years old) and 17 healthy volunteers (66.6 ± 6.0 years old) 
who underwent resting brain perfusion imaging with ethylcysteinate dimer SPECT. 
The latter group was followed clinically for 4.6 ± 2.5 years by investigators 
blinded to the imaging results. PDRP expression was measured in both RBD groups 
and compared with corresponding control values.
RESULTS: PDRP expression was elevated in both groups of subjects with RBD 
(cohort 1: p < 0.04; cohort 2: p < 0.005). Of the 17 subjects with long-term 
follow-up, 8 were diagnosed with Parkinson disease or dementia with Lewy bodies; 
the others did not phenoconvert. For individual subjects with RBD, final 
phenoconversion status was predicted using a logistical regression model based 
on PDRP expression and subject age at the time of imaging (r(2) = 0.64, p < 
0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Latent network abnormalities in subjects with idiopathic RBD are 
associated with a greater likelihood of subsequent phenoconversion to a 
progressive neurodegenerative syndrome.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000130
PMCID: PMC3963420
PMID: 24453082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3337. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2013 Dec;15(4):465-73. doi: 
10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.4/sarlt.

Non-Alzheimer's disease-related memory impairment and dementia.

Arlt S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, Hamburg, Germany.

Although Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a common cause of memory impairment and 
dementia in the elderly disturbed memory function is a widespread subjective 
and/or objective symptom in a variety of medical conditions. The early detection 
and correct distinction of AD from non-AD memory impairment is critically 
important to detect possibly treatable and reversible underlying causes. In the 
context of clinical research, it is crucial to correctly distinguish between AD 
or non-AD memory impairment in order to build homogenous study populations for 
the assessment of new therapeutic possibilities. The distinction of AD from 
non-AD memory impairment may be difficult, especially in mildly affected 
patients, due to an overlap of clinical symptoms and biomarker alterations 
between AD and certain non-AD conditions. This review aims to describe recent 
aspects of the differential diagnosis of AD and non-AD related memory impairment 
and how these may be considered in the presence of memory deficits.

Publisher: Aunque la Enfermedad de Alzheimer (EA) constituye una causa común de 
demencía y deterioro de memoria en la vejez, el trastorno de memoria es un 
síntoma generalizado objetivo ylo subjetivo en una variedad de situaciones 
médicas. La detección precoz y la correcta distinción entre la EA y el deterioro 
de memoria no-EA es muy importante para determinar causas subyacentes 
posiblemente tratables y reversibles. En el contexto de la investigation clínica 
es clave distinguir correctamente entre EA y deterioro de memoria no-EA para 
conformar poblaciones homogéneas de estudio para la evaluación de nuevas 
alternativas terapéuticas. La distinción entre EA y deterioro de memoria no-EA 
puede resultar difícíl, especialmente en pacientes con compromise leve, debido a 
una sobreposición de sintomas clínicos y alteraciones de biomarcadores entre la 
EA y ciertas condiciones no-EA. Esta revisóon tiene como objetivo describir 
aspectos recientes del diagnóstico diferencial de la EA y del deterioro de 
memoria no relacionado con la EA, y cómo estos pueden considerarse cuando hay 
presencia de déficit de memoria.

Publisher: La maladie d'Alzheimer (MA) est une cause fréquente de troubles de la 
mémoire et de démence chez les sujets âgés mais une fonction mnésique perturbée 
est un symptôme subjectif et/ou objectif très répandu dans de nombreuses 
pathologies. La détection précoce et une distinction correcte entre troubles 
mnésiques lies ou non à la MA sont primordiales pour diagnostiquer des causes 
sous-jacentes qui pourraient être réversibles et traitables. En recherche 
clinique, faire cette distinction est essentiel pour constituer des populations 
d'étude homogènes afin d'évaluer de nouveaux traitements. La superposition des 
symptômes cliniques et des modifications des biomarqueurs entre la MA et 
d'autres pathologies non-MA peut rendre difficile la différentiation selon 
I'étiologie, surtout chez les patients légèrement atteints. Dans cet article 
nous décrivons les caractéristiques récentes du diagnostic différentiel entre 
troubles mnésiques liés ou non à la MA et leur prise en compte en présence d'un 
déficit de la mémoire.

DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.4/sarlt
PMCID: PMC3898684
PMID: 24459413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3338. Biochem Pharmacol. 2014 Apr 15;88(4):508-16. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.01.015. 
Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Pathogenesis of synaptic degeneration in Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body 
disease.

Overk CR(1), Masliah E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92039, USA.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92039, USA; Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92039, USA. Electronic address: emasliah@ucsd.edu.

Considerable progress has been made in the past few years in the fight against 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Neuropathological studies 
in human brains and experimental in vivo and in vitro models support the notion 
that synapses are affected even at the earliest stages of the neurodegenerative 
process. The objective of this manuscript is to review some of the mechanisms of 
synaptic damage in AD and PD. Some lines of evidence support the notion that 
oligomeric neurotoxic species of amyloid β, α-synuclein, and Tau might 
contribute to the pathogenesis of synaptic failure at early stages of the 
diseases. The mechanisms leading to synaptic damage by oligomers might involve 
dysregulation of glutamate receptors and scaffold molecules that results in 
alterations in the axonal transport of synaptic vesicles and mitochondria that 
later on lead to dendritic and spine alterations, axonal dystrophy, and 
eventually neuronal loss. However, while some studies support a role of 
oligomers, there is an ongoing debate as to the exact nature of the toxic 
species. Given the efforts toward earlier clinical and preclinical diagnosis of 
these disorders, understanding the molecular and cellular mechanisms of synaptic 
degeneration is crucial toward developing specific biomarkers and new therapies 
targeting the synaptic apparatus of vulnerable neurons.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.01.015
PMCID: PMC3973539
PMID: 24462903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3339. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 21;9(1):e85595. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085595. 
eCollection 2014.

Grey matter changes in cognitively impaired Parkinson's disease patients.

Rektorova I(1), Biundo R(2), Marecek R(1), Weis L(2), Aarsland D(3), Antonini 
A(2).

Author information:
(1)Brain and Mind Research Program, Central European Institute of Technology, 
Central European Institute of Technology Masaryk University, Masaryk University, 
Brno, Czech Republic ; First Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, 
Masaryk University and St. Anne's University Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Center for Parkinson's disease and Movement Disorder "Fondazione Ospedale San 
Camillo" - Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, Venice-Lido, 
Italy.
(3)Department of Neurology and Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet and 
Karolinska University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden ; Centre for Age-Related 
Diseases, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Cortical changes associated with cognitive decline in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) are not fully explored and require investigations with established 
diagnostic classification criteria.
OBJECTIVE: We used MRI source-based morphometry to evaluate specific differences 
in grey matter volume patterns across 4 groups of subjects: healthy controls 
(HC), PD with normal cognition (PD-NC), PD with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI-PD) and PD with dementia (PDD).
METHODS: We examined 151 consecutive subjects: 25 HC, 75 PD-NC, 29 MCI-PD, and 
22 PDD at an Italian and Czech movement disorder centre. Operational diagnostic 
criteria were applied to classify MCI-PD and PDD. All structural MRI images were 
processed together in the Czech centre. The spatial independent component 
analysis was used to assess group differences of local grey matter volume.
RESULTS: We identified two independent patterns of grey matter volume 
deviations: a) Reductions in the hippocampus and temporal lobes; b) Decreases in 
fronto-parietal regions and increases in the midbrain/cerebellum. Both patterns 
differentiated PDD from all other groups and correlated with visuospatial 
deficits and letter verbal fluency, respectively. Only the second pattern 
additionally differentiated PD-NC from HC.
CONCLUSION: Grey matter changes in PDD involve areas associated with 
Alzheimer-like pathology while fronto-parietal abnormalities are possibly an 
early marker of PD cognitive decline. These findings are consistent with a 
non-linear cognitive progression in PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0085595
PMCID: PMC3897481
PMID: 24465612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3340. BMC Geriatr. 2014 Jan 28;14:10. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-10.

A claims data-based comparison of comorbidity in individuals with and without 
dementia.

Bauer K, Schwarzkopf L(1), Graessel E, Holle R.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Economics and Health Care Management, Helmholtz Zentrum 
München, Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1, 85764 Neuherberg, Germany. 
l.schwarzkopf@helmholtz-muenchen.de.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Apr;10(4):184-6.

BACKGROUND: Multimorbidity is common in advanced age, and is usually associated 
with negative - yet to some extent preventable - health outcomes. Detecting 
comorbid conditions is especially difficult in individuals with dementia, as 
they might not always be able to sufficiently express discomfort. This study 
compares relevant comorbidity complexes in elderly people with and without 
dementia, with a particular look at gender- and living environment-specific 
differences. Moreover, associations between selected comorbid conditions and 
dementia are reviewed more closely.
METHODS: Using 2006 claims data from a large German Statutory Health Insurance 
fund, 9,139 individuals with dementia and 28,614 age- and gender-matched control 
subjects aged 65 years and older were identified. A total of 30 comorbidity 
complexes were defined based on ICD-10 codes. Corresponding prevalence rates 
were calculated, and the association between a distinct condition and dementia 
was evaluated via logistic regression in the overall sample as well as in 
analyses stratified by gender and living environment.
RESULTS: Individuals with dementia were more likely to be diagnosed with 15 
comorbidity complexes, including Parkinson's, stroke, diabetes, atherosclerosis 
(supposed dementia risk factors) or fluids and electrolyte disorders, insomnia, 
incontinence, pneumonia, fractures and injuries (supposed sequelae). In 
contrast, they were less likely to be diagnosed with 11 other conditions, which 
included vision and hearing problems, diseases of the musculoskeletal system, 
lipoprotein disorders and hypertension. In a gender-stratified analysis, the 
patterns remained largely the same, but a bigger comorbidity gap between cases 
and control subjects emerged in the male population. Restricting the analysis to 
community-living individuals did not lead to any substantial changes.
CONCLUSION: Besides strengthening the evidence on accepted dementia risk factors 
and sequelae, the analyses point to particular conditions that are likely to 
remain untreated or even undiagnosed. This issue seems to affect male and female 
individuals with dementia to varying degrees. Raising awareness of these 
conditions is important to possibly preventing comorbidity-associated 
complications and disease progression in dementia patients. To more 
comprehensively understand the mutual interactions between dementia and 
comorbidity, further research on diagnostic and treatment attitudes regarding 
comorbidity in dementia patients and on their gender-specific health-seeking 
behaviour seems to be required.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-10
PMCID: PMC3909381
PMID: 24472217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3341. J Neurol. 2014 Apr;261(4):696-701. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7246-6. Epub 2014 Jan 
30.

Unusual features of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease followed-up in a memory clinic.

Jacquin A(1), Deramecourt V, Bakchine S, Maurage CA, Pasquier F.

Author information:
(1)Centre Mémoire de Ressources et de Recherches, Centre National de référence, 
Université de Lille-Nord de France, Maladie d'Alzheimer du sujet jeune, Labex 
DISTALZ, CHU, 59000, Lille, France, agnesjacquin@free.fr.

Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) generally manifests itself by 
cognitive or rapidly progressive motor symptoms. An atypical onset or an unusual 
evolution may delay the diagnosis. Among patients with a confirmed diagnosis of 
sCJD following a post-mortem neuropathological examination at the Neuropathology 
Centre of Lille, France, those who had presented with atypical cognitive 
disorders at onset were included in the study. Four patients were included. The 
first patient (64-years-old) presented early language disorders, later 
accompanied by apathy and behavioral disorders. The prolonged course suggested a 
diagnosis of progressive primary aphasia. The second patient (68-years-old) 
presented with aphasia, apraxia, and ataxia of the right upper limb with 
parkinsonian syndrome, suggesting corticobasal degeneration. In the two last 
patients (58- and 61-years-old), the onset was marked by an anxiety-depression 
syndrome, falls, visual hallucinations, extra-pyramidal syndrome, and 
fluctuating cognitive decline. The diagnosis raised was probable Lewy body 
dementia. The 14.3.3 protein was found in two of the four cases. The clinical 
elements found may initially suggest focal atrophy or Lewy body dementia. A very 
rapid clinical deterioration generally suggests sCJD, but in the last case, the 
evolution was particularly slow. The diagnosis of sCJD must be considered in 
cases of rapid-onset dementia, even if all of the clinical criteria are not 
present. The detection of the 14.3.3 protein and multifold increase in total-Tau 
with normal or slightly increased phosphorylated-Tau in the CSF are additional 
arguments to reinforce the diagnosis. The post-mortem neuropathological 
examination is important to confirm the diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7246-6
PMID: 24477491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3342. Brain. 2014 Mar;137(Pt 3):849-59. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt360. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

Visuoperceptive region atrophy independent of cognitive status in patients with 
Parkinson's disease with hallucinations.

Goldman JG(1), Stebbins GT, Dinh V, Bernard B, Merkitch D, deToledo-Morrell L, 
Goetz CG.

Author information:
(1)1 Rush University Medical Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, 
Chicago, IL, USA.

Visual hallucinations are frequent, disabling complications of advanced 
Parkinson's disease, but their neuroanatomical basis is incompletely understood. 
Previous structural brain magnetic resonance imaging studies suggest volume loss 
in the mesial temporal lobe and limbic regions in subjects with Parkinson's 
disease with visual hallucinations, relative to those without visual 
hallucinations. However, these studies have not always controlled for the 
presence of cognitive impairment or dementia, which are common co-morbidities of 
hallucinations in Parkinson's disease and whose neuroanatomical substrates may 
involve mesial temporal lobe and limbic regions. Therefore, we used structural 
magnetic resonance imaging to examine grey matter atrophy patterns associated 
with visual hallucinations, comparing Parkinson's disease hallucinators to 
Parkinson's disease non-hallucinators of comparable cognitive function. We 
studied 50 subjects with Parkinson's disease: 25 classified as current and 
chronic visual hallucinators and 25 as non-hallucinators, who were matched for 
cognitive status (demented or non-demented) and age (± 3 years). Subjects 
underwent (i) clinical evaluations; and (ii) brain MRI scans analysed using 
whole-brain voxel-based morphometry techniques. Clinically, the Parkinson's 
disease hallucinators did not differ in their cognitive classification or 
performance in any of the five assessed cognitive domains, compared with the 
non-hallucinators. The Parkinson's disease groups also did not differ 
significantly in age, motor severity, medication use or duration of disease. On 
imaging analyses, the hallucinators, all of whom experienced visual 
hallucinations, exhibited grey matter atrophy with significant voxel-wise 
differences in the cuneus, lingual and fusiform gyri, middle occipital lobe, 
inferior parietal lobule, and also cingulate, paracentral, and precentral gyri, 
compared with the non-hallucinators. Grey matter atrophy in the hallucinators 
occurred predominantly in brain regions responsible for processing 
visuoperceptual information including the ventral 'what' and dorsal 'where' 
pathways, which are important in object and facial recognition and 
identification of spatial locations of objects, respectively. Furthermore, the 
structural brain changes seen on magnetic resonance imaging occurred 
independently of cognitive function and age. Our findings suggest that when 
hallucinators and non-hallucinators are similar in their cognitive performance, 
the neural networks involving visuoperceptual pathways, rather than the mesial 
temporal lobe regions, distinctively contribute to the pathophysiology of visual 
hallucinations and may explain their predominantly visual nature in Parkinson's 
disease. Identification of distinct structural MRI differences associated with 
hallucinations in Parkinson's disease may permit earlier detection of at-risk 
patients and ultimately, development of therapies specifically targeting 
hallucinations and visuoperceptive functions.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt360
PMCID: PMC3983409
PMID: 24480486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3343. Expert Opin Drug Discov. 2014 Apr;9(4):383-405. doi: 
10.1517/17460441.2014.885014. Epub 2014 Feb 5.

Methods for the discovery of new anti-aging products--targeted approaches.

Manayi A(1), Saeidnia S, Gohari AR, Abdollahi M.

Author information:
(1)Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmacy, Medicinal Plants 
Research Center , Tehran 1417614411 , Iran.

INTRODUCTION: Aging is considered to be one of the most complicated and 
heterogeneous phenomena and is the main risk factor for most chronic diseases, 
disabilities and declining health. Aging cells cease to divide and drive the 
progression of illness through various pathways. Over the years, a number of 
anti-aging medicines of natural and synthetic origin have been introduced. 
Indeed, some studies have identified senescent cells as potential therapeutic 
targets in the treatment of aging and age-related diseases.
AREAS COVERED: In this review, the authors highlight and critically review the 
possible mechanisms of the aging process and related illnesses. The authors give 
particular attention to illnesses, including Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's 
disease, skin aging and cardiovascular diseases.
EXPERT OPINION: Several reports have highlighted that mitochondria are a key 
factor in the progression of aging and neurodegenerative illnesses. This is due 
to their production of extra amounts of reactive oxygen species, which leads 
into progressive caspase-dependent apoptosis and cell death. Therefore, 
strategies to prevent/reduce oxidative stress-mediated aging, whether 
environmental, nutritional and pharmacological, need to be taken into account. 
Presently, Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans, which focus on 
the evolutionary and genetic foundations of aging, have helped to establish the 
screening of several synthetic and natural compounds with large cohorts in a 
quick manner. However, there is yet to be any efficient experimental evidence to 
prove the exact role of senescent cells in age-related dysfunction and further 
studies are required to better understand these processes.

DOI: 10.1517/17460441.2014.885014
PMID: 24494592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3344. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Mar 20;563:140-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.01.016. Epub 
2014 Feb 2.

Clinical and molecular studies reveal a PSEN1 mutation (L153V) in a Peruvian 
family with early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Cornejo-Olivas MR(1), Yu CE(2), Mazzetti P(3), Mata IF(4), Meza M(5), 
Lindo-Samanamud S(6), Leverenz JB(7), Bird TD(8).

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Research Center, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurologicas, 
Lima, Peru; Northern Pacific Global Health Research Fellows Training Consortium, 
Bethesda, MD, United States. Electronic address: mario.cornejo.o@incngen.org.pe.
(2)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Seattle, WA, United States.
(3)Neurogenetics Research Center, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurologicas, 
Lima, Peru; School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, 
Peru.
(4)Parkinson's Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health 
Care System, Seattle, WA, United States; Department of Neurology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(5)School of Medicine, Universidad Nacional Mayor de San Marcos, Lima, Peru.
(6)Neurogenetics Research Center, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Neurologicas, 
Lima, Peru.
(7)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Seattle, WA, United States; Mental Illness Research Education and 
Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, United States; 
Parkinson's Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Seattle, WA, United States; Department of Neurology, University of 
Washington, Seattle, WA, United States; Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral 
Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States.
(8)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Seattle, WA, United States; Parkinson's Research Education and Clinical 
Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA, United States; 
Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, United States; 
Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA, United States.

Presenilin 1 (PSEN1) gene mutations are found in 30-70% of familial early-onset 
Alzheimer disease (EOAD) cases (onset <60 years). Prevalence of these mutations 
is highly variable including ethnic differences worldwide. No Peruvian kindred 
with familial AD (FAD) have been described. Standardized clinical evaluation and 
cognitive assessment were completed in a Peruvian family with severe EOAD. 
Clinical course was characterized by very early onset (before age 35 years), 
progressive cognitive impairment with early memory loss, spatial disorientation 
and executive dysfunction. We sequenced all exons of PSEN1 in the proband and 
identified a c.475C>G DNA change resulting in a p.L153V missense mutation in the 
transmembrane domain 2 of the gene. This mutation is also present in the three 
additional affected siblings but not in a non-affected family member consistent 
with segregation of this mutation with the disease. This is the first report of 
a Peruvian family affected with EOAD associated with a PSEN1 mutation. This same 
mutation has been reported previously in English and French families, but a 
novel variants very close to the mutation and ancestry informative markers 
analysis suggests the mutation might be of Amerindian or African origin in this 
Peruvian family.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.01.016
PMCID: PMC3984905
PMID: 24495933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3345. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013 Nov 7;5(6):55. doi: 10.1186/alzrt219.

Calmodulin levels in blood cells as a potential biomarker of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Esteras N, Alquézar C, de la Encarnación A, Villarejo A, Bermejo-Pareja F, 
Martín-Requero A.

INTRODUCTION: The clinical features of Alzheimer's disease (AD) overlap with a 
number of other dementias and conclusive diagnosis is only achieved at autopsy. 
Accurate in-life diagnosis requires finding biomarkers suitable for early 
diagnosis, as well as for discrimination from other types of dementia. Mounting 
evidence suggests that AD-dependent processes may also affect peripheral cells. 
We previously reported that calmodulin (CaM) signaling is impaired in AD 
lymphoblasts. Here, we address the issue as to whether the assessment of CaM 
levels in peripheral cells could serve as a diagnostic biomarker.
METHODS: A total of 165 subjects were enrolled in the study, including 56 AD 
patients, 15 patients with mild cognitive impairment, 7 with frontotemporal 
dementia associated with progranulin mutations, 4 with dementia with Lewy 
bodies, 20 patients with Parkinson's disease, 10 with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, 5 with progressive supranuclear palsy, and 48 cognitively normal 
individuals. CaM levels were then analyzed in lymphoblasts, peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells and plasma. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
analyses were employed to evaluate the diagnostic performance of CaM content in 
identifying AD patients.
RESULTS: Compared with control individuals, CaM levels were significantly 
increased in AD cells, but not in the other neurodegenerative disorders. CaM 
levels differentiated AD from control with a sensitivity of 0.89 and a 
specificity of 0.82 and were not dependent on disease severity or age. MCI 
patients also showed higher levels of the protein.
CONCLUSIONS: CaM levels could be considered a peripheral biomarker for AD in its 
early stage and help to discriminate from other types of dementia.

DOI: 10.1186/alzrt219
PMCID: PMC3978675
PMID: 24499616


3346. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Feb 7;2:15. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-15.

Lipid dysfunction and pathogenesis of multiple system atrophy.

Bleasel JM, Wong JH, Halliday GM, Kim WS(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Barker St, Randwick, Sydney NSW 2031, 
Australia. w.kim@unsw.edu.au.

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a progressive neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by the accumulation of α-synuclein protein in the cytoplasm of 
oligodendrocytes, the myelin-producing support cells of the central nervous 
system (CNS). The brain is the most lipid-rich organ in the body and disordered 
metabolism of various lipid constituents is increasingly recognized as an 
important factor in the pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases. 
α-Synuclein is a 17 kDa protein with a close association to lipid membranes and 
biosynthetic processes in the CNS, yet its precise function is a matter of 
speculation, particularly in oligodendrocytes. α-Synuclein aggregation in 
neurons is a well-characterized feature of Parkinson's disease and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. Epidemiological evidence and in vitro studies of α-synuclein 
molecular dynamics suggest that disordered lipid homeostasis may play a role in 
the pathogenesis of α-synuclein aggregation. However, MSA is distinct from other 
α-synucleinopathies in a number of respects, not least the disparate cellular 
focus of α-synuclein pathology. The recent identification of causal mutations 
and polymorphisms in COQ2, a gene encoding a biosynthetic enzyme for the 
production of the lipid-soluble electron carrier coenzyme Q10 (ubiquinone), puts 
membrane transporters as central to MSA pathogenesis, although how such 
transporters are involved in the early myelin degeneration observed in MSA 
remains unclear. The purpose of this review is to bring together available 
evidence to explore the potential role of membrane transporters and lipid 
dyshomeostasis in the pathogenesis of α-synuclein aggregation in MSA. We 
hypothesize that dysregulation of the specialized lipid metabolism involved in 
myelin synthesis and maintenance by oligodendrocytes underlies the unique 
neuropathology of MSA.

DOI: 10.1186/2051-5960-2-15
PMCID: PMC3922275
PMID: 24502382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3347. Int Psychogeriatr. 2014 Apr;26(4):687-92. doi: 10.1017/S104161021300255X. Epub 
2014 Feb 10.

A comparison of caregiver burden in older persons and persons with Parkinson's 
disease or dementia in sub-Saharan Africa.

Dotchin CL(1), Paddick SM(2), Longdon AR(3), Kisoli A(4), Gray WK(1), Dewhurst 
F(1), Chaote P(4), Dewhurst M(1), Walker RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Northumbria Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, North Tyneside General Hospital, 
North Shields, UK.
(2)Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle University, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
(3)South Devon Healthcare NHS Foundation Trust, Torquay, UK.
(4)Hai District Hospital, Hai, Kilimanjaro, Tanzania.

BACKGROUND: Caregiver burden includes the many physical, mental and 
socio-economic problems arising from caring for individuals with chronic and 
disabling diseases. Being a carer in sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), where little is 
known about chronic neurological conditions, may be extremely demanding. 
Conversely, multigenerational living may allow sharing of care among many 
caregivers. We wished to determine the relative burden of caring for two chronic 
neurodegenerative conditions (Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia) in rural 
Tanzania.
METHODS: All surviving patients from a PD prevalence study, newly identified 
people with PD from a neurological disorders study and all people with dementia 
from a dementia prevalence study in Hai, rural Tanzania, were invited to 
participate. The Zarit Burden Interview (ZBI) was used to determine level of 
caregiver strain (higher score reflects more strain).
RESULTS: Of 25 PD patients ZBI was recorded in 20 (14 male). Five had no 
identifiable carer as they were largely independent. Three had PD dementia 
(PDD). Of 75 people with dementia (excluding 3 PDD), 43 (32 female) completed 
the ZBI. For the other 32, the caregivers felt the care they provided was a 
normal intergenerational expectation. Median ages were 78.5 and 85 years for PD 
and dementia, respectively. Median ZBI was 30.5 for PD and 14 for dementia (U = 
166.0, z = -3.913, p < 0.001). Disease duration and disease type (PD or 
dementia) were univariate predictor of ZBI score, although only disease type was 
predictive by multivariable linear regression.
CONCLUSIONS: Caring for an individual with PD may be more burdensome than caring 
for an individual with dementia in SSA. People with more advanced PD had higher 
caregiver burden.

DOI: 10.1017/S104161021300255X
PMID: 24507385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3348. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Jul;35(7):1739-43. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.11.017. Epub 2013 Nov 22.

Subjective cognitive decline predicts future deterioration in cognitively normal 
patients with Parkinson's disease.

Hong JY(1), Sunwoo MK(2), Chung SJ(2), Ham JH(2), Lee JE(2), Sohn YH(2), Lee 
PH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Yonsei University Wonju College of Medicine, Wonju, 
Korea; Department of Neurology and Brain Research Institute, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology and Brain Research Institute, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(3)Department of Neurology and Brain Research Institute, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Severance Biomedical Science Institute, 
Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. Electronic address: 
phisland@chol.net.

Increasing evidence suggests that subjective cognitive decline (SCD) is a 
potential predictor of future cognitive decline or dementia. We investigated 
whether SCD in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) is a predictor of future 
cognitive decline. Forty-six cognitively normal patients with PD were selected 
using comprehensive neuropsychological tests, and classified depending on the 
presence (PD-SCD(+), n = 25) or absence of SCD (PD-SCD(-), n = 21). After a mean 
follow-up of 2.4 years, we repeated the cognitive assessments with the same 
subjects. The clinical characteristics and cognitive performance of the 2 groups 
did not differ at baseline. At the follow-up assessment, 11 patients in the 
PD-SCD(+) group (44.0%) and 2 in the PD-SCD(-) group (9.5%) were diagnosed with 
mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and the PD-SCD(+) patients showed more rapid 
decline in semantic fluency and visuospatial memory tasks than those in the 
PD-SCD(-) group. A multivariate logistic regression analysis showed that 
presence of SCD (odds ratio, 8.378; 95% confidential interval, 1.472-47.683, p = 
0.017) and higher Unified PD Rating Scale motor score of 20 or more (odds ratio, 
4.539; 95% confidential interval, 1.004-20.528; p = 0.049) were risk factors for 
incident MCI. Present results demonstrate that SCD in cognitively normal 
patients with PD is an independent risk factor for incident MCI and acts as a 
predictor for future cognitive decline.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.11.017
PMID: 24507441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3349. Protein Expr Purif. 2014 Apr;96:32-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.01.015. Epub 2014 
Feb 7.

Preparation, crystallization, and preliminary crystallographic analysis of 
wild-type and mutant human TREM-2 ectodomains linked to neurodegenerative and 
inflammatory diseases.

Kober DL(1), Wanhainen KM(2), Johnson BM(3), Randolph DT(2), Holtzman MJ(4), 
Brett TJ(5).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Microbiology and Microbial Pathogenesis Program, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Department of 
Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 
63110, United States.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, United States.
(3)Biochemistry Program, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 
63110, United States.
(4)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Drug 
Discovery Program in Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Washington University 
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States.
(5)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; Biochemistry and Molecular Biophysics, 
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, United States; 
Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, United States; Drug Discovery Program in Pulmonary and Critical 
Care Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, 
United States. Electronic address: tbrett@wustl.edu.

TREM-2 (triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells-2) is an innate immune 
receptor expressed on dendritic cells, macrophages, osteoclasts, and microglia. 
Recent genetic studies have reported the occurrence of point mutations in TREM-2 
that correlate with a dramatically increased risk for the development of 
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal 
dementia, and Parkinson's disease. Structural and biophysical studies of 
wild-type and mutant TREM-2 ectodomains are required to understand the 
functional consequences of these mutations. In order to facilitate these 
studies, we undertook the production and crystallization of these proteins. Here 
we demonstrate that, unlike many single Ig domain proteins, TREM-2 could not be 
readily refolded from bacterially-expressed inclusion bodies. Instead, we 
developed a mammalian-cell based expression system for the successful production 
of wild-type and mutant TREM-2 proteins in milligram quantities and a 
single-chromatography-step purification scheme that produced diffraction-quality 
crystals. These crystals diffract to a resolution of 3.3 Å and produce data 
sufficient for structure determination. We describe herein the procedures to 
produce wild-type and mutant human TREM-2 Ig domains in sufficient quantities 
for structural and biophysical studies. Such studies are crucial to understand 
the functional consequences of TREM-2 point mutations linked to the development 
of neurodegenerative diseases and, ultimately, to develop patient-specific 
molecular therapies to treat them.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pep.2014.01.015
PMCID: PMC3980731
PMID: 24508568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3350. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Apr;20(4):376-81. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.01.012. Epub 2014 Jan 23.

Long-term outcome of subthalamic nucleus DBS in Parkinson's disease: from the 
advanced phase towards the late stage of the disease?

Rizzone MG(1), Fasano A(2), Daniele A(2), Zibetti M(1), Merola A(1), Rizzi L(1), 
Piano C(2), Piccininni C(2), Romito LM(3), Lopiano L(4), Albanese A(5).

Author information:
(1)University of Torino, 'Rita Levi Montalcini' Department of Neuroscience, Via 
Cherasco, 15, 10126 Torino, Italy.
(2)University "Cattolica del Sacro Cuore", Department of Neurology, 00168 Roma, 
Italy.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico "Carlo Besta", 20133 Milano, Italy.
(4)University of Torino, 'Rita Levi Montalcini' Department of Neuroscience, Via 
Cherasco, 15, 10126 Torino, Italy. Electronic address: 
leonardo.lopiano@unito.it.
(5)University "Cattolica del Sacro Cuore", Department of Neurology, 00168 Roma, 
Italy; Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico "Carlo Besta", 20133 Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Deep Brain Stimulation of the Subthalamic Nucleus (STN-DBS) is an 
effective treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD), but only few studies 
investigated its long-term efficacy. Furthermore, little is known about the role 
of PD-subtype on STN-DBS long-term outcome.
OBJECTIVE: To report the results of a long-term follow-up (mean 11 years, range 
10-13) on 26 patients bilaterally implanted in two centres.
METHODS: Patients were assessed preoperatively and 1, 5 and 11 years after the 
implant by the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and a battery of 
neuropsychological tests. Stimulation parameters, drugs dosages, non-motor 
symptoms and adverse events were also recorded.
RESULTS: At 11 years, stimulation significantly improved the motor symptoms by 
35.8%, as compared to the preoperative off-state. Motor complications were well 
controlled, with a 84.6% improvement of dyskinesias and a 65.8% improvement of 
motor fluctuations. Despite this, the UPDRS-II-on score worsened by 88.5%, 
mainly for the worsening of poorly levodopa-responsive symptoms. More than 70% 
of the patients performed in the normal range in most of the neuropsychological 
tests, despite the development of dementia in 22.7%. Age at disease onset, axial 
subscore in off-condition and presence of REM behaviour disorder at baseline 
were found to be associated with a higher risk of developing disability over 
time.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study confirms the long-term safety and efficacy of STN-DBS in 
PD. Nevertheless, the functionality of patients worsens over time, mainly for 
the onset and progression of levodopa-resistant and non-motor symptoms. The role 
of PD-subtype seems to be relevant in the long-term outcome.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.01.012
PMID: 24508574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3351. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Apr;127(4):477-94. doi: 10.1007/s00401-014-1255-5. Epub 
2014 Feb 8.

Environmental neurotoxic challenge of conditional alpha-synuclein transgenic 
mice predicts a dopaminergic olfactory-striatal interplay in early PD.

Nuber S(1), Tadros D, Fields J, Overk CR, Ettle B, Kosberg K, Mante M, 
Rockenstein E, Trejo M, Masliah E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Dr., MTF 344, La Jolla, CA, 92093-0624, USA, snuber@ucsd.edu.

The olfactory bulb (OB) is one of the first brain regions in Parkinson's disease 
(PD) to contain alpha-synuclein (α-syn) inclusions, possibly associated with 
nonmotor symptoms. Mechanisms underlying olfactory synucleinopathy, its 
contribution to progressive aggregation pathology and nigrostriatal dopaminergic 
loss observed at later stages, remain unclear. A second hit, such as 
environmental toxins, is suggestive for α-syn aggregation in olfactory neurons, 
potentially triggering disease progression. To address the possible pathogenic 
role of olfactory α-syn accumulation in early PD, we exposed mice with 
site-specific and inducible overexpression of familial PD-linked mutant α-syn in 
OB neurons to a low dose of the herbicide paraquat. Here, we found that 
olfactory α-syn per se elicited structural and behavioral abnormalities, 
characteristic of an early time point in models with widespread α-syn 
expression, including hyperactivity and increased striatal dopaminergic marker. 
Suppression of α-syn reversed the dopaminergic phenotype. In contrast, paraquat 
treatment synergistically induced degeneration of olfactory dopaminergic cells 
and opposed the higher reactive phenotype. Neither neurodegeneration nor 
behavioral abnormalities were detected in paraquat-treated mice with suppressed 
α-syn expression. By increasing calpain activity, paraquat induced a 
pathological cascade leading to inhibition of autophagy clearance and 
accumulation of calpain-cleaved truncated and insoluble α-syn, recapitulating 
biochemical and structural changes in human PD. Thus our results underscore the 
primary role of proteolytic failure in aggregation pathology. In addition, we 
provide novel evidence that olfactory dopaminergic neurons display an increased 
vulnerability toward neurotoxins in dependence to presence of human α-syn, 
possibly mediating an olfactory-striatal dopaminergic network dysfunction in 
mouse models and early PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-014-1255-5
PMCID: PMC4324760
PMID: 24509835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3352. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2014 Jan 3;48:245-251. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.014. Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Novel action of metformin in the prevention of haloperidol-induced catalepsy in 
mice: Potential in the treatment of Parkinson's disease?

Adedeji HA(1), Ishola IO(1), Adeyemi OO(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Therapeutics and Toxicology, Faculty of Basic 
Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Lagos, PMB 12003, 
Idi-Araba, Lagos State, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Therapeutics and Toxicology, Faculty of Basic 
Medical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of Lagos, PMB 12003, 
Idi-Araba, Lagos State, Nigeria. Electronic address: ooadey@yahoo.com.

Metformin is widely used to treat type II diabetes and other metabolic 
syndromes. In addition, it has been shown to increase neurogenesis, spatial 
memory formation and reduce the risk of Parkinson's disease. On this basis, the 
aim of the present study was the investigation of the protective potential of 
metformin in the haloperidol-induced catalepsy model of Parkinson's disease in 
mice. The effect of metformin (20 - 100mg/kg, p.o) on motor coordination was 
assessed using rotarod and forced swimming tests (FST), while the effect on 
memory function was evaluated using the Y-maze test. The neuroprotective 
activity was investigated in acute/chronic (21days) haloperidol-induced 
catalepsy in mice. On the 21st day, biochemical estimation of nitrosative and 
oxidative stress parameters was carried out. Metformin (50 or 100mg/kg, p.o.) 
did not affect motor coordination in rotarod test and FST but significantly 
reversed haloperidol-induced memory deficit (+35.50%) at 100mg/kg. Importantly, 
metformin significantly reduced the duration of catalepsy score during acute and 
chronic catalepsy tests as compared to trihexylphenidyl (reference standard). 
Intraperitoneal chronic injection of haloperidol (1mg/kg) significantly 
increased malondialdehyde and nitrite levels, while it significantly attenuated 
the activity of reduced glutathione, catalase and superoxide dismutase. 
Moreover, oral chronic administration of metformin significantly attenuated the 
haloperidol-induced increase of malondialdehyde and nitrite, as well as the 
deficit of glutathione and catalase. These findings suggest that metformin 
protects against haloperidol-induced catalepsy through inhibition of 
oxidative/nitrosative stress and has the potential for adjuvant action in the 
management of Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2013.10.014
PMID: 24513020


3353. Brain Nerve. 2014 Feb;66(2):171-4.

[Correlation between cognitive and motor functions in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Murakami H(1), Kawamura M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Showa University.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) have a number of cognitive impairments 
even in the early phase of the disease. Anti-dementia drugs such as 
cholinesterase inhibitors and N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists 
are suggested to alleviate such impairments. This supports the simultaneous 
treatment of both cognitive and motor dysfunctions. Thus, the correlation 
between these two functions is attracting an increasing clinical interest. 
Previous studies show a correlation between executive/frontal dysfunction and 
motor symptoms. This correlation is suggested to be mediated by a dysfunction in 
the fronto-striatal circuit as a common pathophysiology of executive/frontal and 
motor dysfunction. Recently, we showed that visuospatial/parietal dysfunction 
also correlates with motor symptoms, especially postural stability. We argued 
that the parietal lobe and basal ganglia are functionally connected and that 
visuospatial dysfunction and postural instability share a common 
pathophysiology. Anti-dementia drugs such as donepezil and memantine are also 
suggested to promote relief for postural instability. These drugs may possibly 
affect the common pathophysiology between both cognitive and motor dysfunctions. 
Analysis of outcomes using medications which target both cognitive and motor 
functions may serve as pharmacological tool to determine the pathophysiology of 
these dysfunctions.

PMID: 24523315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3354. Clin Neuropsychol. 2014;28(2):333-43. doi: 10.1080/13854046.2014.881554. Epub 
2014 Feb 17.

Validation of the Turkish Version of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale 
(MoCA-TR) in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Ozdilek B(1), Kenangil G.

Author information:
(1)a Department of Neurology , Erenkoy Research and Education Hospital for 
Neurologic and Psychiatric Disorders , Istanbul , Turkey.

The study aimed to examine the reliability and validity of the Turkish version 
of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale (MoCA-TR) as a screening tool for 
cognitive dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD). A total of 50 patients with 
PD and 50 healthy controls were included. The screening instruments-MoCA-TR 
followed by the Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE-TR) and MoCA-TR retest 
within 1 month-and detailed neuropsychological testing were administered to the 
PD patients. MoCA-TR and MMSE-TR were also administered to controls. The 
discriminant validities of the MoCA-TR and MMSE-TR as screening and diagnostic 
instruments were ascertained. The concurrent and criterion validity, test-retest 
reliability, and internal consistency of the MoCA-TR and MMSE-TR were examined. 
The Cronbach's alpha of the MoCA-TR as an index of internal consistency was 
0.664, and the test-retest reliability of MoCA-TR was 0.742. With a cut-off 
score of < 21 points, the MoCA-TR showed sensitivity of 59% and specificity of 
89% in the detection of cognitive dysfunction in PD. The area under the 
receiver-operating characteristics curve (95% confidence interval) for MoCA-TR 
was 0.794 (0.670-0.918), p<.001. The present results indicated that the MoCA-TR 
has acceptable psychometric properties and it should be used to assess mild 
cognitive impairment and early dementia in PD patients, whereas the MMSE-TR 
should remain the instrument of choice to assess cognitive impairment in PD 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1080/13854046.2014.881554
PMID: 24528299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3355. Curr Genomics. 2013 Dec;14(8):534-42. doi: 10.2174/1389202914666131210210559.

Homocysteine Level and Mechanisms of Injury in Parkinson's Disease as Related to 
MTHFR, MTR, and MTHFD1 Genes Polymorphisms and L-Dopa Treatment.

Rozycka A(1), Jagodzinski PP(1), Kozubski W(2), Lianeri M(1), Dorszewska J(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, 6 Swiecickiego St, 60-781, Poznan, Poland.
(2)Department of Neurology, Poznan University of Medical Sciences, 49 
Przybyszewskiego St, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.
(3)Laboratory of Neurobiology, Department of Neurology, Poznan University of 
Medical Sciences, 49 Przybyszewskiego St, 60-355 Poznan, Poland.

An elevated concentration of total homocysteine (tHcy) in plasma and 
cerebrospinal fluid is considered to be a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Homocysteine (Hcy) levels are influenced by 
folate concentrations and numerous genetic factors through the folate cycle, 
however, their role in the pathogenesis of PD remains controversial. Hcy exerts 
a neurotoxic action and may participate in the mechanisms of neurodegeneration, 
such as excitotoxicity, oxidative stress, calcium accumulation, and apoptosis. 
Elevated Hcy levels can lead to prooxidative activity, most probably through 
direct interaction with N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors and sensitization 
of dopaminergic neurons to age-related dysfunction and death. Several studies 
have shown that higher concentration of Hcy in PD is related to long-term 
administration of levodopa (L-dopa). An elevation of plasma tHcy levels can also 
reflect deficiencies of cofactors in remethylation of Hcy to methionine (Met) 
(folates and vitamin B12) and in its transsulfuration to cysteine (Cys) (vitamin 
B6). It is believed that the increase in the concentration of Hcy in PD can 
affect genetic polymorphisms of the folate metabolic pathway genes, such as 
MTHFR (C677T, A1298C and G1793A), MTR (A2756G), and MTHFD1 (G1958A), whose 
frequencies tend to increase in PD patients, as well as the reduced 
concentration of B vitamins. In PD, increased levels of Hcy may lead to 
dementia, depression and progression of the disease.

DOI: 10.2174/1389202914666131210210559
PMCID: PMC3924248
PMID: 24532985


3356. Clin Interv Aging. 2014 Feb 12;9:275-81. doi: 10.2147/CIA.S47367. eCollection 
2014.

Assessment of cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease: 
prevalence and risk factors.

Wang Q(1), Zhang Z(2), Li L(2), Wen H(2), Xu Q(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China ; Department of 
Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Although Parkinson's disease (PD) is clinically characterized by 
motor symptoms, cognitive impairment is one of the most disabling non-motor 
symptoms. Despite it attracting increasing attention worldwide, less is known 
about its prevalence in the Chinese population. The objective of this study was 
to assess cognitive impairment and related risk factors in Chinese PD patients.
METHODS: We collected the demographic, diagnostic, and treatment information of 
901 PD patients from 42 centers throughout the People's Republic of China, then 
administered a battery of neuropsychological tests, to assess motor, cognitive, 
and neuropsychiatric symptoms.
RESULTS: Overall, 193 of 901 (21.4%) PD patients met the criteria for dementia 
(PD-D), and 206 (22.8%) met the criteria for mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI). 
Visuospatial dysfunction and attention/executive impairment predominated. 
Increased severity of cognitive impairment was associated with greater motor 
impairment. Patients with psychiatric symptoms, such as depression and 
hallucinations, were more likely to have dementia. Potentially, the younger-aged 
and more educated are shown less cognitive impairment, but age at onset, and 
levodopa equivalent dose, were not associated with the presence of cognitive 
dysfunction.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence and profile of cognitive impairment in Chinese PD 
patients, as well as the risk factors, are similar as those reported for other 
races, but the frequency of nonamnestic cognitive domains differs.

DOI: 10.2147/CIA.S47367
PMCID: PMC3926705
PMID: 24550669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3357. J Bone Joint Surg Am. 2014 Feb 19;96(4):e27. doi: 10.2106/JBJS.L.01317.

Relative mortality in U.S. Medicare beneficiaries with Parkinson disease and hip 
and pelvic fractures.

Harris-Hayes M(1), Willis AW(2), Klein SE(2), Czuppon S(1), Crowner B(1), 
Racette BA(2).

Author information:
(1)Program in Physical Therapy, Washington University School of Medicine, 4444 
Forest Park, Campus Box 8502, St. Louis, MO 63108. E-mail address for M. 
Harris-Hayes: harrisma@wustl.edu.
(2)Departments of Neurology (A.W.W. and B.A.R.) and Orthopedic Surgery (S.E.K.), 
Washington University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, Campus Box 
8111, St. Louis, MO 63110.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson disease is a neurodegenerative disease that affects gait 
and postural stability, resulting in an increased risk of falling. The purpose 
of this study was to estimate mortality associated with demographic factors 
after hip or pelvic (hip/pelvic) fracture in people with Parkinson disease. A 
secondary goal was to compare the mortality associated with Parkinson disease to 
that associated with other common medical conditions in patients with hip/pelvic 
fracture.
METHODS: This was a retrospective observational cohort study of 1,980,401 
elderly Medicare beneficiaries diagnosed with hip/pelvic fracture from 2000 to 
2005 who were identified with use of the Beneficiary Annual Summary File. The 
race/ethnicity distribution of the sample was white (93.2%), black (3.8%), 
Hispanic (1.2%), and Asian (0.6%). Individuals with Parkinson disease (131,215) 
were identified with use of outpatient and carrier claims. Cox proportional 
hazards models were used to estimate the risk of death associated with 
demographic and clinical variables and to compare mortality after hip/pelvic 
fracture between patients with Parkinson disease and those with other medical 
conditions associated with high mortality after hip/pelvic fracture, after 
adjustment for race/ethnicity, sex, age, and modified Charlson comorbidity 
score.
RESULTS: Among those with Parkinson disease, women had lower mortality after 
hip/pelvic fracture than men (adjusted hazard ratio [HR] = 0.63, 95% confidence 
interval [CI]) = 0.62 to 0.64), after adjustment for covariates. Compared with 
whites, blacks had a higher (HR = 1.12, 95% CI = 1.09 to 1.16) and Hispanics had 
a lower (HR = 0.87, 95% CI = 0.81 to 0.95) mortality, after adjustment for 
covariates. Overall, the adjusted mortality rate after hip/pelvic fracture in 
individuals with Parkinson disease (HR = 2.41, 95% CI = 2.37 to 2.46) was 
substantially elevated compared with those without the disease, a finding 
similar to the increased mortality associated with a diagnosis of dementia (HR = 
2.73, 95% CI = 2.68 to 2.79), kidney disease (HR = 2.66, 95% CI = 2.60 to 2.72), 
and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (HR = 2.48, 95% CI = 2.43 to 2.53).
CONCLUSIONS: Mortality after hip/pelvic fracture in Parkinson disease varies 
according to demographic factors. Mortality after hip/pelvic fracture is 
substantially increased among those with Parkinson disease.

DOI: 10.2106/JBJS.L.01317
PMCID: PMC3918936
PMID: 24553896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3358. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Apr;127(4):459-75. doi: 10.1007/s00401-014-1261-7. Epub 
2014 Feb 20.

Olfactory bulb involvement in neurodegenerative diseases.

Attems J(1), Walker L, Jellinger KA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.

Olfactory dysfunction is a common and early symptom of many neurodegenerative 
diseases, particularly of Parkinson's disease and other synucleinopathies, 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and mild cognitive impairment heralding its 
progression to dementia. The neuropathologic changes of olfactory dysfunction in 
neurodegenerative diseases may involve the olfactory epithelium, olfactory 
bulb/tract, primary olfactory cortices, and their secondary targets. Olfactory 
dysfunction is related to deposition of pathological proteins, α-synuclein, 
hyperphosphorylated tau protein, and neurofilament protein in these areas, 
featured by neurofibrillary tangles, Lewy bodies and neurites inducing a complex 
cascade of molecular processes including oxidative damage, neuroinflammation, 
and cytosolic disruption of cellular processes leading to cell death. Damage to 
cholinergic, serotonergic, and noradrenergic systems is likely involved, since 
such damage is most marked in those diseases with severe anosmia. Recent studies 
of olfactory dysfunction have focused its potential as an early biomarker for 
the diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders and their disease progression. 
Here, we summarize the current knowledge on neuropathological and 
pathophysiological changes of the olfactory system in the most frequent 
neurodegenerative diseases, in particular AD and synucleinopathies. We also 
present neuropathological findings in the olfactory bulb and tract in a large 
autopsy cohort (n = 536, 57.8 % female, mean age 81.3 years). The severity of 
olfactory bulb HPτ, Aβ, and αSyn pathology correlated and increased 
significantly (P < 0.001) with increasing neuritic Braak stages, Thal Aβ phases, 
and cerebral Lewy body pathology, respectively. Hence, further studies are 
warranted to investigate the potential role of olfactory biopsies (possibly 
restricted to the olfactory epithelium) in the diagnostic process of 
neurodegenerative diseases in particular in clinical drug trials to identify 
subjects showing early, preclinical stages of neurodegeneration and to stratify 
clinically impaired cohorts according to the underlying cerebral neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-014-1261-7
PMID: 24554308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3359. J Neurotrauma. 2014 Jul 1;31(13):1180-93. doi: 10.1089/neu.2013.3080. Epub 2014 
May 8.

Delayed increases in microvascular pathology after experimental traumatic brain 
injury are associated with prolonged inflammation, blood-brain barrier 
disruption, and progressive white matter damage.

Glushakova OY(1), Johnson D, Hayes RL.

Author information:
(1)Banyan Biomarkers, Inc. , Alachua, Florida.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is a significant risk factor for chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy (CTE), Alzheimer's disease (AD), and Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Cerebral microbleeds, focal inflammation, and white matter damage are associated 
with many neurological and neurodegenerative disorders including CTE, AD, PD, 
vascular dementia, stroke, and TBI. This study evaluates microvascular 
abnormalities observed at acute and chronic stages following TBI in rats, and 
examines pathological processes associated with these abnormalities. TBI in 
adult rats was induced by controlled cortical impact (CCI) of two magnitudes. 
Brain pathology was assessed in white matter of the corpus callosum for 24 h to 
3 months following injury using immunohistochemistry (IHC). TBI resulted in 
focal microbleeds that were related to the magnitude of injury. At the lower 
magnitude of injury, microbleeds gradually increased over the 3 month duration 
of the study. IHC revealed TBI-induced focal abnormalities including blood-brain 
barrier (BBB) damage (IgG), endothelial damage (intercellular adhesion molecule 
1 [ICAM-1]), activation of reactive microglia (ionized calcium binding adaptor 
molecule 1 [Iba1]), gliosis (glial fibrillary acidic protein [GFAP]) and 
macrophage-mediated inflammation (cluster of differentiation 68 [CD68]), all 
showing different temporal profiles. At chronic stages (up to 3 months), 
apparent myelin loss (Luxol fast blue) and scattered deposition of microbleeds 
were observed. Microbleeds were surrounded by glial scars and co-localized with 
CD68 and IgG puncta stainings, suggesting that localized BBB breakdown and 
inflammation were associated with vascular damage. Our results indicate that 
evolving white matter degeneration following experimental TBI is associated with 
significantly delayed microvascular damage and focal microbleeds that are 
temporally and regionally associated with development of punctate BBB breakdown 
and progressive inflammatory responses. Increased understanding of mechanisms 
underlying delayed microvascular damage following TBI could provide novel 
insights into chronic pathological responses to TBI and potential common 
mechanisms underlying TBI and neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2013.3080
PMID: 24564198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3360. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2014 Jun;27(2):139-44. doi: 
10.1177/0891988714522700. Epub 2014 Feb 26.

Screening for Mild Cognitive Impairment Using the Dementia Rating Scale-2.

Springate BA(1), Tremont G(2), Papandonatos G(3), Ott BR(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA Department of Psychiatry, Rhode Island Hospital, 
Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Alpert Medical School of Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA Department of Psychiatry, Rhode Island Hospital, 
Providence, RI, USA gtremont@lifespan.org.
(3)Department of Biostatistics, Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, 
Providence, RI, USA Department of Neurology, Rhode Island Hospital, Providence, 
RI, USA.

This study examined the sensitivity and specificity of the Dementia Rating 
Scale-2 (DRS-2) to distinguish individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
from both patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and healthy controls (HCs). A 
total of 50 HCs, 98 patients with MCI, and 49 patients with AD completed a 
neurological examination and battery of neuropsychological tests that included 
the DRS-2. Across almost all subscales of the DRS-2, patients with AD scored 
significantly worse than patients with MCI who in turn performed more poorly 
than the HCs. The only exception was the construction subscale where no 
significant difference was found between patients with MCI and the HCs. At a 
cutoff of 136, the sensitivity was 71% and specificity was 86% for 
distinguishing between patients with MCI and the HCs. Sensitivity was 82% and 
specificity was 78% for distinguishing between patients with MCI and patients 
with AD (cutoff score <124). For distinguishing between patients (with MCI and 
AD) and the HCs, sensitivity was 81% and specificity was 86% at a cutoff of 136. 
Our findings suggest the DRS-2 is a brief, easily administered cognitive test 
that appears to be useful in assisting with the detection of MCI.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988714522700
PMID: 24578462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3361. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014 Mar;95(3 Suppl):S245-56. doi: 
10.1016/j.apmr.2013.06.036.

Systematic review of the risk of dementia and chronic cognitive impairment after 
mild traumatic brain injury: results of the International Collaboration on Mild 
Traumatic Brain Injury Prognosis.

Godbolt AK(1), Cancelliere C(2), Hincapié CA(3), Marras C(4), Boyle E(5), 
Kristman VL(6), Coronado VG(7), Cassidy JD(8).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Rehabilitation Medicine, Danderyd Hospital, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. Electronic address: 
alison.godbolt@ki.se.
(2)Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University 
of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Centre, and the Edmond J. Safra 
Program in Parkinson's Research, Toronto Western Hospital, University Health 
Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(5)Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Faculty of Health, Institute of Sport Science 
and Clinical Biomechanics, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.
(6)Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Department of Health Sciences, Lakehead 
University, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada; Institute for Work and Health, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Division of Human Sciences, Northern Ontario School of 
Medicine, Lakehead University, Thunder Bay, Ontario, Canada.
(7)National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, Centers for Disease 
Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA.
(8)Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada; Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Division of Epidemiology, Dalla Lana School 
of Public Health, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Faculty of 
Health, Institute of Sport Science and Clinical Biomechanics, University of 
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: To synthesize the best available evidence regarding the risk of 
dementia and chronic cognitive impairment (CCI) after mild traumatic brain 
injury (MTBI).
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE and other databases were searched (2001-2012) using a 
previously published search strategy and predefined criteria. Peer-reviewed 
reports in 6 languages were considered.
STUDY SELECTION: Systematic reviews, meta-analyses, randomized controlled 
trials, cohort studies, and case-control studies, with a minimum of 30 MTBI 
cases in subjects of any age, assessing the risk of dementia or CCI after MTBI 
were selected.
DATA EXTRACTION: Eligible studies were critically appraised using a modification 
of the Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network criteria. Two reviewers 
independently reviewed each study and extracted data from accepted articles (ie, 
with a low risk of bias) into evidence tables.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Evidence from accepted studies was synthesized qualitatively 
according to modified Scottish Intercollegiate Guidelines Network criteria, and 
prognostic information was prioritized as exploratory or confirmatory according 
to design. Of 77,914 records screened, 299 articles were eligible and reviewed. 
Methodological quality was acceptable for 101 (34%) articles, of which 1 article 
considered dementia and 7 articles considered CCI. The study examining the risk 
of dementia after MTBI did not find an association. One randomized controlled 
trial found that being informed about possible cognitive dysfunction after MTBI 
was associated with worse cognitive performance on standard tests. Children with 
MTBI and intracranial pathology ("complicated" MTBI) performed worse than did 
children without intracranial pathology. Children showed higher rates of 
cognitive symptoms a year after MTBI than did a control group.
CONCLUSIONS: There is a lack of evidence of an increased risk of dementia after 
MTBI. In children, objective evidence of CCI exists only for complicated MTBI. 
More definitive studies are needed to inform clinical decisions, assessment of 
prognosis, and public health policy.

Copyright © 2014 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apmr.2013.06.036
PMID: 24581910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3362. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 20;10(2):e1004173. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004173. 
eCollection 2014 Feb.

Molecular evidence for the inverse comorbidity between central nervous system 
disorders and cancers detected by transcriptomic meta-analyses.

Ibáñez K(1), Boullosa C(1), Tabarés-Seisdedos R(2), Baudot A(3), Valencia A(1).

Author information:
(1)Structural Biology and Biocomputing Programme, Spanish National Cancer, 
Research Centre (CNIO), Madrid, Spain.
(2)Department of Medicine, University of Valencia, CIBERSAM, INCLIVA, Valencia, 
Spain.
(3)Aix-Marseille Université, CNRS, I2M, UMR 7373, Marseille, France.

There is epidemiological evidence that patients with certain Central Nervous 
System (CNS) disorders have a lower than expected probability of developing some 
types of Cancer. We tested here the hypothesis that this inverse comorbidity is 
driven by molecular processes common to CNS disorders and Cancers, and that are 
deregulated in opposite directions. We conducted transcriptomic meta-analyses of 
three CNS disorders (Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Schizophrenia) 
and three Cancer types (Lung, Prostate, Colorectal) previously described with 
inverse comorbidities. A significant overlap was observed between the genes 
upregulated in CNS disorders and downregulated in Cancers, as well as between 
the genes downregulated in CNS disorders and upregulated in Cancers. We also 
observed expression deregulations in opposite directions at the level of 
pathways. Our analysis points to specific genes and pathways, the upregulation 
of which could increase the incidence of CNS disorders and simultaneously lower 
the risk of developing Cancer, while the downregulation of another set of genes 
and pathways could contribute to a decrease in the incidence of CNS disorders 
while increasing the Cancer risk. These results reinforce the previously 
proposed involvement of the PIN1 gene, Wnt and P53 pathways, and reveal 
potential new candidates, in particular related with protein degradation 
processes.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004173
PMCID: PMC3930576
PMID: 24586201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


3363. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 19;9(2):e89020. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089020. 
eCollection 2014.

Neuronal-specific deficiency of the splicing factor Tra2b causes apoptosis in 
neurogenic areas of the developing mouse brain.

Storbeck M(1), Hupperich K(1), Gaspar JA(2), Meganathan K(2), Martínez Carrera 
L(1), Wirth R(3), Sachinidis A(2), Wirth B(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany ; 
Institute of Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany ; Center for 
Molecular Medicine, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Insitute of Neurophysiology, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(3)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Alternative splicing (AS) increases the informational content of the genome and 
is more prevalent in the brain than in any other tissue. The splicing factor 
Tra2b (Sfrs10) can modulate splicing inclusion of exons by specifically 
detecting GAA-rich binding motifs and its absence causes early embryonic 
lethality in mice. TRA2B has been shown to be involved in splicing processes of 
Nasp (nuclear autoantigenic sperm protein), MAPT (microtubule associated protein 
tau) and SMN (survival motor neuron), and is therefore implicated in 
spermatogenesis and neurological diseases like Alzheimer's disease, dementia, 
Parkinson's disease and spinal muscular atrophy. Here we generated a 
neuronal-specific Tra2b knock-out mouse that lacks Tra2b expression in neuronal 
and glial precursor cells by using the Nestin-Cre. Neuronal-specific Tra2b 
knock-out mice die immediately after birth and show severe abnormalities in 
cortical development, which are caused by massive apoptotic events in the 
ventricular layers of the cortex, demonstrating a pivotal role of Tra2b for the 
developing central nervous system. Using whole brain RNA on exon arrays we 
identified differentially expressed alternative exons of Tubulinδ1 and 
Shugoshin-like2 as in vivo targets of Tra2b. Most interestingly, we found 
increased expression of the cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 1a (p21) which we 
could functionally link to neuronal precursor cells in the affected brain 
regions. We provide further evidence that the absence of Tra2b causes p21 
upregulation and ultimately cell death in NSC34 neuronal-like cells. These 
findings demonstrate that Tra2b regulates splicing events essential for 
maintaining neuronal viability during development. Apoptotic events triggered 
via p21 might not be restricted to the developing brain but could possibly be 
generalized to the whole organism and explain early embryonic lethality in 
Tra2b-depleted mice.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089020
PMCID: PMC3929626
PMID: 24586484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3364. PLoS One. 2014 Feb 26;9(2):e89741. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089741. 
eCollection 2014.

Neurodegenerative disorder risk in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder: study 
in 174 patients.

Iranzo A(1), Fernández-Arcos A(2), Tolosa E(1), Serradell M(2), Molinuevo JL(2), 
Valldeoriola F(1), Gelpi E(3), Vilaseca I(4), Sánchez-Valle R(2), Lladó A(2), 
Gaig C(1), Santamaría J(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain ; 
CIBERNED, Barcelona, Spain.
(2)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(3)Neurological Tissue Bank, Biobanc-Hospital Clinic, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Otorhinolaryngology Service, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, CIBER Enfermedades 
Respiratorias, Bunyola, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the risk for developing a defined neurodegenerative 
syndrome in a large cohort of idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (IRBD) 
patients with long follow-up.
METHODS: Using the Kaplan-Meier method, we estimated the disease-free survival 
rate from defined neurodegenerative syndromes in all the consecutive IRBD 
patients diagnosed and followed-up in our tertiary referal sleep center between 
November 1991 and July 2013.
RESULTS: The cohort comprises 174 patients with a median age at diagnosis of 
IRBD of 69 years and a median follow-up of four years. The risk of a defined 
neurodegenerative syndrome from the time of IRBD diagnosis was 33.1% at five 
years, 75.7% at ten years, and 90.9% at 14 years. The median conversion time was 
7.5 years. Emerging diagnoses (37.4%) were dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) in 29 
subjects, Parkinson disease (PD) in 22, multiple system atrophy (MSA) in two, 
and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in 12. In six cases, in whom postmortem was 
performed, neuropathological examination disclosed neuronal loss and widespread 
Lewy-type pathology in the brain in each case.
CONCLUSIONS: In a large IRBD cohort diagnosed in a tertiary referal sleep 
center, prolonged follow-up indicated that the majority of patients are 
eventually diagnosed with the synucleinopathies PD, DLB and less frequently MSA. 
IRBD represented the prodromal period of these conditions. Our findings in IRBD 
have important implications in clinical practice, in the investigation of the 
early pathological events occurring in the synucleinopathies, and for the design 
of interventions with potential disease-modifying agents.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0089741
PMCID: PMC3935943
PMID: 24587002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3365. Mol Neurobiol. 2014 Aug;50(1):168-76. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8661-5. Epub 2014 
Mar 5.

Lipid integration in neurodegeneration: an overview of Alzheimer's disease.

Yadav RS(1), Tiwari NK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Criminology and Forensic Science, School of Applied Sciences, 
Dr. Harisingh Gour Central University, Sagar, MP, 470003, India.

Various types of lipids and their metabolic products associated with the 
biological membrane play a crucial role in signal transduction, modulation, and 
activation of receptors and as precursors of bioactive lipid mediators. 
Dysfunction in the lipid homeostasis in the brain could be a risk factor for the 
many types of neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, 
Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
These neurodegenerative disorders are marked by extensive neuronal apoptosis, 
gliosis, and alteration in the differentiation, proliferation, and development 
of neurons. Sphingomyelin, a constituent of plasma membrane, as well as its 
primary metabolite ceramide acts as a potential lipid second messenger molecule 
linked with the modulation of various cellular signaling pathways. Excessive 
production of reactive oxygen species associated with enhanced oxidative stress 
has been implicated with these molecules and involved in the regulation of a 
variety of different neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory disorders. Studies 
have shown that alterations in the levels of plasma lipid/cholesterol 
concentration may result to neurodegenerative diseases. Alteration in the levels 
of inflammatory cytokines and mediators in the brain has also been found to be 
implicated in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative diseases. Although 
several mechanisms involved in neuronal apoptosis have been described, the 
molecular mechanisms underlying the correlation between lipid metabolism and the 
neurological deficits are not clearly understood. In the present review, an 
attempt has been made to provide detailed information about the association of 
lipids in neurodegeneration especially in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-014-8661-5
PMID: 24590317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3366. Brain. 2014 Apr;137(Pt 4):1120-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu036. Epub 2014 Mar 10.

Mild cognitive impairment is linked with faster rate of cortical thinning in 
patients with Parkinson's disease longitudinally.

Hanganu A(1), Bedetti C, Degroot C, Mejia-Constain B, Lafontaine AL, Soland V, 
Chouinard S, Bruneau MA, Mellah S, Belleville S, Monchi O.

Author information:
(1)1 Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, QC, 
Canada.

Comment in
    Brain. 2015 Jan;138(Pt 1):e319.
    Brain. 2015 Jan;138(Pt 1):e320.

Previous studies have shown greater atrophy in grey and white matter of various 
brain regions in patients with Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive 
impairment than in those without. These anatomical differences likely account 
for the distinct clinical profiles observed between those groups, but do not 
account for the evolution of regional brain degradation observed as the disease 
evolves. Although we have shown recently that cortical thinning correlates 
significantly more with disease duration in Parkinson's patients with mild 
cognitive impairment than in those without, to the best of our knowledge no 
study to date has explored this longitudinally. The present study investigated 
the longitudinal changes of the cortical and subcortical grey matter in patients 
with Parkinson's disease with and without mild cognitive impairment. 
Additionally, these two groups were compared with healthy controls. We found a 
higher rate of cortical thinning in the temporal, occipital, parietal and 
supplementary motor area, in patients with Parkinson's disease with mild 
cognitive impairment compared with both cognitively stable patients and healthy 
controls. On the other hand cognitively stable patients had only one lateral 
occipital and one fusiform cluster with increased rate of thinning compared with 
healthy individuals. Correlating the rate of change of cortical thickness with 
the results of Montreal Cognitive Assessment scores revealed significant 
thinning associated with cognitive decline in the group of all patients, in 
similar regions including temporal and medial occipital lobe. Finally, a 
significant decrease in the volume of the amygdala and nucleus accumbens was 
observed specifically in patients with Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive 
impairment. These results indicate that the early presence of mild cognitive 
impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease is associated with a faster rate 
of grey matter thinning in various cortical regions as well as a significant 
diminishment of limbic subcortical structures. This specific pattern of brain 
degradation associated with the early presence of mild cognitive impairment 
might serve as a marker of development toward dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu036
PMID: 24613932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3367. Mov Disord. 2014 Apr;29(4):454-62. doi: 10.1002/mds.25844. Epub 2014 Mar 11.

Time to redefine PD? Introductory statement of the MDS Task Force on the 
definition of Parkinson's disease.

Berg D(1), Postuma RB, Bloem B, Chan P, Dubois B, Gasser T, Goetz CG, Halliday 
GM, Hardy J, Lang AE, Litvan I, Marek K, Obeso J, Oertel W, Olanow CW, Poewe W, 
Stern M, Deuschl G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research 
and German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tuebingen, Germany.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2016 Nov;31(11):1633-1639.
    Mov Disord. 2016 Nov;31(11):1619-1622.

With advances in knowledge disease, boundaries may change. Occasionally, these 
changes are of such a magnitude that they require redefinition of the disease. 
In recognition of the profound changes in our understanding of Parkinson's 
disease (PD), the International Parkinson and Movement Disorders Society (MDS) 
commissioned a task force to consider a redefinition of PD. This review is a 
discussion article, intended as the introductory statement of the task force. 
Several critical issues were identified that challenge current PD definitions. 
First, new findings challenge the central role of the classical pathologic 
criteria as the arbiter of diagnosis, notably genetic cases without synuclein 
deposition, the high prevalence of incidental Lewy body (LB) deposition, and the 
nonmotor prodrome of PD. It remains unclear, however, whether these challenges 
merit a change in the pathologic gold standard, especially considering the 
limitations of alternate gold standards. Second, the increasing recognition of 
dementia in PD challenges the distinction between diffuse LB disease and PD. 
Consideration might be given to removing dementia as an exclusion criterion for 
PD diagnosis. Third, there is increasing recognition of disease heterogeneity, 
suggesting that PD subtypes should be formally identified; however, current 
subtype classifications may not be sufficiently robust to warrant formal 
delineation. Fourth, the recognition of a nonmotor prodrome of PD requires that 
new diagnostic criteria for early-stage and prodromal PD should be created; 
here, essential features of these criteria are proposed. Finally, there is a 
need to create new MDS diagnostic criteria that take these changes in disease 
definition into consideration.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25844
PMCID: PMC4204150
PMID: 24619848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3368. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;41(2):467-77. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131856.

Mortality risk after dementia diagnosis by dementia type and underlying factors: 
a cohort of 15,209 patients based on the Swedish Dementia Registry.

Garcia-Ptacek S(1), Farahmand B(2), Kåreholt I(3), Religa D(4), Cuadrado ML(5), 
Eriksdotter M(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences 
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Department of Medicine, 
Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain.
(2)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences 
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(3)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden Institute of Gerontology, School of Health Sciences, Jönköping 
University, Jönköping, Sweden.
(4)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska 
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Division of KI-ADRC, Department of Neurobiology, 
Care Sciences and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Department of Medicine, Universidad Complutense, Madrid, Spain Neurology 
department, Hospital Clínico San Carlos, Madrid, Spain.
(6)Division of Clinical Geriatrics, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences 
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden Department of Geriatric 
Medicine, Karolinska University Hospital, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Knowledge on survival in dementia is crucial for patients and public 
health planning. Most studies comparing mortality risk included few different 
dementia diagnoses.
OBJECTIVES: To compare mortality risk in the most frequent dementia disorders in 
a large cohort of patients with an incident diagnosis, adjusting for potential 
confounding factors.
METHODS: 15,209 patients with dementia from the national quality database, 
Swedish Dementia Registry (SveDem), diagnosed in memory clinics from 2008 to 
2011, were included in this study. The impact of age, gender, dementia 
diagnosis, baseline Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), institutionalization, 
coresidency, and medication on survival after diagnosis were examined using 
adjusted hazard ratios (HR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI).
RESULTS: During a mean follow-up of 2.5 years, 4,287 deaths occurred, with 114 
(95% CI 111-117) deaths/1,000 person-years. Adjusted HR of death for men was 
1.56 (95% CI 1.46-1.66) compared to women. Low MMSE, institutionalization, and 
higher number of medications were associated with higher HR of death. All 
dementia diagnoses demonstrated higher HR compared to Alzheimer's disease, with 
vascular dementia presenting the highest crude HR. After adjusting, 
frontotemporal dementia had the highest risk with a HR of 1.91 (95% CI 
1.52-2.39), followed by Lewy body dementia (HR 1.64; 95% CI 1.39-1.95), vascular 
dementia (HR 1.55; 95% CI 1.42-1.69), Parkinson's disease dementia (HR 1.47; 95% 
CI 1.17-1.84), and mixed Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia (HR 1.32; 95% 
CI 1.22-1.44).
CONCLUSION: Worse cognition, male gender, higher number of medications, 
institutionalization, and age were associated with increased death risk after 
dementia diagnosis. Adjusted risk was lowest in Alzheimer's disease patients and 
highest in frontotemporal dementia subjects.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-131856
PMID: 24625796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3369. J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4(2):181-7. doi: 10.3233/JPD-130277.

Olfactory dysfunction and dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Takeda A(1), Baba T(2), Kikuchi A(3), Hasegawa T(3), Sugeno N(3), Konno M(3), 
Miura E(1), Mori E(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Sendai-Nishitgaga 
Hospital, Kagitori-honcho, Taihaku-ku, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Seiryo-machi, 
Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Seiryo-machi, Aoba-ku, Sendai, Japan.

Dementia is one of the most debilitating symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD), 
but the development of dementia is still difficult to predict at early stages of 
the disease. We recently found that hyposmia, one of the most typical non-motor 
features of PD, was a predictive feature of Parkinson's disease with dementia 
(PDD). In that work, multivariate logistic analysis identified severe hyposmia 
and visuoperceptual impairment as independent risk factors for subsequent 
dementia within 3 years. The patients with severe hyposmia had an 18.7-fold 
increase in their risk of dementia for each 1 SD (2.8) decrease in scores on the 
odor stick identification test for Japanese (OSIT-J). We also found an 
association between severe hyposmia and a specific pattern of cerebral metabolic 
decline, which was identical to findings observed in PDD. Furthermore, 
volumetric magnetic resonance imaging analyses demonstrated close relationships 
between olfactory dysfunction and atrophy of focal brain structures, including 
the amygdala and other limbic structures. Our findings suggest that brain 
regions related to olfactory function are closely associated with cognitive 
decline and that severe hyposmia is a prominent clinical feature that predicts 
the subsequent development of PDD. We have now started a randomized, 
double-blind study using donepezil for the PD group with severe hyposmia. We 
hope that this clinical trial will allow us to establish a therapeutic 
intervention that can improve the prognosis of advanced PD.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-130277
PMID: 24625830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3370. Dis Model Mech. 2014 May;7(5):571-82. doi: 10.1242/dmm.013185. Epub 2014 Mar 13.

Axon degeneration and PGC-1α-mediated protection in a zebrafish model of 
α-synuclein toxicity.

O'Donnell KC(1), Lulla A, Stahl MC, Wheat ND, Bronstein JM, Sagasti A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

α-synuclein (aSyn) expression is implicated in neurodegenerative processes, 
including Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). In 
animal models of these diseases, axon pathology often precedes cell death, 
raising the question of whether aSyn has compartment-specific toxic effects that 
could require early and/or independent therapeutic intervention. The relevance 
of axonal pathology to degeneration can only be addressed through longitudinal, 
in vivo monitoring of different neuronal compartments. With current imaging 
methods, dopaminergic neurons do not readily lend themselves to such a task in 
any vertebrate system. We therefore expressed human wild-type aSyn in zebrafish 
peripheral sensory neurons, which project elaborate superficial axons that can 
be continuously imaged in vivo. Axonal outgrowth was normal in these neurons 
but, by 2 days post-fertilization (dpf), many aSyn-expressing axons became 
dystrophic, with focal varicosities or diffuse beading. Approximately 20% of 
aSyn-expressing cells died by 3 dpf. Time-lapse imaging revealed that focal 
axonal swelling, but not overt fragmentation, usually preceded cell death. 
Co-expressing aSyn with a mitochondrial reporter revealed deficits in 
mitochondrial transport and morphology even when axons appeared overtly normal. 
The axon-protective protein Wallerian degeneration slow (WldS) delayed axon 
degeneration but not cell death caused by aSyn. By contrast, the transcriptional 
coactivator PGC-1α, which has roles in the regulation of mitochondrial 
biogenesis and reactive-oxygen-species detoxification, abrogated aSyn toxicity 
in both the axon and the cell body. The rapid onset of axonal pathology in this 
system, and the relatively moderate degree of cell death, provide a new model 
for the study of aSyn toxicity and protection. Moreover, the accessibility of 
peripheral sensory axons will allow effects of aSyn to be studied in different 
neuronal compartments and might have utility in screening for novel 
disease-modifying compounds.

DOI: 10.1242/dmm.013185
PMCID: PMC4007408
PMID: 24626988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3371. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jun;20(6):637-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.02.023. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Serum uric acid and risk of dementia in Parkinson's disease.

González-Aramburu I(1), Sánchez-Juan P(2), Sierra M(1), Fernández-Juan E(3), 
Sánchez-Quintana C(1), Berciano J(2), Combarros O(2), Infante J(4).

Author information:
(1)Service of Neurology, Universitary Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla (IFIMAV), 
University of Cantabria (UC), Santander, Spain.
(2)Service of Neurology, Universitary Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla (IFIMAV), 
University of Cantabria (UC), Santander, Spain; Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain.
(3)Department of Clinical Analysis, Universitary Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla, 
Santander, Spain.
(4)Service of Neurology, Universitary Hospital Marqués de Valdecilla (IFIMAV), 
University of Cantabria (UC), Santander, Spain; Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain. 
Electronic address: jinfante@humv.es.

OBJECTIVE: Low serum uric acid (UA) levels have been associated with a worse 
cognitive function later in life and also with a higher risk and faster 
progression of Parkinson's disease (PD). Here we studied whether serum UA levels 
and the genetic variants related to its variability are associated with the 
presence of dementia in a cohort of patients with PD.
METHODS: The study included 343 PD patients, which were examined for the 
presence of dementia according to the MDS Task Force criteria (level 1). The 
predominant PD phenotype and UPDRS-III and Hoehn-Yahr scales were recorded. 
Serum UA levels were determined in each participant. Genotyping of SLC2A9 
rs734553, ABCG2 rs2231142, SLC17A1 rs1183201, SLC22A11 rs17300741, SLC22A12 
rs505802, GCKR rs780094, PDZK1 rs12129861, LRRC16A + SCGN rs742132, and SLC16A9 
rs12356193 was carried out by Taqman analysis. For each subject we calculated a 
cumulative genetic risk score (GRS), defined as the total number of risk alleles 
(range 2-15) associated to lower serum UA levels.
RESULTS: 72 out of 343 PD patients (21%) presented dementia. Serum UA levels 
were not different between PD patients with or without dementia. No significant 
association was detected between any single SNP and the risk of PD-dementia. 
When we analyzed the combined effect of the eight SNPs using the cumulative GRS 
no significant association between the number of risk alleles and the risk of PD 
was observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that serum UA levels have not a significant impact 
on the risk of dementia in PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.02.023
PMID: 24637121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3372. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 Nov;85(11):1227-31. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-307228. Epub 2014 Mar 17.

Apolipoprotein E ε2 genotype delays onset of dementia with Lewy bodies in a 
Norwegian cohort.

Berge G(1), Sando SB(2), Rongve A(3), Aarsland D(4), White LR(2).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.
(2)Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of 
Science and Technology (NTNU), Trondheim, Norway Department of Neurology, 
University Hospital of Trondheim, Trondheim, Norway.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Haugesund Hospital, Haugesund, Norway.
(4)Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences, and Society, Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Center, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden Department of 
Psychiatry, Akershus University Hospital, Norway Centre for Age-Related 
Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Results conflict concerning the relevance of APOE alleles on the 
development of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), though they are well established 
in connection with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The role of APOE alleles in a 
Norwegian cohort of patients with DLB was therefore examined compared with 
patients with AD and healthy control individuals.
METHODS: The study included 156 patients with DLB diagnosed according to the 
consensus criteria guidelines, 519 patients diagnosed with AD according to the 
National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Diseases and 
Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS/ARDRA) 
criteria and 643 healthy elderly volunteers. Patients were recruited through 
hospitals, outpatient clinics, nursing homes or from local care authorities in 
central and south-western parts of Norway. Healthy individuals were recruited 
from caregivers and societies for retired people.
RESULTS: Subjects carrying an APOE ε2 allele had a reduced risk for developing 
DLB (OR 0.4, CI 0.3 to 0.8, p=0.004), and the onset of disease was delayed by 4 
years (p=0.01, Mann-Whitney U test). Conversely, the APOE ε4 allele increased 
the risk for development of DLB (OR 5.9, CI 2.7 to 13.0, p<0.0005 for 
homozygotes). Similar results were found for patients with AD regarding the 
effect of APOE ε2, though the protective effect appeared to be slightly less 
pronounced than in DLB. This study is one of the largest regarding DLB and APOE 
to date.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that APOE ε2, a protective factor in AD, has a 
clear beneficial effect on the development of DLB also.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-307228
PMCID: PMC4215279
PMID: 24639435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3373. BMC Psychiatry. 2014 Mar 20;14:84. doi: 10.1186/1471-244X-14-84.

Comorbidity of dementia: a cross-sectional study of primary care older patients.

Poblador-Plou B, Calderón-Larrañaga A(1), Marta-Moreno J, Hancco-Saavedra J, 
Sicras-Mainar A, Soljak M, Prados-Torres A.

Author information:
(1)EpiChron Research Group on Chronic Diseases, Aragón Health Sciences Institute 
(IACS), IIS Aragón, Miguel Servet University Hospital, Zaragoza, Spain. 
acalderon.iacs@aragon.es.

BACKGROUND: The epidemiologic study of comorbidities of an index health problem 
represents a methodological challenge. This study cross-sectionally describes 
and analyzes the comorbidities associated with dementia in older patients and 
reviews the existing similarities and differences between identified comorbid 
diseases using the statistical methods most frequently applied in current 
research.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study of 72,815 patients over 64 seen in 19 Spanish 
primary care centers during 2008. Chronic diseases were extracted from 
electronic health records and grouped into Expanded Diagnostic Clusters®. Three 
different statistical methods were applied (i.e., analysis of prevalence data, 
multiple regression and factor analysis), stratifying by sex.
RESULTS: The two most frequent comorbidities both for men and women with 
dementia were hypertension and diabetes. Yet, logistic regression and factor 
analysis demonstrated that the comorbidities significantly associated with 
dementia were Parkinson's disease, congestive heart failure, cerebrovascular 
disease, anemia, cardiac arrhythmia, chronic skin ulcers, osteoporosis, thyroid 
disease, retinal disorders, prostatic hypertrophy, insomnia and anxiety and 
neurosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of the comorbidities associated with an index disease 
(e.g., dementia) must not be exclusively based on prevalence rates, but rather 
on methodologies that allow the discovery of non-random associations between 
diseases. A deep and reliable knowledge about how different diseases are grouped 
and associated around an index disease such as dementia may orient future 
longitudinal studies aimed at unraveling causal associations.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-244X-14-84
PMCID: PMC3994526
PMID: 24645776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3374. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Feb;51(1):361-9. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8673-1. Epub 2014 
Mar 20.

Pathway analysis of two amyotrophic lateral sclerosis GWAS highlights shared 
genetic signals with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

Shang H(1), Liu G, Jiang Y, Fu J, Zhang B, Song R, Wang W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Fourth Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical 
University, Harbin, China.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is the third most common neurodegenerative 
disease after Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). In order to 
unravel more genetic etiology of ALS, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) 
have been conducted. However, the newly identified ALS susceptibility loci exert 
only very small risk effects and cannot fully explain the underlying ALS genetic 
risk. A large proportion of the heritability of ALS is still to be explained. 
Recently, pathway analysis of GWAS has been used to investigate the mechanisms 
of AD and PD. We think that AD or PD risk pathways may also be involved in ALS. 
In order to confirm this view, we conducted a pathway analysis of two 
independent ALS GWAS. We identified multiple classifications of the Kyoto 
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathways related to metabolism, immune system 
and diseases, environmental information processing, genetic information 
processing, cellular processes, and nervous system and neurodegenerative 
diseases to be the consistent signals in the two ALS GWAS. On the single pathway 
level, we identified 12 shared pathways. We compared the findings from ALS GWAS 
with those of previous pathway analyses of AD and PD GWAS. The results further 
supported the involvement of AD and PD risk pathways in ALS. We believe that our 
results may advance the understanding of ALS mechanisms and will be very useful 
for future genetic studies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-014-8673-1
PMID: 24647822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3375. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jun;20(6):584-9; discussion 584. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.02.021. Epub 2014 Mar 5.

Does α-synuclein have a dual and opposing effect in preclinical vs. clinical 
Parkinson's disease?

Markopoulou K(1), Biernacka JM(2), Armasu SM(2), Anderson KJ(2), Ahlskog JE(3), 
Chase BA(4), Chung SJ(5), Cunningham JM(6), Farrer M(7), Frigerio R(1), 
Maraganore DM(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, 
USA.
(2)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(4)Department of Biology, University of Nebraska at Omaha, Omaha, NE, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.
(7)Centre for Applied Neurogenetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada.
(8)Department of Neurology, NorthShore University HealthSystem, Evanston, IL, 
USA. Electronic address: dmaraganore@northshore.org.

α-Synuclein gene (SNCA) multiplications cause familial parkinsonism and 
allele-length polymorphisms within the SNCA dinucleotide repeat REP1 increase 
the risk for developing Parkinson's disease (PD). Since SNCA multiplications 
increase SNCA expression, and REP1 genotypes that increase the risk of 
developing PD show increased SNCA expression in cell-culture systems, animal 
models, and human blood and brain, PD therapies seek to reduce SNCA expression. 
We conducted an observational study of 1098 PD cases to test the hypothesis that 
REP1 genotypes correlated with reduced SNCA expression are associated with 
better motor and cognitive outcomes. We evaluated the association of REP1 
genotypes with survival free of Hoehn and Yahr stages 4 or 5 (motor outcome) and 
of Modified Telephone Interview for Cognitive Status score ≤27 or Alzheimer's 
Disease Dementia Screening Interview score ≥2 (cognitive outcome). Median 
disease duration at baseline was 3.3 years and median lag time from baseline to 
follow-up was 7.8 years. Paradoxically, REP1 genotypes associated with increased 
risk of developing PD and increased SNCA expression were associated with better 
motor (HR = 0.87, p = 0.046, covariate-adjusted age-scale analysis; HR = 0.85, 
p = 0.020, covariate-adjusted time-scale analysis) and cognitive outcomes 
(HR = 0.90, p = 0.12, covariate-adjusted age-scale analysis; HR = 0.85, 
p = 0.023, covariate-adjusted time-scale analysis). Our findings raise the 
possibility that SNCA has a dual, opposing, and time-dependent role. This may 
have implications for the development of therapies that target SNCA expression.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.02.021
PMCID: PMC4723426
PMID: 24656894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3376. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2014 Jul-Aug;59(1):1-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2014.02.012. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Meta-analysis of risk factors for the second hip fracture (SHF) in elderly 
patients.

Zhu Y(1), Chen W(1), Sun T(1), Zhang Q(1), Cheng J(1), Zhang Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050051, PR China; Key Laboratory of Biomechanics 
of Hebei Province, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050051, PR China.
(2)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, The Third Hospital of Hebei Medical 
University, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050051, PR China; Key Laboratory of Biomechanics 
of Hebei Province, Shijiazhuang, Hebei 050051, PR China. Electronic address: 
dryzzhang@126.com.

This study aims to quantitatively summarize the risk factors for the incidence 
of SHF. A meta-analysis was performed with the data obtained from 22 relevant 
papers published in Pubmed, Embase and Cochrane central database (all through 
January 2014) following strict selection. The pooled odds ratios (ORs) or 
standardized mean difference (SMD) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were 
calculated for potential risk factors associated with SHF. Our meta-analysis 
indicated the significant risk factors for SHF were female (OR, 1.46; 95%CI, 
1.29-1.66), living in institutions (OR, 2.23; 95%CI, 1.29-3.83), osteoporosis 
(Singh index (SI) 1-3) (OR, 10.02; 95%CI, 5.41-18.57), low vision (OR, 2.09; 
95%CI, 1.06-4.12), dementia (OR, 1.89; 95%CI, 1.47-2.43), Parkinson (OR, 2.90; 
95%CI, 1.41-5.95), cardiac diseases (OR, 1.32; 95%CI, 1.02-1.70) and respiratory 
disease (OR, 1.97; 95%CI, 1.16-3.32). Related strategies must be implemented on 
those involved with above-mentioned medical conditions to effectively prevent a 
SHF.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2014.02.012
PMID: 24657007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3377. Brain. 2014 May;137(Pt 5):1496-513. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu057. Epub 2014 Mar 24.

Accumulation of oligomer-prone α-synuclein exacerbates synaptic and neuronal 
degeneration in vivo.

Rockenstein E(1), Nuber S, Overk CR, Ubhi K, Mante M, Patrick C, Adame A, 
Trejo-Morales M, Gerez J, Picotti P, Jensen PH, Campioni S, Riek R, Winkler J, 
Gage FH, Winner B, Masliah E.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.

In Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, α-synuclein aggregates to 
form oligomers and fibrils; however, the precise nature of the toxic α-synuclein 
species remains unclear. A number of synthetic α-synuclein mutations were 
recently created (E57K and E35K) that produce species of α-synuclein that 
preferentially form oligomers and increase α-synuclein-mediated toxicity. We 
have shown that acute lentiviral expression of α-synuclein E57K leads to the 
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons; however, the effects of chronic expression 
of oligomer-prone α-synuclein in synapses throughout the brain have not been 
investigated. Such a study could provide insight into the possible mechanism(s) 
through which accumulation of α-synuclein oligomers in the synapse leads to 
neurodegeneration. For this purpose, we compared the patterns of 
neurodegeneration and synaptic damage between a newly generated mThy-1 
α-synuclein E57K transgenic mouse model that is prone to forming oligomers and 
the mThy-1 α-synuclein wild-type mouse model (Line 61), which accumulates 
various forms of α-synuclein. Three lines of α-synuclein E57K (Lines 9, 16 and 
54) were generated and compared with the wild-type. The α-synuclein E57K Lines 9 
and 16 were higher expressings of α-synuclein, similar to α-synuclein wild-type 
Line 61, and Line 54 was a low expressing of α-synuclein compared to Line 61. By 
immunoblot analysis, the higher-expressing α-synuclein E57K transgenic mice 
showed abundant oligomeric, but not fibrillar, α-synuclein whereas 
lower-expressing mice accumulated monomeric α-synuclein. Monomers, oligomers, 
and fibrils were present in α-synuclein wild-type Line 61. Immunohistochemical 
and ultrastructural analyses demonstrated that α-synuclein accumulated in the 
synapses but not in the neuronal cells bodies, which was different from the 
α-synuclein wild-type Line 61, which accumulates α-synuclein in the soma. 
Compared to non-transgenic and lower-expressing mice, the higher-expressing 
α-synuclein E57K mice displayed synaptic and dendritic loss, reduced levels of 
synapsin 1 and synaptic vesicles, and behavioural deficits. Similar alterations, 
but to a lesser extent, were seen in the α-synuclein wild-type mice. Moreover, 
although the oligomer-prone α-synuclein mice displayed neurodegeneration in the 
frontal cortex and hippocampus, the α-synuclein wild-type only displayed 
neuronal loss in the hippocampus. These results support the hypothesis that 
accumulating oligomeric α-synuclein may mediate early synaptic pathology in 
Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies by disrupting synaptic 
vesicles. This oligomer-prone model might be useful for evaluating therapies 
directed at oligomer reduction.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu057
PMCID: PMC3999721
PMID: 24662516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3378. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 27;9(3):e92878. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092878. 
eCollection 2014.

Mild parkinsonian signs in the elderly--is there an association with PD? 
Crossectional findings in 992 individuals.

Lerche S(1), Hobert M(1), Brockmann K(1), Wurster I(1), Gaenslen A(1), Hasmann 
S(1), Eschweiler GW(2), Maetzler W(1), Berg D(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Neurology, Department of Neurodegeneration and Hertie-Institute for 
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany; German 
Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.
(2)Geriatric Center and Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
Hospital of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) are common in the elderly population, 
and have been associated with vascular diseases, mild cognitive impairment and 
dementia; however their relation to Parkinson's disease (PD) is unclear. 
Hypothesizing that individuals with MPS may reflect a pre-stage of PD, i.e. a 
stage in which the nigrostriatal system is already affected although to a milder 
degree than at the time of PD diagnosis, aim of this study was to evaluate the 
similarities between MPS and PD.
METHODS: The TREND study is a prospective cross-sectional cohort study in 
individuals >50 years with biennial assessments designed to identify markers for 
an earlier diagnosis of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease. For this substudy 
992 individuals were included for analyses (892 controls, 73 MPS individuals, 27 
PD patients). Parameters defining risk of PD (sex, age, positive family 
history), prodromal markers (hyposmia, REM sleep behavior disorder, depression 
and autonomic failure) as well as quantitative fine motor, axial motor and 
cognitive parameters were compared between the three cohorts.
RESULTS: As expected, PD patients differed from controls with regard to 12 of 15 
of the assessed parameters. MPS individuals differed significantly from controls 
in 12 of the PD-associated parameters, but differed from PD only in 5 
parameters.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that individuals with MPS share many prodromal and 
clinical markers of PD with PD patients, implying that either a common dynamic 
process or similar constitutional factors occur in MPS individuals and PD 
patients.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092878
PMCID: PMC3968033
PMID: 24675747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Lerche, Mr. Hobert, Ms. 
Wurster, Dr. Gaenslen and Ms. Hasmann reports no disclosures. Dr. Brockmann has 
received honoraria for lectures from the Deutsche Gesellschaft für klinische 
Neurophysiologie (DGKN) as well as travel grants from GlaxoSmithKline, UCB and 
the Movement Disorders Society. Prof. Maetzler has received speaker honoraria 
from GlaxoSmithKline, and receives research support from the European Union and 
the Robert Bosch Foundation. Prof. Eschweiler has received grants for Phase II 
and phase III study in alzheimer disorders from AC Immune and Janssen Alzheimer 
Immunotherapy Research. Prof. Berg has received Advisory Boards from UCB 
SchwarzPharma, Novartis, Merz; Honoraria from UCB SchwarzPharma, GSK, TEVA, 
Lundbeck; Grants from Michael J Fox Foundation, BmBF, Janssen Pharmaceutica, 
TEVA Pharma GmbH, Böhringer, dPV (German Parkinson's disease association), 
Abbott and Center of Integrative Neurosciences. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


3379. Mov Disord. 2015 Apr 15;30(5):680-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.25820. Epub 2014 Feb 22.

Patterns of cortical thinning in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder.

Rahayel S(1), Montplaisir J, Monchi O, Bedetti C, Postuma RB, Brambati S, 
Carrier J, Joubert S, Latreille V, Jubault T, Gagnon JF.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de 
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Psychology, Université du 
Québec à Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder is a parasomnia that is a 
risk factor for dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease. Brain 
function impairments have been identified in this disorder, mainly in the 
frontal and posterior cortical regions. However, the anatomical support for 
these dysfunctions remains poorly understood. We investigated gray matter 
thickness, gray matter volume, and white matter integrity in patients with 
idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder. Twenty-four patients with 
polysomnography-confirmed idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder 
and 42 healthy individuals underwent a 3-tesla structural and diffusion magnetic 
resonance imaging examination using corticometry, voxel-based morphometry, and 
diffusion tensor imaging. In the patients with idiopathic rapid eye movement 
sleep behavior disorder, decreased cortical thickness was observed in the 
frontal cortex, the lingual gyrus, and the fusiform gyrus. Gray matter volume 
was reduced in the superior frontal sulcus only. Patients showed no increased 
gray matter thickness or volume. Diffusion tensor imaging analyses revealed no 
significant white matter differences between groups. Using corticometry in 
patients with idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder, several new 
cortical regions with gray matter alterations were identified, similar to those 
reported in dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease. These findings 
provide some anatomical support for previously identified brain function 
impairments in this disorder.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25820
PMID: 24676967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3380. Int Psychogeriatr. 2014 Aug;26(8):1247-62. doi: 10.1017/S1041610214000416. Epub 
2014 Mar 31.

Review of brief cognitive tests for patients with suspected dementia.

Velayudhan L(1), Ryu SH(2), Raczek M(3), Philpot M(4), Lindesay J(1), 
Critchfield M(5), Livingston G(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences,University of Leicester,Leicester,UK.
(2)Department of Psychiatry,Konkuk University Medical Centre,Konkuk 
University,Seoul,South Korea.
(3)Old Age Psychiatry,Sussex Partnership NHS Foundation Trust,Worthing,UK.
(4)Institute of Psychiatry,Kings College London,London,UK.
(5)Leicestershire Partnership NHS Trust,Leicester,UK.
(6)Division of Psychiatry,Charles Bell House,University College 
London,London,UK.

BACKGROUND: As the population ages, it is increasingly important to use 
effective short cognitive tests for suspected dementia. We aimed to review 
systematically brief cognitive tests for suspected dementia and report on their 
validation in different settings, to help clinicians choose rapid and 
appropriate tests.
METHODS: Electronic search for face-to-face sensitive and specific cognitive 
tests for people with suspected dementia, taking ≤ 20 minutes, providing 
quantitative psychometric data.
RESULTS: 22 tests fitted criteria. Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and 
Hopkins Verbal Learning Test (HVLT) had good psychometric properties in primary 
care. In the secondary care settings, MMSE has considerable data but lacks 
sensitivity. 6-Item Cognitive Impairment Test (6CIT), Brief Alzheimer's Screen, 
HVLT, and 7 Minute Screen have good properties for detecting dementia but need 
further validation. Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE) and Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment are effective to detect dementia with Parkinson's disease 
and Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination-Revised (ACE-R) is useful for all 
dementias when shorter tests are inconclusive. Rowland Universal Dementia 
Assessment scale (RUDAS) is useful when literacy is low. Tests such as Test for 
Early Detection of Dementia, Test Your Memory, Cognitive Assessment Screening 
Test (CAST) and the recently developed ACE-III show promise but need validation 
in different settings, populations, and dementia subtypes. Validation of tests 
such as 6CIT, Abbreviated Mental Test is also needed for dementia screening in 
acute hospital settings.
CONCLUSIONS: Practitioners should use tests as appropriate to the setting and 
individual patient. More validation of available tests is needed rather than 
development of new ones.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610214000416
PMCID: PMC4071993
PMID: 24685119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3381. Am J Speech Lang Pathol. 2014 May;23(2):S246-58. doi: 
10.1044/2014_AJSLP-13-0087.

Reading comprehension in Parkinson's disease.

Murray LL, Rutledge S.

PURPOSE: Although individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) self-report reading 
problems and experience difficulties in cognitive-linguistic functions that 
support discourse-level reading, prior research has primarily focused on 
sentence-level processing and auditory comprehension. Accordingly, the authors 
investigated the presence and nature of reading comprehension in PD, 
hypothesizing that (a) individuals with PD would display impaired accuracy 
and/or speed on reading comprehension tests and (b) reading performances would 
be correlated with cognitive test results.
METHOD: Eleven adults with PD and 9 age- and education-matched control 
participants completed tests that evaluated reading comprehension; general 
language and cognitive abilities; and aspects of attention, memory, and 
executive functioning.
RESULT: The PD group obtained significantly lower scores on several, but not 
all, reading comprehension, language, and cognitive measures. Memory, language, 
and disease severity were significantly correlated with reading comprehension 
for the PD group.
CONCLUSION: Individuals in the early stages of PD without dementia or broad 
cognitive deficits can display reading comprehension difficulties, particularly 
for high- versus basic-level reading tasks. These reading difficulties are most 
closely related to memory, high-level language, and PD symptom severity status. 
The findings warrant additional research to delineate further the types and 
nature of reading comprehension impairments experienced by individuals with PD.

DOI: 10.1044/2014_AJSLP-13-0087
PMID: 24686432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3382. J Speech Lang Hear Res. 2014 Feb;57(1):68-80. doi: 
10.1044/1092-4388(2013/12-0263).

Vowel acoustics in dysarthria: mapping to perception.

Lansford KL, Liss JM.

PURPOSE: The aim of the present report was to explore whether vowel metrics, 
demonstrated to distinguish dysarthric and healthy speech in a companion article 
(Lansford & Liss, 2014), are able to predict human perceptual performance.
METHOD: Vowel metrics derived from vowels embedded in phrases produced by 45 
speakers with dysarthria were compared with orthographic transcriptions of these 
phrases collected from 120 healthy listeners. First, correlation and stepwise 
multiple regressions were conducted to identify acoustic metrics that had 
predictive value for perceptual measures. Next, discriminant function analysis 
misclassifications were compared with listeners' misperceptions to examine more 
directly the perceptual consequences of degraded vowel acoustics.
RESULTS: Several moderate correlative relationships were found between acoustic 
metrics and perceptual measures, with predictive models accounting for 18%-75% 
of the variance in measures of intelligibility and vowel accuracy. Results of 
the second analysis showed that listeners better identified acoustically 
distinctive vowel tokens. In addition, the level of agreement between 
misclassified-to-misperceived vowel tokens supports some specificity of degraded 
acoustic profiles on the resulting percept.
CONCLUSION: Results provide evidence that degraded vowel acoustics have some 
effect on human perceptual performance, even in the presence of extravowel 
variables that naturally exert influence in phrase perception.

DOI: 10.1044/1092-4388(2013/12-0263)
PMCID: PMC4095862
PMID: 24687468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3383. J Neurol. 2014 Jun;261(6):1090-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7321-z. Epub 2014 Apr 
1.

Long-term cognitive outcome of bilateral subthalamic deep brain stimulation in 
Parkinson's disease.

Kim HJ(1), Jeon BS, Paek SH, Lee KM, Kim JY, Lee JY, Kim HJ, Yun JY, Kim YE, 
Yang HJ, Ehm G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Movement Disorder Center, Parkinson Study Group, 
and Neuroscience Research Institute, College of Medicine, Seoul National 
University, 28 Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, Korea.

The effect of subthalamic deep brain stimulation (STN DBS) on cognition in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) remains controversial, and it is unclear which factors 
are related to cognitive decline and dementia after STN DBS, especially over the 
long term. To this end, we analyzed the cognitive outcome of 103 non-demented 
patients with PD who were followed-up for at least 12 months after bilateral STN 
DBS surgery. Preoperatively, the patients were evaluated with the Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale and neuropsychological tests. The rate of 
global cognitive decline and the incidence of dementia during follow-up for up 
to 7 years (mean 42.4 ± 24.5 months) were calculated, and preoperative clinical 
and neuropsychological factors associated with postoperative global cognitive 
decline or dementia were analyzed. The prevalence of mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) and its relation to later cognitive decline or dementia were also 
evaluated. The annual decline in the mini-mental state examination score was 0.4 
± 1.7 with impaired attention and executive function and a higher levodopa 
equivalent dose at baseline being the predictors of a faster global cognitive 
decline after STN DBS. Dementia developed in 13 patients with an incidence rate 
of 35.7 per 1,000 person-years. Impaired executive function at baseline 
predicted dementia. At baseline, 63.1 % of the patients had PD-MCI, and these 
patients were more likely to develop dementia than those without PD-MCI. This 
study showed that dysfunctions in the frontostriatal circuitry at baseline were 
associated with a risk of subsequent global cognitive decline and dementia in 
patients with PD who underwent STN DBS. In addition, preoperative PD-MCI was a 
risk factor for dementia after STN DBS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7321-z
PMID: 24687897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3384. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 Oct;121(10):1259-68. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-014-1203-5. Epub 2014 Apr 2.

Carotid artery thickening and neurocirculatory abnormalities in de novo 
Parkinson disease.

Kim JS(1), Oh YS, Lee KS, Song IU, Park IS, Yang DW, Koo JS, Goldstein DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Seoul St. Mary's Hospital, The 
Catholic University of Korea, 505, Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul, 137-701, South 
Korea, neuronet@catholic.ac.kr.

Cognitive dysfunction constitutes a major non-motor manifestation of Parkinson 
disease (PD), but the mechanisms remain incompletely understood. 
Neurocirculatory abnormalities such as supine hypertension (SH) and orthostatic 
hypotension (OH), white matter hyperintensities upon magnetic resonance imaging, 
and dementia are inter-related in PD, even in patients with early, 
levodopa-untreated disease. These abnormalities might in turn be associated with 
carotid atherosclerosis which, by a variety of interacting means could 
contribute to repeated episodes of cerebral hypo- and hyper-perfusion. We 
investigated inter-correlations among neurocirculatory and carotid sonographic 
measurements [intimal-medial thickness (IMT) and wall:lumen ratios (WLR)] in 65 
patients with levodopa-untreated, de novo PD who underwent tilt table testing 
and 24-h ambulatory blood pressure monitoring. Increased mean IMT and WLR were 
associated with OH and supine and overnight blood pressures. Across individuals 
the orthostatic fall in systolic pressure was correlated with both IMT and WLR. 
Since arteriosclerosis would be expected to splint carotid sinus baroreceptors, 
complex positive interactions among carotid wall thickening, SH, and OH may 
result in myriad episodes of cerebral hypo- and hyper-perfusion, contributing to 
microvascular injury and consequently to the cognitive dysfunction attending PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-014-1203-5
PMID: 24692006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3385. Presse Med. 2014 May;43(5):549-54. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2014.02.012. Epub 2014 Apr 
2.

[Environmental factors in ALS].

[Article in French]

Juntas-Morales R(1), Pageot N(1), Corcia P(2), Camu W(3).

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Gui-de-Chauliac, service de neurologie, clinique du motoneurone, 
Inserm 1051, 34925 Montpellier cedex 5, France.
(2)CHRU de Tours, centre SLA, service de neurologie et neurophysiologie 
clinique, UMR Inserm U930, 37000 Tours, France.
(3)Hôpital Gui-de-Chauliac, service de neurologie, clinique du motoneurone, 
Inserm 1051, 34925 Montpellier cedex 5, France. Electronic address: 
w-camu@chu-montpellier.fr.

ALS is likely to be a disorder of multifactorial origin. Among all the factors 
that may increase the risk of ALS, environmental ones are being studied for many 
years, but in the recent years, several advances have pointed to a new interest 
in their potential involvement in the disease process, especially for the 
cyanotoxin BMAA. Food containing BMAA has been found on Guam, a well-known focus 
of ALS/parkinsonism/dementia and high levels of BMAA have been identified into 
the brain of these patients. The BMAA cyanotoxin is potentially ubiquitous and 
have also been found into the food of patients who died from ALS both in Europe 
and USA. BMAA can be wrongly integrated into the protein structure during mRNA 
traduction, competing with serine. This may induce abnormal protein folding and 
a subsequent cell death. Heavy metals, such as lead or mercury may be directly 
toxic for neuronal cells. Several works have suggested an increased risk of ALS 
in individuals chronically exposed to these metals. Exposure to pesticides has 
been suggested to be linked to an increased risk of developing ALS. The 
mechanism of their toxicity is likely to be mediated by paraoxonases. These 
proteins are in charge of detoxifying the organism from toxins, and particularly 
organophosphates. To date, there are insufficient scientific data to suggest 
that exposure to electromagnetic fields may increase the risk of having ALS. We 
are particularly missing longitudinal cohorts to demonstrate that risk.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2014.02.012
PMID: 24703731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3386. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jun;20(6):622-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.03.009. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

Subcortical grey matter changes in untreated, early stage Parkinson's disease 
without dementia.

Lee HM(1), Kwon KY(1), Kim MJ(1), Jang JW(1), Suh SI(2), Koh SB(1), Kim JH(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Guro-dong Ro 148, Guro-gu, Seoul 152-703, Republic of 
Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
(3)Department of Neurology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, Guro-dong Ro 148, Guro-gu, Seoul 152-703, Republic of 
Korea. Electronic address: jhkim.merrf@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Nov;20(11):1323.

BACKGROUND: Previous MRI studies have investigated cortical or subcortical grey 
matter changes in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), yielding inconsistent 
findings between the studies. We therefore sought to determine whether focal 
cortical or subcortical grey matter changes may be present from the early 
disease stage.
METHODS: We recruited 49 untreated, early stage PD patients without dementia and 
53 control subjects. Voxel-based morphometry was used to evaluate cortical grey 
matter changes, and automated volumetry and shape analysis were used to assess 
volume changes and shape deformation of the subcortical grey matter structures, 
respectively.
RESULTS: Voxel-based morphometry showed neither reductions nor increases in grey 
matter volume in patients compared to controls. Compared to controls, PD 
patients had significant reductions in adjusted volumes of putamen, nucleus 
accumbens, and hippocampus (corrected p < 0.05). Vertex-based shape analysis 
showed regionally contracted area on the posterolateral and ventromedial putamen 
bilaterally in PD patients (corrected p < 0.05). No correlations were found 
between cortical and subcortical grey matter and clinical variables representing 
disease duration and severity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that untreated, early stage PD without dementia 
is associated with volume reduction and shape deformation of subcortical grey 
matter, but not with cortical grey matter reduction. Our findings of structural 
changes in the posterolateral putamen and ventromedial putamen/nucleus accumbens 
could provide neuroanatomical basis for the involvement of motor and limbic 
striatum, further implicating motor and non-motor symptoms in PD, respectively. 
Early hippocampal involvement might be related to the risk for developing 
dementia in PD patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.03.009
PMID: 24703894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3387. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jun;20(6):627-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.03.010. Epub 2014 Mar 20.

The utility of the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale in Parkinson's disease mild 
cognitive impairment.

Pirogovsky E(1), Schiehser DM(1), Litvan I(2), Obtera KM(3), Burke MM(3), Lessig 
SL(4), Song DD(4), Liu L(5), Filoteo JV(6).

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs, San Diego Health Care System, San Diego, CA, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, Movement Disorder Center, University of 
California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(3)Veterans Affairs, San Diego Health Care System, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Veterans Affairs, San Diego Health Care System, San Diego, CA, USA; 
Department of Neurosciences, Movement Disorder Center, University of California, 
San Diego, CA, USA.
(5)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, University of California, San 
Diego, CA, USA.
(6)Veterans Affairs, San Diego Health Care System, San Diego, CA, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, San Diego, CA, 
USA. Electronic address: vfiloteo@ucsd.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Movement Disorders Society (MDS) recently proposed guidelines 
for diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD-MCI) that 
includes two assessment levels: abbreviated (Level I) and comprehensive (Level 
II). The aim of this study was to determine the utility of the Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale (MDRS), a recommended Level I test, for detecting Level II PD-MCI 
diagnosis.
METHODS: The study sample included 30 patients diagnosed with PD-MCI based on 
Level II MDS criteria and 68 PD patients with normal cognition (PD-NC). Receiver 
operator curve (ROC) analyses were generated to measure the sensitivity and 
specificity of various MDRS cutoff scores. To examine the utility of the MDRS as 
a screening tool, the optimal cutoff point was defined as the lowest value 
providing ≥80% sensitivity. For use of the MDRS as a diagnostic tool, the 
optimal cutoff point was defined as the highest value providing ≥80% 
specificity.
RESULTS: ROC analyses showed that the optimal MDRS cutoff score for screening 
purposes and diagnostic purposes were ≤140 and ≤137, respectively. However, an 
examination of sensitivity/specificity values for the screening cutoff scores 
suggested that a total score of ≤139 for screening purposes yielded a better 
balance between sensitivity (77%) and specificity (65%).
CONCLUSIONS: In a clinical setting, in which detection of PD-MCI may be 
important, a total MDRS score of ≤139 can be used to detect PD-MCI. In research 
and other settings in which diagnostic certainty is more important, a score of 
≤137 may be more useful.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.03.010
PMID: 24709086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3388. Mov Disord. 2014 May;29(6):756-64. doi: 10.1002/mds.25875. Epub 2014 Apr 7.

Evaluation of mild cognitive impairment subtypes in Parkinson's disease.

Cholerton BA(1), Zabetian CP, Wan JY, Montine TJ, Quinn JF, Mata IF, Chung KA, 
Peterson A, Espay AJ, Revilla FJ, Devoto J, Watson GS, Hu SC, Leverenz JB, 
Edwards KL.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, & Clinical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Science, University of Washington School 
of Medicine, Seattle, Washington, USA.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD-MCI) is common and 
increases the risk for dementia. Establishing distinct PD-MCI cognitive subtypes 
could be valuable for eventually predicting those most likely to convert to 
dementia. However, the study of PD-MCI subtypes has not yielded consistent 
results among cohorts. To determine whether there are distinct cognitive 
subtypes among participants diagnosed with PD-MCI in the Pacific Northwest Udall 
Center Clinical Consortium, we cognitively subtyped 95 patients with PD-MCI, 
using the Movement Disorders Society Task Force diagnostic guidelines. 
Psychometric test scores were then subjected to principle components factor 
analysis to determine whether similar cognitive subgroups could be identified 
using statistical methodology. Multiple-domain PD-MCI was diagnosed in 95% of 
the sample, and a range of cognitive impairments were noted. Factor analysis 
yielded seven factors and demonstrated overlap of phonemic verbal fluency on two 
factors, as well as the loading of verbal fluency on the same factor as a 
visuospatial measure; however, these factors did not partition the sample into 
distinct cognitive subtypes. Separation of cognitive subtypes based on the 
current PD-MCI criteria, or via statistical methods, may not provide sufficient 
information to describe distinct PD groups. Future efforts to validate the 
PD-MCI criteria and identify combinations of genetic or other risk factors for 
cognitive impairment are warranted.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25875
PMCID: PMC4013249
PMID: 24710804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3389. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2014 Jul;20(7):692-8. doi: 10.1111/cns.12260. Epub 2014 Apr 
8.

Early failure of the default-mode network and the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Simic G(1), Babic M, Borovecki F, Hof PR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Croatian Institute for Brain Research, University 
of Zagreb Medical School, Zagreb, Croatia.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.12260
PMCID: PMC4062585
PMID: 24712393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3390. Neurology. 2014 Apr 22;82(16):1441-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000350. Epub 
2014 Apr 9.

Faster cognitive decline in elders without dementia and decreased risk of cancer 
mortality: NEDICES Study.

Benito-León J(1), Romero JP, Louis ED, Bermejo-Pareja F.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (J.B.-L., J.P.R., F.B.-P.), University 
Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid; Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre 
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (J.B.-L., F.B.-P.); Department of Medicine 
(J.B.-L., F.B.-P.), Complutense University, Madrid, Spain; G.H. Sergievsky 
Center (E.D.L.), Department of Neurology (E.D.L.), and Taub Institute for 
Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain (E.D.L.), College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, and Department of Epidemiology (E.D.L.), Mailman School 
of Public Health, Columbia University, New York.

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether faster cognitive decline in elders without dementia 
is associated with decreased risk of cancer mortality.
METHODS: In this population-based, prospective study of 2,627 people without 
dementia aged 65 years and older (Neurological Disorders in Central Spain), a 
37-item version of the Mini-Mental State Examination (37-MMSE) was administered 
at 2 visits (baseline and follow-up, approximately 3 years later). We divided 
change in 37-MMSE into tertiles (lower tertile ≥ 2 point improvement in score, 
higher tertile ≥ 2 point decline in score). Community-dwelling elders were 
followed for a median of 12.9 years, after which the death certificates of those 
who died were examined.
RESULTS: A total of 1,003 (38.2%) died, including 339 (33.8%) deaths among 
participants who were in the higher tertile of 37-MMSE change and 664 (66.2%) 
deaths among those in the remaining tertiles. Cancer was reported significantly 
less often in those in the higher tertile of MMSE change (20.6%) than in those 
in the remaining tertiles (28.6%): in an unadjusted Cox model, hazard ratio for 
cancer mortality in participants within the higher tertile = 0.75 (p = 0.04) 
compared with the participants within the remaining tertiles. In a Cox model 
that adjusted for a variety of demographic factors and comorbidities, hazard 
ratio for cancer mortality in participants within the higher tertile = 0.70 (p = 
0.01).
CONCLUSION: In this population-based, prospective study of community-dwelling 
elders without dementia, faster cognitive decline was associated with a 
decreased risk of cancer mortality. Further studies are required to elucidate 
this inverse association in elders without dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000350
PMCID: PMC4001199
PMID: 24719490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3391. J Alzheimers Dis Parkinsonism. 2013 Aug 26;3:123. doi: 
10.4172/2161-0460.1000123.

A Comparative White Matter Study with Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's Disease 
with Dementia and Alzheimer's Disease.

Perea RD(1), Rada RC(2), Wilson J(3), Vidoni1 ED(2), Morris JK(4), Lyons KE(5), 
Pahwa R(5), Burns JM(4), Honea RA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas 
City, KS, USA ; Alzheimer's Research Disease Center, University of Kansas School 
of Medicine, Kansas City, KS, USA ; Bioengineering Program, Department of 
Engineering, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA.
(2)Alzheimer's Research Disease Center, University of Kansas School of Medicine, 
Kansas City, KS, USA.
(3)Department of Psychology, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS, USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas 
City, KS, USA ; Alzheimer's Research Disease Center, University of Kansas School 
of Medicine, Kansas City, KS, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas School of Medicine, Kansas 
City, KS, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are among the most common 
neurodegenerative disorders affecting older populations. AD is characterized by 
impaired memory and cognitive decline while the primary symptoms of PD include 
resting tremor, bradykinesia and rigidity. In PD, mild cognitive changes are 
frequently present, which could progress to dementia (PD dementia (PDD)). PDD 
and AD dementias are different in pathology although the difference in 
microstructural changes remains unknown. To further understand these diseases, 
it is essential to understand the distinct mechanism of their microstructural 
changes. We used diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) to investigate white matter 
tract differences between early stage individuals with AD (n=14), PD (n=12), PDD 
(n=9), and healthy non-demented controls (CON) (n=13). We used whole brain tract 
based spatial statistics (TBSS) and a region of interest (ROI) analysis focused 
on the substantia nigra (SN). We found that individuals with PDD had more 
widespread white matter degeneration compared to PD, AD, and CON. Individuals 
with AD had few regional abnormalities in the anterior and posterior projections 
of the corpus callosum while PD and CON did not appear to have significant white 
matter degeneration when compared to other groups. ROI analyses showed that PDD 
had the highest diffusivity in the SN and were significantly different from CON. 
There were no significant ROI differences between CON, PD, or AD. In conclusion, 
global white matter microstructural deterioration is evident in individuals with 
PDD, and DTI may provide a means with which to tease out pathological 
differences between AD and PD dementias.

DOI: 10.4172/2161-0460.1000123
PMCID: PMC3979316
PMID: 24724042


3392. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2014;38(3-4):178-85. doi: 10.1159/000359966. Epub 
2014 Apr 8.

Thyroid status and cognitive function in euthyroid patients with early 
Parkinson's disease.

Choi SM(1), Kim BC, Choi KH, Nam TS, Kim JT, Lee SH, Park MS, Kim MK, Cho KH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chonnam National University Hwasun Hospital, 
Gwangju, South Korea.

BACKGROUND: Alterations in thyroid hormone (TH) levels may be related to the 
pathogenesis of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia. Cognitive deficits 
are common in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. The aim of this study was to 
investigate whether variations within the normal ranges of thyroid function are 
related to cognitive function in early PD without dementia.
METHODS: Eighty-four euthyroid patients with early PD underwent evaluation of 
their thyroid status, including measures of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), 
total triiodothyronine (tT3) and free thyroxine (fT4), and comprehensive 
neuropsychological tests.
RESULTS: The 46 patients of the PD-MCI group did not differ in the serum levels 
of TH compared to the 38 patients of the PD-normal cognition group. fT4 levels 
were inversely associated with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) score 
and neuropsychological tests of attention and visuospatial and executive 
function. TSH and tT3 levels were not related to cognitive performances. After 
controlling for demographic and clinical variables, multiple regression analyses 
indicated statistically significant associations between fT4 concentrations and 
MMSE score and neuropsychological tests of executive function.
CONCLUSIONS: This study supports a relationship between the thyroid status and 
cognitive function in euthyroid early PD patients, with higher concentrations of 
fT4 being associated with a poor performance of executive function.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000359966
PMID: 24732425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3393. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jun;71(6):735-41. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.286.

Swiss cheese striatum: clinical implications.

Burnett MS(1), Witte RJ(2), Ahlskog JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(2)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

IMPORTANCE: Markedly enlarged Virchow-Robin spaces throughout the striatum 
appear occasionally on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans of the elderly, 
and this type of striatum is known as the Swiss cheese striatum (SCS); however, 
its clinical impact is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical features associated with SCS detected on 
MRI scans.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A blinded, retrospective case-control study 
using medical records from 2000 to 2007 obtained from an MRI database at the 
Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, of residents 40 years of age or older of 
Olmsted County, Minnesota, who had extensive Mayo Clinic medical records and MRI 
reports suggestive of SCS. Cases with a severe form of SCS (n = 27) were 
randomly selected for comparison with age-, sex-, and examination year-matched 
controls (n = 52) with a minimal form of SCS or no SCS.
EXPOSURE: Magnetic resonance imaging.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Associations of clinical and imaging features with 
the presence of a severe form of SCS. Medical records were reviewed for clinical 
features such as parkinsonism, dementia, and vascular risk factors. The MRI 
scans were visually scored for degree of leukoaraiosis, central atrophy, and 
cortical atrophy.
RESULTS: No significant differences were found between those with a severe form 
of SCS and controls in rates of parkinsonism (19% vs 17%; odds ratio, 1.09 [95% 
CI, 0.28-4.16]) or dementia of any type (30% vs 21%; odds ratio, 1.57 [95% CI, 
0.48-5.13]). Vascular risk factors were not significantly different between 
groups. Swiss cheese striatum correlated with degree of leukoaraiosis 
(P < .001). Potential associations with visualized cortical atrophy (P = .01), 
nonobstructive urinary incontinence (18.5% vs 3.9%; P = .04), and syncope (37% 
vs 9.6%; P = .01) did not hold up after correction for the false discovery rate.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our study suggests that marked cribriform change in 
the striatum was not associated with the development of extrapyramidal clinical 
disorders, including parkinsonism. The association of SCS with leukoaraiosis 
suggests that it is part of a more generalized cerebrovascular process. 
Skepticism is called for when attributing clinical symptoms to this MRI finding.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.286
PMID: 24733660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3394. Neurology. 2014 Apr 15;82(15):1384-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000446501.19131.4d.

Risk factors for dementia with Lewy bodies: a case-control study.

Golimstok A(1).

Author information:
(1)Buenos Aires.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2013 Aug 27;81(9):833-40.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000446501.19131.4d
PMID: 24733859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3395. Clin Auton Res. 2015 Apr;25(2):87-94. doi: 10.1007/s10286-014-0244-z. Epub 2014 
Apr 18.

Lack of orthostatic symptoms in dementia patients with orthostatic hypotension.

Bengtsson-Lindberg M(1), Larsson V, Minthon L, Wattmo C, Londos E.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Simrisbanv. 14, 20502, Malmö, Sweden.

PURPOSE: Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is common and increases with age. OH is 
part of the autonomic dysfunction in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Commonly 
OH is diagnosed when the patient falls which is a risk factor of premature 
death. Our objective was to systematically investigate the clinical symptoms 
associated with measurement of OH in different neurodegenerative dementias and 
normal controls (NC).
METHODS: 154 patients [50 DLB, 50 Alzheimer's disease (AD), 54 AD and vascular 
components (ADvasc)] were examined with systolic and diastolic blood pressure 
measurements in supine position, immediately after standing up and after 1, 3, 5 
and 10 min of standing. They were compared with 50 NC. Orthostatic symptoms were 
registered according to a predefined protocol.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven percent of all the investigated individuals reported OH 
symptoms during the measurement while 43% fulfilled the criteria of OH. 
Sixty-three percent of orthostatic patients did not have any symptoms during the 
measurement. The prevalence of any orthostatic symptoms during the measurement 
differed significantly (p < 0.001) between the diagnostic groups with 40% in DLB 
patients, 37% in ADvasc, 28% in AD and 2% in NC. The most frequent symptom was 
dizziness 13.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: Classical orthostatic symptoms are absent in the majority of 
dementia patients with OH. The orthostatic reaction must therefore be routinely 
measured in this patient group. This is particularly important for patients with 
DLB where falls as a result of OH are common.

DOI: 10.1007/s10286-014-0244-z
PMID: 24743866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3396. Curr Cardiol Rep. 2014;16(6):491. doi: 10.1007/s11886-014-0491-6.

Ischemic heart disease and the Mediterranean diet.

Whayne TF Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Medicine, Gill Heart Institute, University of 
Kentucky, 326 Wethington Building, 900 South Limestone Street, Lexington, KY, 
40536-0200, USA, twhayn0@uky.edu.

Lifestyle modification is primary in cardiovascular (CV) disease prevention. A 
major contribution is the Mediterranean diet (MedDiet), defined by two of seven 
components. Italian investigators determined a significant decrease in 
peripheral arterial disease of 56 % for a high score. Multiple specific CV risk 
factors are also favorably modified by the MedDiet. This includes beneficial 
effect on inflammation, vascular endothelium, and insulin resistance. There is 
also evidence that coronary heart disease, diabetes mellitus, and metabolic 
syndrome are decreased. Benefit appears to extend to new migrants in France. The 
economics of dietary adherence are favorable with decreased total lifetime 
health costs. Although mixed nuts appear to be a major factor in the MedDiet, 
special emphasis goes to extra virgin olive oil. Benefit also extends to other 
noncommunicable diseases with a decrease in cancer, Parkinson's disease, and 
Alzheimer's disease. Further quantitation of benefit and understanding of 
mechanisms involved in dietary benefit is essential.

DOI: 10.1007/s11886-014-0491-6
PMID: 24743900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3397. Neurology. 2014 May 20;82(20):1784-90. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000425. Epub 
2014 Apr 18.

CSF Aβ42 predicts early-onset dementia in Parkinson disease.

Alves G(1), Lange J(2), Blennow K(2), Zetterberg H(2), Andreasson U(2), Førland 
MG(2), Tysnes OB(2), Larsen JP(2), Pedersen KF(2).

Author information:
(1)From The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders (G.A., J.L., M.G.F., J.P.L., 
K.F.P.), Department of Neurology (G.A., K.F.P.), and Memory Clinic (G.A., 
K.F.P.), Stavanger University Hospital, Norway; Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology (K.B., H.Z., U.A.), Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, the 
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden; UCL Institute 
of Neurology (H.Z.), Queen Square, London, UK; the Department of Neurology 
(O.-B.T.), Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; Institute of Clinical 
Medicine (O.-B.T.), University of Bergen, Norway; and the Network for Medical 
Sciences (J.P.L.), University of Stavanger, Norway. algu@sus.no.
(2)From The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders (G.A., J.L., M.G.F., J.P.L., 
K.F.P.), Department of Neurology (G.A., K.F.P.), and Memory Clinic (G.A., 
K.F.P.), Stavanger University Hospital, Norway; Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology (K.B., H.Z., U.A.), Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, the 
Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden; UCL Institute 
of Neurology (H.Z.), Queen Square, London, UK; the Department of Neurology 
(O.-B.T.), Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway; Institute of Clinical 
Medicine (O.-B.T.), University of Bergen, Norway; and the Network for Medical 
Sciences (J.P.L.), University of Stavanger, Norway.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2014 May 20;82(20):1758-9.

OBJECTIVE: To test in vivo the proposal from clinicopathologic studies that 
β-amyloid (Aβ) pathology shortens the time to dementia in Parkinson disease 
(PD), and to explore the utility of CSF Aβ and related measures as early 
prognostic biomarkers of dementia in an incident PD cohort.
METHODS: We assessed a population-based incident cohort of 104 patients with PD 
who underwent lumbar puncture at diagnosis. We analyzed CSF concentrations of 
Aβ42, Aβ40, and Aβ38 using a multiplexed immunoassay with 
electrochemiluminescence (ECL) detection and levels of Aβ42, total tau, and 
phosphorylated tau using ELISA. Patients were followed prospectively for 5 
years. Dementia was diagnosed according to published criteria.
RESULTS: CSF levels of Aβ42 were significantly decreased in patients who 
developed dementia (n = 20, 19.2%) compared to those who did not (n = 84, 
80.8%), as measured by ECL (-33%, p = 0.006) as well as ELISA (-36%, p < 0.001). 
No differences were observed for other markers. Low Aβ42 values predicted a 
substantially increased risk for subsequent dementia at high sensitivity (≥ 
85%), with hazard ratios of 9.9 (95% confidence interval 2.3-43.5, p = 0.002) 
for Aβ42ECL <376 pg/mL and 7.6 (2.2-26.4, p = 0.001) for Aβ42ELISA <443 pg/mL, 
after adjustment for baseline age and PD-mild cognitive impairment (MCI) status. 
Aβ42 reductions tended to precede the onset of PD-MCI that progressed to 
dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: These in vivo data support the role of Aβ pathology in the etiology 
and highlight the potential utility of CSF Aβ42 as an early prognostic biomarker 
of dementia associated with PD.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000425
PMID: 24748671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3398. J Intern Med. 2014 Mar;275(3):296-303. doi: 10.1111/joim.12192.

Pathways to Alzheimer's disease.

Hardy J, Bogdanovic N, Winblad B, Portelius E, Andreasen N, Cedazo-Minguez A, 
Zetterberg H.

Recent trials of anti-amyloid agents have not produced convincing improvements 
in clinical outcome in Alzheimer's disease; however, the reason for these poor 
or inconclusive results remains unclear. Recent genetic data continue to support 
the amyloid hypothesis of Alzheimer's disease with protective variants being 
found in the amyloid gene and both common low-risk and rare high-risk variants 
for disease being discovered in genes that are part of the amyloid response 
pathways. These data support the view that genetic variability in how the brain 
responds to amyloid deposition is a potential therapeutic target for the 
disease, and are consistent with the notion that anti-amyloid therapies should 
be initiated early in the disease process.

DOI: 10.1111/joim.12192
PMID: 24749173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3399. J Proteomics. 2014 Jun 2;104:24-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.014. Epub 2014 
Apr 18.

Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases: an environmental proteomic point of view.

Demartini DR(1), Schilling LP(2), da Costa JC(3), Carlini CR(4).

Author information:
(1)Center of Biotechnology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Bento 
Gonçalves 9500, Prédio 43431, Sala 214, 91501-970 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
Electronic address: diogord@terra.com.br.
(2)Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio 
Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Av. Ipiranga 6690, 90610-000 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio 
Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Av. Ipiranga 6690, 90610-000 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil. 
Electronic address: jcc@pucrs.br.
(4)Center of Biotechnology, Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul, Av. Bento 
Gonçalves 9500, Prédio 43431, Sala 214, 91501-970 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; 
Brain Institute of Rio Grande do Sul, Pontifical Catholic University of Rio 
Grande do Sul (PUCRS), Av. Ipiranga 6690, 90610-000 Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases are severe neurodegenerative conditions 
triggered by complex biochemical routes. Many groups are currently pursuing the 
search for valuable biomarkers to either perform early diagnostic or to follow 
the disease's progress. Several studies have reported relevant findings 
regarding environmental issues and the progression of such diseases. Here the 
etiology and mechanisms of these diseases are briefly reviewed. Approaches that 
might reveal candidate biomarkers and environmental stressors associated to the 
diseases were analyzed under a proteomic perspective. This article is part of a 
Special Issue entitled: Environmental and structural proteomics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jprot.2014.04.014
PMID: 24751585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3400. Mov Disord. 2014 Jul;29(8):1060-4. doi: 10.1002/mds.25883. Epub 2014 Apr 21.

Analysis of Parkinson's disease brain-derived DNA for alpha-synuclein coding 
somatic mutations.

Proukakis C(1), Shoaee M, Morris J, Brier T, Kara E, Sheerin UM, Charlesworth G, 
Tolosa E, Houlden H, Wood NW, Schapira AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Although alpha-synuclein (SNCA) is crucial to the pathogenesis of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), mutations in the 
gene appear to be rare. We have recently hypothesized that somatic mutations in 
early development could contribute to PD.
METHODS: Expanding on our recent negative small study, we used high-resolution 
melting (HRM) analysis to screen SNCA coding exons for somatic point mutations 
in DNA from 539 PD and DLB cerebellar samples, with two additional regions 
(frontal cortex, substantia nigra) for 20 PD cases. We used artificial mosaics 
to determine sensitivity where possible.
RESULTS: We did not detect any evidence of somatic coding mutations. Three cases 
were heterozygous for known silent polymorphisms. The protocol we used was 
sensitive enough to detect 5% to 10% mutant DNA.
CONCLUSION: Using DNA predominantly from cerebellum, but also from frontal 
cortex and substantia nigra (n = 20 each), we have not detected any somatic 
coding SNCA point mutations.

© 2014 The Authors. International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society 
published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25883
PMCID: PMC4190821
PMID: 24752924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


