2401. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2010 Sep 7;6:483-90. doi: 10.2147/ndt.s5190.

Therapeutic interventions and adjustments in the management of Parkinson 
disease: role of combined carbidopa/levodopa/entacapone (Stalevo).

Solla P(1), Cannas A, Marrosu F, Marrosu MG.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Center, Institute of Neurology, University of Cagliari, 
Cagliari, Italy.

Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by 3 
cardinal motor symptoms: resting tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia. Since its 
introduction 40 years ago, levodopa has represented the gold standard for 
dopaminergic stimulation therapy in patients with PD. Levodopa is routinely 
combined with a dopa-decarboxylase inhibitor (DDCI) to prevent the conversion of 
levodopa into dopamine in peripheral circulation. However, up to 80% of patients 
treated with continuous levodopa manifest the onset of disabling motor 
complications capable of producing an adverse effect on quality of life as the 
disease progresses. In recent years, a new, safe, and efficacious armamentarium 
of treatment options has been provided by the marketing of the 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitor, entacapone, a peripheral blocker 
of dopa to 3-0-methyldopa metabolism, which increments levodopa brain 
availability. When administered with levodopa, entacapone conjugates the rapid 
onset of levodopa-induced effects with a protracted efficiency, thus providing 
additional benefits to classic levodopa treatment by increasing "on" time in 
fluctuating PD patients, and theoretically providing a more continuous and 
physiological-like stimulation of dopamine receptors implying a reduced risk of 
motor complications. In this context, the use of a single administration of 
combined carbidopa/ levodopa/entacapone (Stalevo(®)) in the treatment of PD 
affords clinical improvements similar to those obtained by 2 separate tablets 
(ie, levodopa/DDCI and entacapone), although the former produces a more positive 
effect on quality of life than the latter. Additionally, the STalevo Reduction 
In Dyskinesia Evaluation (STRIDE-PD) study was designed with the aim of 
demonstrating that the combination of levodopa, carbidopa, and entacapone, used 
as initial levodopa therapy, significantly delays the onset of dyskinesias 
compared with the conventional levodopa/carbidopa formulation. Unfortunately, 
STRIDEPD failed to prove the benefit of continuous dopaminergic stimulation with 
triple therapy in a clinical setting. Recently, the effect of combined COMT 
inhibitor with levodopa administration in reducing homocysteine synthesis has 
been described. To this regard, clear evidence has been presented indicating 
homocysteine as a risk factor for vascular diseases, cognitive impairment, and 
dementia. Several studies have discussed the potential of entacapone as adjunct 
to levodopa/ DDCI in reducing plasma homocysteine levels with contrasting 
results.

DOI: 10.2147/ndt.s5190
PMCID: PMC2938297
PMID: 20856911


2402. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2010 Nov;25(7):547-55. doi: 
10.1177/1533317510382893. Epub 2010 Sep 21.

Review: disruption of the postsynaptic density in Alzheimer's disease and other 
neurodegenerative dementias.

Gong Y(1), Lippa CF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Drexel University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, 
PA 19102, USA. Yuesong.Gong@DrexelMed.edu

The most common causes of neurodegenerative dementia include Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). We 
believe that, in all 3, aggregates of pathogenic proteins are pathological 
substrates which are associated with a loss of synaptic function/plasticity. The 
synaptic plasticity relies on the normal integration of glutamate receptors at 
the postsynaptic density (PSD). The PSD organizes synaptic proteins to mediate 
the functional and structural plasticity of the excitatory synapse and to 
maintain synaptic homeostasis. Here, we will discuss the relevant disruption of 
the protein network at the PSD in these dementias and the accumulation of the 
pathological changes at the PSD years before clinical symptoms. We suggest that 
the functional and structural plasticity changes of the PSD may contribute to 
the loss of molecular homeostasis within the synapse (and contribute to early 
symptoms) in these dementias.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317510382893
PMCID: PMC2976708
PMID: 20858652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2403. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(3):933-8. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101197.

Neprilysin activity in cerebrospinal fluid is associated with dementia and 
amyloid-β42 levels in Lewy body disease.

Maetzler W(1), Stoycheva V, Schmid B, Schulte C, Hauser AK, Brockmann K, Melms 
A, Gasser T, Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Center of Neurology, Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for 
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. 
walter.maetzler@uni-tuebingen.de

Lewy body disease, defined by the occurrence of α-synuclein aggregates as 
fibrils in Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, is associated with increased 
probabilities for both co-occurrence of dementia, and co-occurrence of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like pathology, in particular amyloid-β (Aβ) plaques 
and lowered cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) Aβ42 levels. Not surprisingly, in patients 
with Lewy body disease patients, there is a strong association between dementia 
and Aβ pathology. Neprilysin (NEP) is an Aβ-degrading protein found at 
presynaptic terminals and in body fluids. Reduced CSF NEP activity levels have 
been shown to occur in early AD, suggesting that altered CSF NEP activity levels 
may also be associated with dementia and lowered CSF Aβ42 levels in Lewy body 
disease. Hypothesizing a relation between CSF NEP activity and dementia in Lewy 
body disease, we determined CSF and serum NEP activity, and Aβ42 levels of 41 
demented Lewy body disease patients, 38 non-demented Lewy body disease patients, 
and of 23 elderly controls. Demented Lewy body disease patients had lowered CSF 
NEP activity levels (0.3 pmol/min*ml, 0.2-81.5), compared to both non-demented 
Lewy body disease subjects (8.5 pmol/min*ml, 0.2-87.2; p=0.004) and controls 
(21.5 pmol/ml*min, 0.15-413.4; p=0.02). In addition, CSF NEP activity levels 
correlated positively with CSF Aβ42 levels (Rho=0.28, p=0.008) which was not 
explained by the presence or absence of ApoE4. Serum NEP activity levels were 
not significantly different between the groups. We conclude that, in Lewy body 
disease, CSF NEP activity levels are associated with dementia, probably via the 
Aβ pathway.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101197
PMID: 20858953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2404. Psychogeriatrics. 2010 Sep;10(3):144-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2010.00325.x. 
Epub 2010 Aug 28.

Diffuse occipital hypometabolism on [18 F]-FDG PET scans in patients with 
idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder: prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies?

Fujishiro H(1), Iseki E, Murayama N, Yamamoto R, Higashi S, Kasanuki K, Suzuki 
M, Arai H, Sato K.

Author information:
(1)PET/CT Dementia Research Center, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical 
Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. 
fujishiro17@hotmail.co.jp

BACKGROUND: Previous longitudinal studies have revealed that specific patterns 
on [(18) F]-fluoro-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) scans in 
patients with amnesic mild cognitive impairment can predict Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). However, the significance of particular patterns on [(18) F]-FDG PET scans 
in prodromal patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) remains unclear.
METHODS: Based on the prevailing evidence that rapid eye movement (REM) sleep 
behavior disorder (RBD) often precedes the onset of DLB, [(18) F]-FDG PET scans 
of nine non-demented patients reporting recurrent nocturnal dream-enactment 
behavior in our memory clinic were compared with the normative database using 
three-dimensional stereotactic surface projection (3D-SSP) images. All patients 
underwent clinical and neuropsychological examinations as well as cardiac [(123) 
I]-metaiodobenzylguanidine ([(123) I]-MIBG) scintigraphy.
RESULTS: Four patients were found to have diffuse areas of reduced cerebral 
metabolic rate of glucose (CMRglc), predominantly in the occipital lobe, which 
is the preferentially affected region in DLB patients. In contrast, five 
patients showed no such occipital hypometabolism; instead, these five patients 
showed hypometabolism in the left anterior cingulate gyrus (Broadmann area (BA) 
24), right frontal lobe (BA 32) and right anterior temporal lobe (BA 38), which 
are the preferentially affected regions in Parkinson's disease rather than DLB. 
The extent of the reduction in CMRglc in the left occipital lobe was correlated 
with scores on the Bender Gestalt Test, which reflects visuospatial ability, but 
not with global cognitive measures. All patients showed reduced cardiac [(123) 
I]-MIBG levels, consistent with underlying Lewy body disease.
CONCLUSION: These variations in [(18) F]-FDG PET scans raise the possibility 
that the specific pattern of CMRglc reduction may predict developing DLB in 
patients with idiopathic RBD. Further follow-up studies are needed, particularly 
on patients with diffuse occipital hypometabolism.

© 2010 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2010 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2010.00325.x
PMID: 20860570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2405. Neuron. 2010 Sep 23;67(6):953-66. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.044.

Acetylation of tau inhibits its degradation and contributes to tauopathy.

Min SW(1), Cho SH, Zhou Y, Schroeder S, Haroutunian V, Seeley WW, Huang EJ, Shen 
Y, Masliah E, Mukherjee C, Meyers D, Cole PA, Ott M, Gan L.

Author information:
(1)Gladstone Institute of Neurological Disease, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

Erratum in
    Neuron. 2010 Nov 18;68(4):801.

Comment in
    Neuron. 2010 Sep 23;67(6):900-2.

Neurodegenerative tauopathies characterized by hyperphosphorylated tau include 
frontotemporal dementia and Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Reducing tau levels improves cognitive function in 
mouse models of AD and FTDP-17, but the mechanisms regulating the turnover of 
pathogenic tau are unknown. We found that tau is acetylated and that tau 
acetylation prevents degradation of phosphorylated tau (p-tau). We generated two 
antibodies specific for acetylated tau and showed that tau acetylation is 
elevated in patients at early and moderate Braak stages of tauopathy. Histone 
acetyltransferase p300 was involved in tau acetylation and the class III protein 
deacetylase SIRT1 in deacetylation. Deleting SIRT1 enhanced levels of 
acetylated-tau and pathogenic forms of p-tau, probably by blocking 
proteasome-mediated degradation. Inhibiting p300 with a small molecule promoted 
tau deacetylation and eliminated p-tau associated with tauopathy. Modulating tau 
acetylation could be a new therapeutic strategy to reduce tau-mediated 
neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.08.044
PMCID: PMC3035103
PMID: 20869593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2406. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Aug;8(4):316-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.004.

Management of hallucinations and psychosis in Parkinson's disease.

Eng ML(1), Welty TE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, University of Kansas School of Pharmacy, 
Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA. meng@kumc.edu

BACKGROUND: Hallucinations and psychosis are common in patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), with reported prevalences of up to 48% and 80%, respectively. 
However, few randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trials evaluating the 
treatment options have appeared in the literature. The studies that have been 
published were complicated by lack of agreement on the diagnosis of psychosis in 
PD, poor completion rates, mixed populations that included dementia, and other 
issues. Several reviews, guidelines, and consensus statements have sought to 
establish standards for treating these symptoms of PD. In 2006, the American 
Academy of Neurology (AAN) published a practice guideline (based on articles 
published up to 2004) for management of depression, psychosis, and dementia in 
patients with PD. Since then, a number of relevant studies have been published.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this article was to review data that have appeared in 
the literature since publication of the AAN guideline regarding the management 
of hallucinations and psychosis in PD.
METHODS: A literature search of the PubMed, CINAHL, and PsychInfo databases was 
conducted for human studies published in English from January 2004 to June 2010. 
All clinical studies were included except case reports and case series. Studies 
with <20 participants were also excluded. Search terms included psychosis, 
hallucinosis, hallucination, delusion, Parkinson, atypical antipsychotic, 
neuroleptic, aripiprazole, clozapine, olanzapine, quetiapine, risperidone, and 
ziprasidone.
RESULTS: Thirteen studies were included in the review: 3 studies of clozapine, 7 
studies of quetiapine, 2 head-to-head trials comparing quetiapine and clozapine, 
and 1 noncomparative trial of clozapine or quetiapine interventions. Most of the 
studies included participants with a mean age in the early to mid 70s and a mean 
duration of PD typically >10 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of the identified studies suggested that patients with PD 
might benefit from long-term clozapine therapy. Results of the quetiapine 
studies were conflicting. However, no statistically significant difference in 
effectiveness was found between quetiapine and clozapine in comparative trials. 
The significance of the differences in treatment responses between patients with 
dementia and those without dementia remains unclear, and it was not possible to 
draw conclusions for or against other atypical antipsychotics because of 
insufficient evidence. Further studies are needed to address the methodologic 
issues in the current trials and to assess safety issues in larger cohorts.

Copyright © 2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.004
PMID: 20869621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2407. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2010 Aug;8(4):331-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006.

Tetrabenazine, a monoamine-depleting drug used in the treatment of hyperkinetic 
movement disorders.

Guay DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55455, USA. guayx001@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Few drugs are available for the management of hyperkinetic movement 
disorders such as the dystonias, choreas, dyskinesias, and tics. Those that are 
available (primarily neuroleptics) are associated with a wide range of 
potentially serious adverse effects, including induction of tardive movement 
disorders. Tetrabenazine (TBZ) is a monoamine-depleting agent initially studied 
in the 1950s and currently approved by the US Food and Drug Administration for 
the treatment of chorea in Huntington's disease.
OBJECTIVE: This article reviews the chemistry, pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, 
therapeutic use, tolerability, drug-interaction potential, and dosing and 
administration of TBZ.
METHODS: MEDLINE was searched (1950-February 2010) for English-language articles 
investigating any aspect of TBZ. Search terms included tetrabenazine, Ro 1-9569, 
Nitoman, benzoquinolizines, and reserpine. The reference lists of the identified 
articles were searched for other pertinent publications, particularly those that 
were not indexed in the 1950s and 1960s.
RESULTS: In the search for a chemical compound that was simpler than reserpine 
while preserving reserpine-like psychotropic activity, TBZ was identified in the 
1950s as one member of a large group of benzoquinolizine derivatives. TBZ acts 
by depletion of the monoamines serotonin, norepinephrine, and dopamine in the 
central nervous system (CNS). It does this by reversibly inhibiting vesicle 
monoamine transporter type 2 and thus preventing monoamine uptake into 
presynaptic neurons. Clinical studies suggest that TBZ may have therapeutic 
applications in a wide range of hyperkinetic movement disorders. TBZ has been 
associated with numerous adverse effects, some of them serious and potentially 
fatal; these include parkinsonism, other extrapyramidal symptoms (particularly 
akathisia), depression and suicidality, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, and 
sedation. TBZ is subject to important drug-drug interactions with inhibitors and 
inducers of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6, reserpine, and lithium. It is one of very 
few drugs whose dosing is based, in part, on the results of genotyping (in its 
case, genotyping for CYP2D6 metabolizer status).
CONCLUSIONS: TBZ is a complicated drug in terms of its mechanism of action and 
its activities against the 3 major monoamines in the CNS, making it difficult to 
predict its efficacy and tolerability in patients with hyperkinetic movement 
disorders. It is associated with numerous adverse effects and several important 
drug-drug interactions. Much work remains to be done to determine the 
therapeutic potential of TBZ in the treatment of hyperkinetic movement 
disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Excerpta Medica Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2010.08.006
PMID: 20869622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2408. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Dec 15;299(1-2):150-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.08.038. Epub 
2010 Sep 25.

Is there pure vascular dementia in old age?

Jellinger KA(1), Attems J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Vascular dementia (VaD) has been suggested to be the most common form of 
dementia in old age, but clinico-pathologic studies showed big differences in 
its epidemiology. A retrospective hospital-based study of the frequency and 
pathology of "pure" VaD (due to cerebrovascular disease without other 
pathologies) was performed in 1110 consecutive autopsy cases of demented elderly 
in Vienna, Austria. It assessed clinical, general autopsy data and 
neuropathology including immunohistochemistry. Neuropathologic diagnosis 
followed current consensus criteria. Four age groups (7th to 10th decades) were 
evaluated. "Pure" VaD was observed in 10.8% of the total cohort, decreasing from 
age 60 to 90+. 85-95% had histories of diabetes, morphologic signs of 
hypertension, 65% myocardial infarction/cardiac decompensation, and 75% a 
history of stroke(s). Neuritic AD-pathology was low (mean Braak stages 1.2-1.6). 
Morphologic subtypes (multi-infarct (MID), subcortical arteriosclerotic 
(SAE)-the most frequent, and strategic infarct dementia (SID)) showed no 
age-related differences. By contrast, AD (without vascular or Lewy pathologies), 
mixed dementia (AD+cerebrovascular encephalopathy), and AD with minor 
cerebrovascular lesions increased with age. AD+Lewy pathology and other 
dementias decreased significantly over age 90. This retrograde study using 
strict morphologic diagnostic criteria confirmed the existence of "pure" VaD in 
old age, with a tendency to decline at age 90+, while AD and AD+cerebrovascular 
pathologies showed considerable age-related increase. Another autopsy study 
distinguishing two age groups of demented showed a significant increase of both 
AD and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), but decrease of VaD over age 85, while 
in a small subgroup of old subjects CAA without considerable AD-pathology may be 
an independent risk factor for cognitive decline.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.08.038
PMID: 20869729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2409. Neurotherapeutics. 2010 Oct;7(4):399-412. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2010.05.017.

Astrocytes in Alzheimer's disease.

Verkhratsky A(1), Olabarria M, Noristani HN, Yeh CY, Rodriguez JJ.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Life Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester M139PT, 
United Kingdom.

The circuitry of the human brain is formed by neuronal networks embedded into 
astroglial syncytia. The astrocytes perform numerous functions, providing for 
the overall brain homeostasis, assisting in neurogenesis, determining the 
micro-architecture of the grey matter, and defending the brain through 
evolutionary conserved astrogliosis programs. Astroglial cells are engaged in 
neurological diseases by determining the progression and outcome of 
neuropathological process. Astrocytes are specifically involved in various 
neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and various forms of dementia. Recent evidence 
suggest that early stages of neurodegenerative processes are associated with 
atrophy of astroglia, which causes disruptions in synaptic connectivity, 
disbalance in neurotransmitter homeostasis, and neuronal death through increased 
excitotoxicity. At the later stages, astrocytes become activated and contribute 
to the neuroinflammatory component of neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society for Experimental NeuroTherapeutics, Inc. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nurt.2010.05.017
PMCID: PMC5084302
PMID: 20880504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2410. Lancet Neurol. 2010 Dec;9(12):1200-1213. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70212-X. 
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Neuropsychological and clinical heterogeneity of cognitive impairment and 
dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Kehagia AA(1), Barker RA(2), Robbins TW(3).

Author information:
(1)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, UK; 
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK.
(2)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, UK.
(3)Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, UK; 
Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK. Electronic 
address: twr2@cam.ac.uk.

Cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease is gaining increased 
clinical significance owing to the relative success of therapeutic approaches to 
the motor symptoms of this disorder. Early investigations contributed to the 
concept of subcortical dementia associated with bradyphrenia and cognitive 
rigidity. For cognition in parkinsonian disorders, this notion developed into 
the concept of mild cognitive impairment and fronto-executive dysfunction in 
particular, driven mainly by dopaminergic dysmodulation and manifesting as 
deficits in flexibility, planning, working memory, and reinforcement learning. 
However, patients with Parkinson's disease could also develop a syndrome of 
dementia that might depend on non-dopaminergic, cholinergic cortical 
dysfunction. Recent findings, supplemented by advances in neuroimaging and 
genetic research, reveal substantial heterogeneity in the range of cognitive 
deficits in patients with Parkinson's disease. Remediation and management 
prospects for these cognitive deficits are based on neuropharmacological and 
cognitive rehabilitation approaches.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70212-X
PMID: 20880750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2411. Neurology. 2010 Oct 5;75(14):1270-6. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f61311.

What predicts mortality in Parkinson disease?: a prospective population-based 
long-term study.

Forsaa EB(1), Larsen JP, Wentzel-Larsen T, Alves G.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Center for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Box 8100, N-4068 Stavanger, Norway. foeb@sus.no

OBJECTIVE: To identify independent risk factors of mortality in a 
community-based Parkinson disease (PD) cohort during prospective long-term 
follow-up.
METHODS: A community-based prevalent sample of 230 patients with PD from 
southwestern Norway was followed prospectively with repetitive assessments of 
motor and nonmotor symptoms from 1993 to 2005. Information on vital status until 
October 20, 2009, was obtained from the National Population Register in Norway. 
Cox proportional hazards models were applied to identify independent predictors 
of mortality during follow-up. Chronological age, Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor score, levodopa equivalent dose, probable REM sleep 
behavior disorder, psychotic symptoms, dementia, and use of antipsychotics were 
included as time-dependent variables, and age at onset (AAO) and sex as 
time-independent variables.
RESULTS: Of 230 patients, 211 (92%) died during the study period. Median 
survival time from motor onset was 15.8 years (range 2.2-36.6). Independent 
predictors of mortality during follow-up were AAO (hazard ratio [HR] 1.40 for 
10-years increase, p = 0.029), chronological age (HR 1.51 for 10-years increase, 
p = 0.043), male sex (HR 1.63, p = 0.001), UPDRS motor score (HR 1.18 for 
10-point increase, p < 0.001), psychotic symptoms (HR 1.45, p = 0.039), and 
dementia (HR 1.89, p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: This population-based long-term study demonstrates that in addition 
to AAO, chronological age, motor severity, and dementia, psychotic symptoms 
independently predict increased mortality in PD. In contrast, no significant 
impact of antipsychotic or antiparkinsonian drugs on survival was observed in 
our PD cohort. Early prevention of motor progression and development of 
psychosis and dementia may be the most promising strategies to increase life 
expectancy in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f61311
PMID: 20921512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2412. Chem Senses. 2011 Jan;36(1):63-7. doi: 10.1093/chemse/bjq098. Epub 2010 Oct 5.

Odor identification and mortality in old age.

Wilson RS(1), Yu L, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, 600 South 
Paulina Avenue, Suite 1038, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rwilson@rush.edu

The association of olfactory dysfunction with mortality was examined in 1162 
older persons without dementia or Parkinson's disease. They completed a standard 
12-item test of odor identification and then were followed for a mean of 4.2 
years (standard deviation [SD] = 2.6, range: 0-9) during which 321 individuals 
died (27.6%). The relation of olfactory score to risk of death was assessed in a 
series of proportional hazards models adjusted for age, sex, education, and 
other covariates. Olfactory scores ranged from 0 to 12 correct (mean = 9.0, SD = 
2.2). In an initial analysis, risk of death decreased by about 6% for each 
additional odor correctly identified (hazard ratio = 0.94; 95% confidence 
interval: 0.90, 0.98). Thus, mortality risk was about 36% higher with a low 
score (6, 10th percentile) compared with a high score (11, 90th percentile). The 
association persisted in subsequent analyses that controlled for naming ability, 
disability, cerebrovascular disease, characteristic patterns of leisure 
activity, depressive symptoms, and apolipoprotein E genotype. The results 
indicate that difficulty identifying familiar odors in old age is associated 
with increased risk of death.

DOI: 10.1093/chemse/bjq098
PMCID: PMC3002399
PMID: 20923931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2413. J Neurol. 2011 Mar;258(3):380-5. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5762-6. Epub 2010 Oct 
7.

T1rho (T1ρ) MR imaging in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease with and 
without dementia.

Haris M(1), Singh A, Cai K, Davatzikos C, Trojanowski JQ, Melhem ER, Clark CM, 
Borthakur A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Center for Magnetic Resonance and Optical Imaging, 
University of Pennsylvania, B1 Stellar-Chance Laboratories, 422 Curie Boulevard, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6100, USA. haris@mail.mmrrcc.upenn.edu

In the current study, we aim to measure T1rho (T (1ρ)) in the hippocampus in the 
brain of control, Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and PD 
patients with dementia (PDD), and to determine efficacy of T (1ρ) in 
differentiating these cohorts. With informed consent, 53 AD patients, 62 PD 
patients, 11 PDD patients, and 46 age-matched controls underwent a standardized 
clinical assessment including mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and brain T 
(1ρ) MRI on a 1.5-T clinical-scanner. T(1ρ) maps were generated by fitting each 
pixel's intensity as a function of the spin-lock pulse duration. In control, AD, 
PD and PDD, mean ± SE T (1ρ) values in the right hippocampus (RH) were 92.15 ± 
2.00, 99.65 ± 1.98, 85.68 ± 1.87, 102.47 ± 4.66 ms while in the left hippocampus 
(LH) these values were 90.16 ± 1.82, 99.53 ± 1.91, 84.33 ± 2.03, 95.33 ± 4.64 
ms. Significant difference for both RH and LH T (1ρ) across the groups (p < 
0.001) was observed. Both RH and LH T (1ρ) were significantly increased in AD 
compared to control (p = 0.034, p = 0.001) and PD (p < 0.001, p < 0.001). In 
control, both RH and LH T (1ρ) values were significantly increased compared to 
PD (p = 0.031, p = 0.027) while compared to PDD only the RH T (1ρ) value was 
significantly decreased (p = 0.043). Both RH and LH T (1ρ) values in PD were 
significantly lower than PDD (p = 0.004, p = 0.032). No significant correlation 
between the T (1ρ) and age as well as between T (1ρ) and MMSE scores was 
observed. The serial measurement of T(1ρ) in both AD and PD may provide the 
nature of disease progression and may contribute to their early diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-010-5762-6
PMCID: PMC5585858
PMID: 20924593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2414. Mov Disord. 2010 Dec 15;25(16):2769-76. doi: 10.1002/mds.23391.

Parkinson's disease dementia can be easily detected in routine clinical 
practice.

Dujardin K(1), Dubois B, Tison F, Durif F, Bourdeix I, Péré JJ, Duhamel A; 
EXECUTIVE study group.

Collaborators: Auzou N, Azulay JP, Benatru I, Bourdeix I, Brandel JP, Ceccaldi 
M, Charre J, Chedan F, Cochen-De Cock V, Corvol JC, Defebvre L, Delfini M, 
Delgadillo D, Destée A, Devos D, Dubois B, Duhamel A, Dujardin K, Durif F, 
Eusebio A, Fouillet N, Garnier-Carronnier S, Godefroy O, Krystkowiak P, 
Lacomblez L, Latxague C, Martin S, Péré JJ, Perez-Lloret S, Petrissans JL, 
Planque E, Portet F, Poujois A, Rascol O, Renié L, Robin C, Rogez R, Rouaud O, 
Roussel M, Spampinato U, Thomas-Antérion C, Tison F, Touchon J, Tranchant C, 
Turc J, Viallet F, Witjas T, Ziegler M.

Author information:
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, UDSL, CNRS FRE3291, Neurology and Movement 
Disorders Unit, Lille University Medical Center, Lille, France. 
kathy.dujardin@chru-lille.fr

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2011 Aug 1;26(9):1764; author reply 1764-5.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is mainly characterized by its motor manifestations, 
but it is also frequently associated with dementia. Early diagnosis of PD 
dementia (PDD) is particularly important because effective cholinesterase 
inhibitor treatments are available. This study aimed at validating a short 
procedure for screening for PDD in routine clinical practice and which adopts 
recently published diagnostic criteria. One hundred eighty-eight patients with 
PD participated in the study. The examination procedure comprised three steps: 
standard clinical examination, a short cognitive function assessment fulfilling 
the requirements of the Movement Disorders Society (Mini Mental State 
Examination, five-word test, word generation task, and impact on daily life, 
including a questionnaire on compliance with medication) and an extensive 
evaluation of cognitive functions and behavior. After each step, the suspected 
presence or absence of dementia was recorded. After the short cognitive function 
assessment, PDD was suspected in 18.62% of the patients [95% confidence interval 
(CI): 13.32-24.93%]. After the extensive assessment, 21.81% (95% CI: 
16.13-28.40%) met the criteria for probable PDD. The short battery's sensitivity 
and specificity were 65.85% (95% CI = 49.41-79.92%) and 94.56% (95% CI = 
89.56-97.62%), respectively. A stepwise logistic regression analysis showed that 
use of a specific cut-off considerably enhanced the short battery's sensitivity 
(85.37%, 95% CI = 70.83-94.43%) without decreasing its specificity (83.67%, 95% 
CI = 76.69-89.25%). With an easy-to-use, short battery of tests that are 
commonly used in routine clinical practice, it is possible to diagnose PDD in 
accordance with reference criteria and with the same sensitivity and specificity 
as in a more extensive evaluation.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23391
PMID: 20925065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2415. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010 Oct;58(10):1855-62. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.03085.x.

Morbidity and physical functioning in old age: differences according to living 
area.

Sjölund BM(1), Nordberg G, Wimo A, von Strauss E.

Author information:
(1)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, 
Stockholm, Sweden. britt-marie.sjolund@ki.se

OBJECTIVES: To describe differences in morbidity and functional status according 
to living area.
DESIGN: Community-based survey.
SETTING: A community-based prospective cohort, the Kungsholmen-Nordanstig 
Project.
PARTICIPANTS: Adults aged 75 and older living in an urban area of central 
Stockholm (n=1,222) and in the rural community of Nordanstig in northern Sweden 
(n=919).
MEASUREMENTS: Physicians clinically examined all participants using the same 
standardized protocols in both living areas; trained nurses directly assessed 
disability.
RESULTS: Cardiovascular disease was the most common disorder in both living 
areas (39.9% in the urban area and 45.2% in the rural area). There were great 
area differences in the prevalence of stroke (7.4% and 14.0%), diabetes mellitus 
6.3% and 16.1%), and Parkinson's disease (1.0% and 3.7%). It was more common to 
have two or more diseases than no diseases in the rural area than in the urban 
area (odds ratio=1.9, 95% confidence interval=1.4-2.4). Significant living area 
differences (urban vs rural) in population attributable risk (PAR) was found for 
disability due to stroke (5.6 vs 32.2), diabetes mellitus (1.2 vs 6.1), 
fractures (1.4 vs 10.7), and hearing impairment (8.7 vs 22.0).
CONCLUSION: Differences were found in disability, morbidity, and disease 
patterns according to living area. The rural elderly population was more 
disabled and had more diseases than the urban elderly population, despite being 
slightly younger than the urban cohort. There were significant area differences 
in the PAR of how specific chronic conditions influenced the risk of disability.

© 2010, Copyright the Authors. Journal compilation © 2010, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.03085.x
PMID: 20929463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2416. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;23(1):109-19. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101518.

A gene expression pattern in blood for the early detection of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Booij BB(1), Lindahl T, Wetterberg P, Skaane NV, Sæbø S, Feten G, Rye PD, 
Kristiansen LI, Hagen N, Jensen M, Bårdsen K, Winblad B, Sharma P, Lönneborg A.

Author information:
(1)DiaGenic ASA, Grenseveien, Oslo, Norway. anders.lonneborg@diagenic.com

A whole genome screen was performed using oligonucleotide microarray analysis on 
blood from a large clinical cohort of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and 
control subjects as clinical sample. Blood samples for total RNA extraction were 
collected in PAXgene tubes, and gene expression analysis performed on the AB1700 
Whole Genome Survey Microarrays. When comparing the gene expression of 94 AD 
patients and 94 cognitive healthy controls, a Jackknife gene selection based 
method and Partial Least Square Regression (PLSR) was used to develop a disease 
classifier algorithm, which gives a test score indicating the presence 
(positive) or absence (negative) of AD. This algorithm, based on 1239 probes, 
was validated in an independent test set of 63 subjects comprising 31 AD 
patients, 25 age-matched cognitively healthy controls, and 7 young controls. 
This algorithm correctly predicted the class of 55/63 (accuracy 87%), including 
26/31 AD samples (sensitivity 84%) and 29/32 controls (specificity 91%). The 
positive likelihood ratio was 8.9 and the area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve (ROC AUC) was 0.94. Furthermore, the algorithm also 
discriminated AD from Parkinson's disease in 24/27 patients (accuracy 89%). We 
have identified and validated a gene expression signature in blood that 
classifies AD patients and cognitively healthy controls with high accuracy and 
show that alterations specific for AD can be detected distant from the primary 
site of the disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101518
PMID: 20930264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2417. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(4):1123-33. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101413.

Intra-familial clinical heterogeneity due to FTLD-U with TDP-43 proteinopathy 
caused by a novel deletion in progranulin gene (PGRN).

Gabryelewicz T(1), Masellis M, Berdynski M, Bilbao JM, Rogaeva E, St 
George-Hyslop P, Barczak A, Czyzewski K, Barcikowska M, Wszolek Z, Black SE, 
Zekanowski C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Disorders, Mossakowski Medical Research 
Centre, Polish Academy of Sciences, Warsaw, Poland.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is one of the commonest forms of early-onset 
dementia, accounting for up to 20% of all dementia patients. Recently, it has 
been shown that mutations in progranulin gene (PGRN) cause many familial cases 
of FTD. Members of a family affected by FTD spectrum disorders were ascertained 
in Poland and Canada. Clinical, radiological, molecular, genetic, and 
pathological studies were performed. A sequencing analysis of PGRN exons 1-13 
was performed in the proband. Genotyping of the identified PGRN mutation and 
pathological analysis was carried out in the proband's brother. The onset of 
symptoms of FTD in the proband included bradykinesia, apathy, and somnolence 
followed by changes in personality, cognitive deficits, and psychotic features. 
The proband's clinical diagnosis was FTD and parkinsonism (FTDP). DNA sequence 
analysis of PGRN revealed a novel, heterozygous mutation in exon 11 
(g.2988_2989delCA, P439_R440fsX6). The mutation introduced a premature stop 
codon at position 444. The proband's brother with the same mutation had a 
different course first presenting as progressive non-fluent aphasia, and later 
evolving symptoms of behavioral variant of FTD. He also developed parkinsonism 
late in the disease course evolving into corticobasal syndrome. Pathological 
analysis in the brother revealed Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration-Ubiquitin 
(FTLD-U)/TDP-43 positive pathology. The novel PGRN mutation is a disease-causing 
mutation and is associated with substantial intra-familial clinical 
heterogeneity. Although presenting features were different, rapid and 
substantial deterioration in the disease course was observed in both family 
members.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101413
PMCID: PMC5045304
PMID: 20930269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2418. Neuroimage. 2011 Jan;54 Suppl 1:S227-32. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.077. 
Epub 2010 Oct 4.

Do patient's get angrier following STN, GPi, and thalamic deep brain 
stimulation.

Burdick AP(1), Foote KD, Wu S, Bowers D, Zeilman P, Jacobson CE, Ward HE, Okun 
MS.

Author information:
(1)University of Florida Movement Disorders Center, Department of Neurosurgery, 
Gainesville, FL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to examine whether deep brain 
stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN), the globus pallidus internus 
(GPi), and/or the ventralis intermedius thalamic nucleus (Vim) was associated 
with making patients angrier pre to post-surgical intervention.
BACKGROUND: Secondary outcome analysis of the NIH COMPARE Parkinson's Disease 
DBS trial revealed that participants were angrier and had more mood and 
cognitive side effects following DBS. Additionally blinded on/off analysis did 
not change anger scores. The sample size was small but suggested that STN DBS 
may have been worse than GPi in provoking anger. We endeavored to examine this 
question utilizing a larger dataset (the UF INFORM database), and also we 
included a third surgical target (Vim), which has been utilized for a different 
disease, essential tremor.
METHODS: Consecutive patients from the University of Florida Movement Disorders 
Center who were implanted with unilateral DBS for Parkinson's disease (STN or 
GPi) or essential tremor (Vim) were included. Patients originally implanted at 
outside institutions were excluded. Pre-operative and 4- to 6-month 
post-operative Visual Analog Mood Scale (VAMS) scores for all three groups were 
compared; additionally, pre-operative and 1- to 3-month scores were compared for 
STN and GPi patients. A linear regression model was utilized to analyze the 
relationship between the VAMS anger score and the independent variables of age, 
years with symptoms, Mini-Mental Status Examination (MMSE) score, handedness, 
ethnicity, gender, side of surgery, target of surgery, baseline Dementia Rating 
Scale (DRS) total score, baseline Beck Depression Index (BDI) score, micro- and 
macroelectrode passes, and years of education. Levodopa equivalent dosages and 
dopamine agonist use were analyzed for a potential impact on anger scores.
RESULTS: A total of 322 unilateral DBS procedures were analyzed, with STN 
(n=195), Vim (n=71), and GPi (n=56) making up the cohort. An ANOVA was used to 
detect significant differences among the three targets in the changes pre- to 
post-operatively. Similar to the COMPARE dataset, at 4 months, the only subscore 
of VAMS to reveal a significant difference between the three targets was the 
angry subscore, with GPi revealing a mean (standard) change of 2.38 (9.53); STN, 
4.82 (14.52); and Vim, -1.17 (11.51) (p=0.012). At 1-3 months post-operation, 
both STN and GPi groups were significantly angrier (p=0.004), but there was no 
significant difference between the two groups. However, GPi patients were 
significantly more confused as compared to STN patients (p=0.016). The linear 
regression model which sought independent explanatory variables revealed a 
relationship between the VAMS anger score and the surgical target and the 
disease duration. The mean changes for STN and GPi DBS pre- to post-operation 
were 11.67 (p=0.001) and 8.21 (p=0.022) units more than those with Vim, 
respectively. For every year added of disease duration, the VAMS anger score 
increased by 0.24 (p=0.022). For the GPi and STN groups, number of 
microelectrode passes was significantly associated with angry score changes 
(p=0.014), with the anger score increasing 2.29 units per microelectrode pass. 
Independent variables not associated with the VAMS anger score included the 
surgery side, handedness, gender, ethnicity, education, age at surgery, MMSE, 
DRS, and BDI scores. Although the STN group significantly decreased in LED when 
compared to GPi, there was no relationship to anger scores. Similarly, dopamine 
agonist use was not different between STN and GPi groups and did not correlate 
with the VAMS anger score changes.
CONCLUSIONS: STN and GPi DBS for Parkinson's disease were associated with 
significantly higher anger scores pre- to post-DBS as compared to Vim for 
essential tremor. Anger score changes in STN and GPi patients seem to be 
associated with microelectrode passes, suggesting that it may be a lesional 
effect. PD patients with longer disease duration may be particularly 
susceptible, and this should be kept in mind when discussing the potential of 
DBS surgery for an individual patient. Essential tremor patients who on average 
have much longer disease durations did not get angrier. The changes in anger 
scores were not related to LED change or dopamine agonist use. Whether the 
induction of anger is disease-specific or target-specific is not currently 
known; however, our data would suggest that PD patients implanted in STN or GPi 
are at a potential risk. Finally, on closer inspection of the COMPARE DBS data, 
VAMS anger scores did not change on or off DBS, suggesting that anger changes 
may be more of a lesional effect rather than a stimulation induced one (Okun et 
al., 2009).

Copyright Â© 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.09.077
PMCID: PMC3014411
PMID: 20932923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2419. Neurology. 2010 Oct 12;75(15):1356-61. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649.

Phenotypic spectrum of patients with PLA2G6 mutation and PARK14-linked 
parkinsonism.

Yoshino H(1), Tomiyama H, Tachibana N, Ogaki K, Li Y, Funayama M, Hashimoto T, 
Takashima S, Hattori N.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: PLA2G6 is the causative gene for infantile neuroaxonal dystrophy, 
neurodegeneration associated with brain iron accumulation, and Karak syndrome. 
Based on previous reports, patients with PLA2G6 mutations could show axonal 
dystrophy, dystonia, dementia, and cerebellar signs. Recently, PLA2G6 was also 
reported as the causative gene for early-onset PARK14-linked 
dystonia-parkinsonism.
METHODS: To clarify the role of PLA2G6 mutation in parkinsonism, we conducted 
mutation analysis in 29 selected patients with very early-onset (≤ 30, mean 21.2 
± 8.4 years, ± SD) parkinsonism. These patients had other clinical features 
(e.g., mental retardation/dementia [14/29], psychosis [15/29], dystonia [11/29], 
and hyperreflexia [11/29]).
RESULTS: Two novel compound heterozygous PLA2G6 mutations were detected (patient 
A: p.F72L/p.R635Q; patients B1 and B2: p.Q452X/p.R635Q). All 3 patients had 
early-onset l-dopa-responsive parkinsonism with dementia and frontotemporal 
lobar atrophy. Disease progression was relatively rapid. SPECT in patient B1 
showed frontotemporal lobar hypoperfusion. MRI in patient A showed iron 
accumulation in the substantia nigra and striatum.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the clinical presentation of PLA2G6-associated 
neurodegeneration was reported to be homogeneous, our findings suggest patients 
with PLA2G6 mutation could show heterogeneous phenotype such as 
dystonia-parkinsonism, dementia, frontotemporal atrophy/hypoperfusion, with or 
without brain iron accumulation. Based on the clinical heterogeneity, the 
functional roles of PLA2G6 and the roles of PLA2G6 variants including single 
heterozygous mutations should be further elucidated in patients with atypical 
parkinsonism, dementia, or Parkinson disease. PLA2G6 mutations should be 
considered in patients with early-onset l-dopa-responsive parkinsonism and 
dementia with frontotemporal lobar atrophy.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f73649
PMID: 20938027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2420. Mov Disord. 2010 Dec 15;25(16):2756-61. doi: 10.1002/mds.23379.

Everyday reasoning abilities in persons with Parkinson's disease.

Young TL(1), Granic A, Yu Chen T, Haley CB, Edwards JD.

Author information:
(1)University of South Florida, School of Aging Studies, Tampa, Florida, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) patients develop progressive cognitive decline. The 
degree to which such decline impacts instrumental activities of daily living 
(IADL) among individuals in the early stages of PD without dementia is not well 
documented. The Everyday Cognitive Battery Reasoning subtest (ECB) was used to 
assess ability to solve everyday reasoning tasks for IADL among 19 non-demented 
older adults with PD in comparison to 20 older adults without PD. The two groups 
were similar in age, education, race and gender. Individuals with PD had 
significantly lower scores (M = 61.98, SD = 12.03) than the comparison group (M 
= 69.80, SD = 9.48). Individuals with PD, who do not have dementia, may be more 
likely to experience difficulties in IADL requiring reasoning including 
medication use, finances, and nutrition. Even more serious implications lie in 
the capacity to make treatment choices.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23379
PMCID: PMC3003758
PMID: 20939079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: None of the authors have 
conflicts of interest related to this project.


2421. MMW Fortschr Med. 2010 Apr 8;152 Suppl 1:1-6.

[The German Study on the Epidemiology of Parkinson's Disease with Dementia 
(GEPAD): more than Parkinson].

[Article in German]

Von Reichmann H(1), Deuschl G, Riedel O, Spottke A, Förstl H, Henn F, Heuser I, 
Oertel W, Riederer P, Trenkwalder C, Dodel R, Wittchen HU.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Fakultät Carl Gustav Carus Dresden.

It is unknown, how frequently Parkinson's disease (PD) is complicated by 
dementia, depression and other neuropsychiatric conditions. An epidemiologic 
characterisation of the situation in specialised neurologic settings is lacking. 
The Geman Study on the Epidemiology of Parkinson's Disease with Dementia (GEPAD) 
isa national representative epidemiological study of n=1449 PD patients in n=315 
office-based neurological settings, designed to estimate the prevalence of 
dementia, depression and other neuropsychiatric conditions in patients with PD 
of all stages by using standardized clinical assessments.
RESULTS: 28.6% met DSM-IV criteria for dementia. 33.6% met criteria for 
depression and 61% additionally had other clinically significant 
psychopathological syndromes. Only 29.4% had no neuropsychiatric conditions. 
GEPAD reveals for the first time comprehensively that the neuropsychiatric 
burden of PD patients in all stages and even early stages is considerable, 
posing challenging questions for research and clinical management.

PMID: 20942300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2422. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Mar;131(3):637-43. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.301. Epub 2010 
Oct 14.

Risk factors for bullous pemphigoid in the elderly: a prospective case-control 
study.

Bastuji-Garin S(1), Joly P, Lemordant P, Sparsa A, Bedane C, Delaporte E, 
Roujeau JC, Bernard P, Guillaume JC, Ingen-Housz-Oro S, Maillard H, Pauwels C, 
Picard-Dahan C, Dutronc Y, Richard MA; French Study Group for Bullous Diseases.

Author information:
(1)Faculté de Médecine, LIC EA4393, Université Paris-Est, Créteil, France. 
sylvie.bastuji-garin@hmn.aphp.fr

A rise in the incidence of bullous pemphigoid (BP) was documented recently in 
Europe, and the main risk factors for BP remain unknown. We conducted a 
multicenter case-control study to evaluate risk factors for BP. We identified 
201 incident BP cases and 345 controls individually matched for age, gender, 
center, and place of residence (home, nursing home, or extended-care facility). 
We used univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses to compare 
drugs used for over 3 months, comorbidities, and physical and cognitive 
impairments between cases and controls. Mean age of BP patients was 84.2 (±8.7) 
years. Factors independently associated with BP by multivariate analysis were 
major cognitive impairment (odds ratio (OR), 2.19; 95% confidence interval (95% 
CI), 1.24-3.87), bedridden condition (OR, 2.19; 95% CI, 1.23-3.89), Parkinson's 
disease (OR, 2.16; 95% CI, 1.09-4.27), unipolar or bipolar disorder (OR, 5.25; 
95% CI, 1.21-22.86), and chronic use of spironolactone (OR, 2.30; 95% CI, 
1.20-4.46) or phenothiazines with aliphatic side chains (OR, 3.70; 95% CI, 
1.21-11.34). Chronic analgesic use was associated with a lower risk of BP (OR, 
0.49; 95% CI, 0.30-0.81). Thus, risk factors for BP include neurological 
disorders, particularly dementia and Parkinson's disease, psychiatric disorders 
(unipolar and bipolar disorders), bedridden condition, and chronic use of 
several drugs.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2010.301
PMID: 20944650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2423. J Clin Neurol. 2010 Sep;6(3):148-51. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2010.6.3.148. Epub 2010 
Sep 30.

Behavioral changes as the earliest clinical manifestation of progressive 
supranuclear palsy.

Han HJ(1), Kim H, Park JH, Shin HW, Kim GU, Kim DS, Lee EJ, Oh HE, Park SH, Kim 
YJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Myongji Hospital, College of Medicine, Kwandong 
University, Goyang, Korea.

BACKGROUND: The clinical and pathological heterogeneity of progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) is well established. Even with a well-defined clinical 
phenotype and a thorough laboratory workup, PSP can be misdiagnosed, especially 
in its early stages.
CASE REPORT: A 52-year-old woman, who we initially diagnosed with a behavioral 
variant of frontotemporal dementia developed parkinsonian features, which then 
progressed to gait instability and gaze abnormality.
CONCLUSIONS: We report herein a pathologically confirmed case of PSP presenting 
with behavioral changes including agitation and irritability, which eventually 
led to the cardinal symptoms of progressive supranuclear palsy.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2010.6.3.148
PMCID: PMC2950920
PMID: 20944816

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial conflicts of 
interest.


2424. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):204.e13-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.08.010. Epub 2010 Oct 13.

Paraoxonase-1 polymorphisms in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
AD-PD spectrum diseases.

Wingo TS(1), Rosen A, Cutler DJ, Lah JJ, Levey AI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322-1047, USA. 
thomas.wingo@emory.edu

Paraoxonase-1 (PON1) is a serum arylsulfatase that metabolizes organophosphate 
pesticides and protects low-density lipoprotein from oxidation. Case-control 
studies of PON1 genetic variants in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD) have revealed some positive albeit inconsistent associations with 2 
PON1 coding polymorphisms: Q192R (rs662) and L55M (rs854560). Because AD and PD 
exist along a spectrum of disorders with shared epidemiologic, clinical, and 
pathologic features, here we evaluated PON1 variants in a cohort of 746 AD, 566 
PD, 132 AD-PD, and 719 cognitively normal age-matched controls. In the combined 
AD and Caucasian PD cohorts we had 80% power to detect a relative risk of at 
least 1.25 and 1.35, respectively, for each polymorphism. We found no 
association between 2 PON1 coding polymorphisms and AD in African Americans or 
Caucasians, and no association with PD or AD-PD in Caucasians. There was also no 
evidence of an interaction between PON1 and apolipoprotein E for any of these 
diseases. Our results suggest that either these functional PON1 polymorphisms 
are not associated with AD and PD spectrum disorders, or that the relative risk 
conferred is small.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.08.010
PMCID: PMC3021799
PMID: 20947215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2425. Neurobiol Dis. 2011 Feb;41(2):377-84. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2010.10.005. Epub 2010 
Oct 14.

Striatal Aβ peptide deposition mirrors dementia and differentiates DLB and PDD 
from other parkinsonian syndromes.

Kalaitzakis ME(1), Walls AJ, Pearce RK, Gentleman SM.

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Unit, Centre for Neuroscience, Division of Experimental 
Medicine, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, Charing Cross Campus, 
St Dunstan's Road, London, UK. michail.kalaitzakis03@imperial.ac.uk

Recent neuropathological studies have described widespread amyloid-β peptide 
(Aβ) deposition in the striatum of patients with Lewy body disorders, 
particularly in Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB). However, positron emission tomography (PET) studies using the 
[(11)C]PIB ligand, binding to Aβ deposits, detects significant striatal 
pathology only in DLB and not in PDD. Employing immunohistochemistry, we 
examined striatal Aβ deposition in the caudate nucleus and putamen of 52 PD, 41 
PDD, 14 DLB, 7 multiple system atrophy (MSA) and 14 progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP) cases in relation to the presence of dementia. PD, MSA and PSP cases 
showed little or no Aβ pathology in the striatum. In contrast, both PDD and DLB 
cases demonstrated significantly greater Aβ deposition in the striatum when 
compared to PD, MSA and PSP groups. We conclude that striatal Aβ pathology is 
common in both PDD and DLB and may reflect the development of dementia in these 
conditions. More detailed examination of the morphology of the Aβ pathology 
suggests that it is the presence of cored amyloid plaques in DLB, but not PDD, 
that underlies the differences seen in PET imaging.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2010.10.005
PMID: 20951207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2426. Clin Neuropsychol. 2010 Nov;24(8):1365-78. doi: 10.1080/13854046.2010.516769. 
Epub 2010 Oct 15.

Assessment of the RBANS Visual and Verbal Indices in a sample of neurologically 
impaired elderly participants.

Morgan DR(1), Linck J, Scott J, Adams R, Mold J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences,University of Oklahoma Health 
Sciences Center, Oklahoma City, OK 73126, USA. drmorgan2538@gmail.com

With increases in the older adult population, brief assessments sensitive to 
dementia are essential. This study assessed the effectiveness of the verbal 
memory and visual processing indices proposed by Duff et al. (2009) to 
differentiate participants with neurological disorders. Participants included 
individuals diagnosed with mild cognitive impairment (MCI; n = 38), Alzheimer's 
disease (AD; n = 100), or Parkinson's disease (PD; n = 35), with ages ranging 
from 65-93 years. In addition, normal control participants (n = 100) within the 
same age range were used for comparison. ANOVA and posthoc analyses revealed 
that the normal control and AD groups were significantly different from all 
groups for Verbal and Visual Indices. However, the MCI and PD groups did not 
differ from each other. Predictive discriminant analysis (PDA) assessed 
classification rates of the groups, and the normal participants were classified 
best (63% to 92%). The AD group followed with percentages ranging from 64% to 
76%. Specifically, when classifying the normal and AD groups using both Verbal 
and Visual Indices of the RBANS together, sensitivity was 92.0% (n = 92) and 
specificity was 79.0% (n = 79). Overall classification rates for this analysis 
were 85.5%. Overall, the RBANS Verbal and Visual Indices may provide additional 
information when working with neurologically impaired older adults, with overall 
classification rates ranging from 61.5% to 85.5%.

DOI: 10.1080/13854046.2010.516769
PMID: 20954101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2427. Mov Disord. 2010 Dec 15;25(16):2785-91. doi: 10.1002/mds.23411.

Neuropsychological correlates of mild to severe hallucinations in Parkinson's 
disease.

Llebaria G(1), Pagonabarraga J, Martínez-Corral M, García-Sánchez C, 
Pascual-Sedano B, Gironell A, Kulisevsky J.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital (Sant Pau 
Institute of Biomedical Research), Autonomous University of Barcelona, Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Barcelona, Spain.

The development of visual hallucinations (VH) is a frequent complication of 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Presence of hallucinations is one of the main risk 
factors associated with dementia, and severity progression of VH mainly 
contributes to impaired quality of life in PD. The neuropsychological features 
associated with severity progression of VH are unknown and might help to detect 
patients at risk of a more severe outcome. We aimed to explore the 
neuropsychological deficits associated with the different types of VH observed 
in PD, from minor hallucinations to well-formed VH with loss of insight. 
Prospective study of 57 PD patients with (n = 29) and without VH (n = 28) 
matched for age, education, antiparkinsonian medications, and disease duration. 
Description of VH was assessed by the Hallucinations and Psychosis item of the 
MDS-UPDRS. Cognition was assessed with the Parkinson's Disease-Cognitive Rating 
Scale (PD-CRS) and the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (MDRS). Patients with minor 
VH did not differ from patients without VH in any cognitive domain. PD patients 
with major VH and insight retained performed worse on the action verbal fluency 
task (P < 0.04), and patients with VH and loss of insight showed a greater 
impairment on the PD-CRS posterior cortical score (P = 0.021) and the clock 
copying item (P = 0.01). A double dissociation was found in the 
neuropsychological profile of patients with VH with and without loss of insight. 
While the presence of major VH with insight retained appeared related to a 
predominant frontal-striatal impairment, loss of insight was characterized by 
further impairment of cognitive functions related to posterior cortical areas. A 
comprehensible continuum pattern of clinical relationships emerged among VH and 
cognitive functioning in PD.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23411
PMID: 20960483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2428. J Neurosci. 2010 Oct 20;30(42):14153-64. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1042-10.2010.

Human immunodeficiency virus-1 Tat activates calpain proteases via the ryanodine 
receptor to enhance surface dopamine transporter levels and increase 
transporter-specific uptake and Vmax.

Perry SW(1), Barbieri J, Tong N, Polesskaya O, Pudasaini S, Stout A, Lu R, 
Kiebala M, Maggirwar SB, Gelbard HA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neural Development and Disease, Department of Neurology, Child 
Neurology Division, Graduate Program in Pathology, and Department of 
Microbiology and Immunology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. seth_perry@urmc.rochester.edu

Human immunodeficiency virus-associated neurological disease (HAND) still causes 
significant morbidity, despite success reducing viral loads with combination 
antiretroviral therapy. The dopamine (DA) system is particularly vulnerable in 
HAND. We hypothesize that early, "reversible" DAergic synaptic dysfunction 
occurs long before DAergic neuron loss. As such, aging human immunodeficiency 
virus (HIV)-infected individuals may be vulnerable to other age-related 
neurodegenerative diseases like Parkinson's disease (PD), underscoring the need 
to understand shared molecular targets in HAND and PD. Previously, we reported 
that the neurotoxic HIV-1 transactivating factor (Tat) acutely disrupts 
mitochondrial and endoplasmic reticulum calcium homeostasis via ryanodine 
receptor (RyR) activation. Here, we further report that Tat disrupts DA 
transporter (DAT) activity and function, resulting in increased plasma membrane 
(PM) DAT and increased DAT V(max), without changes in K(m) or total DAT protein. 
Tat also increases calpain protease activity at the PM, demonstrated by total 
internal reflection fluorescence microscopy of a cleavable fluorescent calpain 
substrate. Tat-increased PM DAT and calpain activity are blocked by the RyR 
antagonists ryanodine and dantrolene, the calpain inhibitor calpastatin, and by 
a specific inhibitor of GSK-3β. We conclude that Tat activates RyRs via a 
calcium- and calpain-mediated mechanism that upregulates DAT trafficking to the 
PM, and is independent of DAT protein synthesis, reinforcing the feasibility of 
RyR and GSK-3β inhibition as clinical therapeutic approaches for HAND. Finally, 
we provide key translational relevance for these findings by highlighting 
published human data of increased DAT levels in striata of HAND patients and by 
demonstrating similar findings in Tat-expressing transgenic mice.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.1042-10.2010
PMCID: PMC2972730
PMID: 20962236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2429. Neurology. 2010 Nov 16;75(20):1766-72. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fd613b. Epub 
2010 Oct 20.

Detection of elevated levels of α-synuclein oligomers in CSF from patients with 
Parkinson disease.

Tokuda T(1), Qureshi MM, Ardah MT, Varghese S, Shehab SA, Kasai T, Ishigami N, 
Tamaoka A, Nakagawa M, El-Agnaf OM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kyoto, 
Japan.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 Nov 16;75(20):1760-1.
    Neurology. 2011 Aug 2;77(5):510; author reply 510-1.

BACKGROUND: To date, there is no accepted clinical diagnostic test for Parkinson 
disease (PD) that is based on biochemical analysis of blood or CSF. The 
discovery of mutations in the SNCA gene encoding α-synuclein in familial 
parkinsonism and the accumulation of α-synuclein in the PD brain suggested a 
critical role for this protein in PD etiology.
METHODS: We investigated total and α-synuclein oligomers levels in CSF from 
patients clinically diagnosed with PD, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), or 
Alzheimer disease (AD), and age-matched controls, using ELISA developed in our 
laboratory.
RESULTS: The levels of α-synuclein oligomers and oligomers/total-α-synuclein 
ratio in CSF were higher in the PD group (n = 32; p < 0.0001, Mann-Whitney U 
test) compared to the control group (n = 28). The area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (AUC) indicated a sensitivity of 75.0% and a 
specificity of 87.5%, with an AUC of 0.859 for increased CSF α-synuclein 
oligomers in clinically diagnosed PD cases. However, when the CSF 
oligomers/total-α-synuclein ratio was analyzed, it provided an even greater 
sensitivity of 89.3% and specificity of 90.6%, with an AUC of 0.948. In another 
cross-sectional pilot study, we confirmed that the levels of CSF α-synuclein 
oligomers were higher in patients with PD (n = 25) compared to patients with PSP 
(n = 18; p < 0.05) or AD (n = 35; p < 0.001) or control subjects (n = 43; p < 
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that levels of α-synuclein oligomers in CSF 
and the oligomers/total-α-synuclein ratio can be useful biomarkers for diagnosis 
and early detection of PD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fd613b
PMID: 20962290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2430. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2010 Oct;107(39):684-91. doi: 10.3238/arztebl.2010.0684. Epub 
2010 Oct 1.

Lewy body and parkinsonian dementia: common, but often misdiagnosed conditions.

Mollenhauer B(1), Förstl H, Deuschl G, Storch A, Oertel W, Trenkwalder C.

Author information:
(1)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany. brit.mollenhauer@pk-mx.de

Comment in
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2010 Oct;107(39):675-6.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2011 Feb;108(8):131; author reply 132.
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2011 Feb;108(8):131; author reply 132.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease dementia 
(PDD) are the two most common types of dementing neurodegenerative disease after 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Both of these conditions are often diagnosed late or 
not at all.
METHODS: Selective literature review.
RESULTS: The severe cholinergic and dopaminergic deficits that are present in 
both DLB and PDD produce not only motor manifestations, but also cognitive 
deficits, mainly in the executive and visual-constructive areas, as well as 
psychotic manifestations such as visual hallucinations, delusions, and 
agitation. The intensity of these manifestations can fluctuate markedly over the 
course of the day, particularly in DLB. Useful tests for differential diagnosis 
include magnetic resonance imaging and electroencephalography; in case of 
clinical uncertainty, nuclear medical procedures and cerebrospinal fluid 
analysis can be helpful as well. Neuropathological studies have revealed 
progressive alpha-synuclein aggregation in affected areas of the brain. In DLB, 
beta-amyloid abnormalities are often seen as well.
CONCLUSION: DLB should be included in the differential diagnosis of early 
dementia. If motor manifestations arise within one year (DLB), dopaminergic 
treatment should be initiated. On the other hand, patients with Parkinson's 
disease should undergo early screening for signs of dementia so that further 
diagnostic and therapeutic steps can be taken in timely fashion, as indicated. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors are useful for the treatment of cognitive deficits and 
experiential/behavioral disturbances in both DLB (off-label indication) and PDD 
(approved indication).

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2010.0684
PMCID: PMC2957617
PMID: 20963199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2431. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Jan 15;300(1-2):63-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.09.031. Epub 
2010 Oct 20.

Prevalence of small cerebral bleeds in patients with a neurodegenerative 
dementia: a neuropathological study.

De Reuck J(1), Deramecourt V, Cordonnier C, Leys D, Pasquier F, Maurage CA.

Author information:
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, UDSL, F-59000 Lille, France. 
dereuck.j@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Small cerebral bleeds are frequently observed on magnetic resonance 
imaging in patients with Alzheimer dementia (AD). Histological confirmations in 
post-mortem brains are scarce. This study describes the prevalence of 
cerebrovascular lesions and the quantification of the "bleeding load" in 
post-mortem brains of patients with neurodegenerative dementias.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Forty-five brains of AD patients, 8 of dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and 12 of fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) were compared to 10 
controls. Histological examination was performed for the evaluation of cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy (CAA), white matter changes (WMCs), micro-infarcts, and 
cerebral micro- and mini-bleeds (MnBs). The latter were evaluated 
semi-quantitatively on a coronal section of a whole cerebral hemisphere and on a 
horizontal section through the pons and cerebellum.
RESULTS: Arterial hypertension (AH) was the main vascular risk factor in the 
patients with AD and DLB (P<0.05). MnBs, consisting of small perivascular 
bleeds, were significantly more frequent (P<0.001) in AD brains. They were 
mainly and equally present in the cerebral cortex of AD and DLB brains (P=0.04). 
Combined AD and DLB pathologies were present in 15%. CAA and WMCs occurred more 
frequently in AD brains (P<0.001). Occasional MnBs were observed in 60% of the 
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This neuropathological study confirms the frequent presence of MnBs 
and WMCs in AD brains. The relative high incidence of cortical MnBs in DLB 
brains is probably due to the high incidence of AH and the frequent association 
with AD and CAA.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2010.09.031
PMID: 20965516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2432. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2011 Jan;66(1):82-8. doi: 10.1093/gerona/glq187. 
Epub 2010 Oct 21.

Musculoskeletal pain is associated with incident mobility disability in 
community-dwelling elders.

Shah RC(1), Buchman AS, Boyle PA, Leurgans SE, Wilson RS, Andersson GB, Bennett 
DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, 600 South Paulina, Suite 1038, Chicago, IL 
60612, USA. raj_c_shah@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: Identifying mobility disability risk factors may facilitate 
development of interventions promoting functional independence in older persons. 
We tested the hypothesis that musculoskeletal pain is associated with first 
occurrence of severe mobility disability.
METHODS: In a prospective observational study at 40 community-based sites, 759 
older Catholic clergy in the Rush Religious Orders Study without baseline 
dementia, stroke, Parkinson's disease, or severe performance-based mobility 
disability (defined as gait speed less than or equal to 0.4 m/s) and at least 
one follow-up mobility evaluation were evaluated over a mean of 8.5 (SD = 3.8) 
years. All participants were queried about musculoskeletal pain in the year 
before baseline and underwent annual assessment of mobility.
RESULTS: Using a proportional hazards model adjusted for age, sex, and 
education, the hazard for incident severe mobility disability was greater for 
participants reporting pain in the year before baseline (odds ratio = 1.47, 95% 
confidence interval = 1.17-1.85). Results were unchanged after adjusting for 
self-reported mobility disability, gait speed, depressive symptoms, body mass 
index, physical activity, chronic medical conditions, and analgesic use. 
Compared with no report of musculoskeletal pain, musculoskeletal pain in one or 
two areas was associated with a 30% greater hazard for incident disability (odds 
ratio = 1.31, 95% confidence interval = 1.00-1.70). Musculoskeletal pain in 
three or more areas was associated with an 80% greater hazard for incident 
disability (odds ratio = 1.80, 95% confidence interval = 1.31-2.47). In 
participants without baseline self-reported mobility disability (n = 486), 
musculoskeletal pain was associated with greater hazard for incident 
self-reported mobility disability (odds ratio = 1.38, 95% confidence interval = 
1.11-1.73).
CONCLUSION: In older persons, musculoskeletal pain is associated with incident 
mobility disability.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glq187
PMCID: PMC3011961
PMID: 20966101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2433. Arch Toxicol. 2010 Nov;84(11):825-89. doi: 10.1007/s00204-010-0577-x. Epub 2010 
Aug 17.

Towards a unifying, systems biology understanding of large-scale cellular death 
and destruction caused by poorly liganded iron: Parkinson's, Huntington's, 
Alzheimer's, prions, bactericides, chemical toxicology and others as examples.

Kell DB(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Chemistry and the Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, The 
University of Manchester, Manchester M1 7DN, UK. dbk@manchester.ac.uk

Comment in
    Arch Toxicol. 2010 Nov;84(11):823-4.

Exposure to a variety of toxins and/or infectious agents leads to disease, 
degeneration and death, often characterised by circumstances in which cells or 
tissues do not merely die and cease to function but may be more or less entirely 
obliterated. It is then legitimate to ask the question as to whether, despite 
the many kinds of agent involved, there may be at least some unifying mechanisms 
of such cell death and destruction. I summarise the evidence that in a great 
many cases, one underlying mechanism, providing major stresses of this type, 
entails continuing and autocatalytic production (based on positive feedback 
mechanisms) of hydroxyl radicals via Fenton chemistry involving poorly liganded 
iron, leading to cell death via apoptosis (probably including via pathways 
induced by changes in the NF-κB system). While every pathway is in some sense 
connected to every other one, I highlight the literature evidence suggesting 
that the degenerative effects of many diseases and toxicological insults 
converge on iron dysregulation. This highlights specifically the role of iron 
metabolism, and the detailed speciation of iron, in chemical and other 
toxicology, and has significant implications for the use of iron chelating 
substances (probably in partnership with appropriate anti-oxidants) as 
nutritional or therapeutic agents in inhibiting both the progression of these 
mainly degenerative diseases and the sequelae of both chronic and acute toxin 
exposure. The complexity of biochemical networks, especially those involving 
autocatalytic behaviour and positive feedbacks, means that multiple 
interventions (e.g. of iron chelators plus antioxidants) are likely to prove 
most effective. A variety of systems biology approaches, that I summarise, can 
predict both the mechanisms involved in these cell death pathways and the 
optimal sites of action for nutritional or pharmacological interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00204-010-0577-x
PMCID: PMC2988997
PMID: 20967426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2434. BMC Geriatr. 2010 Oct 22;10:77. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-10-77.

Loneliness and the rate of motor decline in old age: the Rush Memory and Aging 
Project, a community-based cohort study.

Buchman AS(1), Boyle PA, Wilson RS, James BD, Leurgans SE, Arnold SE, Bennett 
DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush 
University Medical Center, 600 S, Paulina, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. 
aron_s_buchman@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: Being alone, as measured by less frequent social interactions, has 
been reported to be associated with a more rapid rate of motor decline in older 
persons. We tested the hypothesis that feeling alone is associated with the rate 
of motor decline in community-dwelling older persons.
METHODS: At baseline, loneliness was assessed with a 5-item scale in 985 persons 
without dementia participating in the Rush Memory and Aging Project, a 
longitudinal community-based cohort study. Annual detailed assessment of 9 
measures of muscle strength and 9 motor performances were summarized in a 
composite measure of global motor function.
RESULTS: Linear mixed-effects models which controlled for age, sex and 
education, showed that the level of loneliness at baseline was associated with 
the rate of motor decline (Estimate, -0.016; S.E. 0.006, p = 0.005). For each 
1-point higher level of loneliness at baseline, motor decline was 40% more 
rapid; this effect was similar to the rate of motor decline observed in an 
average participant 4 years older at baseline. Furthermore, this amount of motor 
decline per year was associated with about a 50% increased risk of death. When 
terms for both feeling alone (loneliness) and being alone were considered 
together in a single model, both were relatively independent predictors of motor 
decline. The association between loneliness and motor decline persisted even 
after controlling for depressive symptoms, cognition, physical and cognitive 
activities, chronic conditions, as well as baseline disability or a history of 
stroke or Parkinson's disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Among community-dwelling older persons, both feeling alone and 
being alone are associated with more rapid motor decline, underscoring the 
importance of psychosocial factors and motor decline in old age.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-10-77
PMCID: PMC2975650
PMID: 20969786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2435. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2011 Jan;17(1):55-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.09.009.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations in diffuse Lewy body disease.

Nishioka K(1), Ross OA, Vilariño-Güell C, Cobb SA, Kachergus JM, Mann DM, 
Snowden J, Richardson AM, Neary D, Robinson CA, Rajput A, Papapetropoulos S, 
Mash DC, Pahwa R, Lyons KE, Wszolek ZK, Dickson DW, Farrer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Clinicogenetic and pathological studies have shown that mutations of the 
glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) are a risk factor for Parkinson's disease and Lewy 
body disorders. In the present study, we have identified GBA mutations in 6.8% 
(4/59) of cases with a pathological diagnosis of diffuse Lewy body disease. 
Taken with previous studies, it appears that GBA mutations are associated with a 
more diffuse pattern of Lewy body distribution involving the cerebral cortex 
than the brainstem/limbic distribution observed in typical Parkinson's disease.

© 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.09.009
PMCID: PMC4721925
PMID: 20971030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors declare no 
financial or other conflicts of interest.


2436. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Mar;82(3):272-7. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2009.202903. Epub 2010 Oct 25.

Long-term follow-up of pallidal deep brain stimulation in two cases of 
Huntington's disease.

Kang GA(1), Heath S, Rothlind J, Starr PA.

Author information:
(1)San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Parkinson's Disease Research, 
Education and Clinical Center, 4150 Clement Street 127P, San Francisco, CA 
94121, USA. gakang@comcast.net

BACKGROUND: Deep brain stimulator (DBS) implantation has been shown to be 
effective in the treatment of various movement disorders including Parkinson's 
disease, essential tremor and dystonia. However, there is limited information 
regarding the potential use of DBS in Huntington's disease (HD). In this study, 
the authors present their findings on the long-term motor and neurocognitive 
results of two HD patients (patient 1: 57 years, 42 cytosine-adenine guanine 
(CAG) repeats; patient 2: 50 years, 41 CAG repeats) who underwent staged 
bilateral globus pallidus interna DBS surgery.
METHODS: The patients were evaluated at baseline and at five timepoints 
throughout a 2-year postoperative during which motoric ratings ((Unified 
Huntington's Disease Rating Scale), Activities of Daily Living scores (HD-ADL) 
and neurocognitive testing) were obtained.
RESULTS: Both patients had a sustained decline in chorea 2&emsp14;years after 
initial DBS surgery. Despite this improvement in chorea, one patient has had 
continuing deterioration in gait, bradykinesia and dystonia scores, which has 
caused his ability to perform activities of daily living to return to his 
baseline level of functioning prior to DBS surgery. Both patients have 
experienced further gradual decline in neurocognitive functioning, which appears 
to be independent of DBS and most likely related to disease progression.
CONCLUSION: DBS implantation may be a potential treatment option for a subset of 
HD patients who have significant functional deficits due to chorea. However, 
appropriate selection of the best candidates for DBS appears to be challenging, 
given the difficulty in predicting disease course in HD due to its variable 
nature.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.202903
PMID: 20974647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2437. Parkinsons Dis. 2010;2010:836962. doi: 10.4061/2010/836962. Epub 2009 Nov 10.

Total cholesterol and the risk of Parkinson's disease: a review for some new 
findings.

Hu G(1).

Author information:
(1)Chronic Disease Epidemiology Laboratory, Population Science, Pennington 
Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, LA 70808, USA.

The studies on the association between serum cholesterol level and the risks of 
neurodegenerative diseases risk are debated. Some prospective studies have found 
that high serum cholesterol may increase the risks of dementia/Alzheimer's 
disease and ischemic stroke. However, other studies have found no association or 
a decreased risk of hemorrhagic stroke with increasing levels of serum total 
cholesterol. Little is known about the association between serum total 
cholesterol or a history of hypercholesterolemia and Parkinson's disease (PD) 
risk. Only a few case-control studies and four prospective epidemiological 
studies have examined this association, but the results are inconsistent. An 
inverse association between serum total cholesterol and the risk of PD has been 
found in one prospective study; however, no significant association is reported 
in the case-control studies and other two prospective studies. Recently, one 
large prospective study from Finland suggests that high total cholesterol at 
baseline is associated with an increased risk of PD. Further studies, especially 
large clinical trials, are needed.

DOI: 10.4061/2010/836962
PMCID: PMC2957328
PMID: 20975778


2438. BMC Neurol. 2010 Nov 3;10:108. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-10-108.

Saliva levels of Abeta1-42 as potential biomarker of Alzheimer's disease: a 
pilot study.

Bermejo-Pareja F(1), Antequera D, Vargas T, Molina JA, Carro E.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Simple, non-invasive tests for early detection of degenerative 
dementia by use of biomarkers are urgently required. However, up to the present, 
no validated extracerebral diagnostic markers for the early diagnosis of 
Alzheimer disease (AD) are available. The clinical diagnosis of probable AD is 
made with around 90% accuracy using modern clinical, neuropsychological and 
imaging methods. A biochemical marker that would support the clinical diagnosis 
and distinguish AD from other causes of dementia would therefore be of great 
value as a screening test. A total of 126 samples were obtained from subjects 
with AD, and age-sex-matched controls. Additionally, 51 Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients were used as an example of another neurodegenerative disorder. We 
analyzed saliva and plasma levels of β amyloid (Aβ) using a highly sensitive 
ELISA kit.
RESULTS: We found a small but statistically significant increase in saliva Aβ42 
levels in mild AD patients. In addition, there were not differences in saliva 
concentration of Aβ42 between patients with PD and healthy controls. Saliva Aβ40 
expression was unchanged within all the studied sample. The association between 
saliva Aβ42 levels and AD was independent of established risk factors, including 
age or Apo E, but was dependent on sex and functional capacity.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that saliva Aβ42 levels could be considered a potential 
peripheral marker of AD and help discrimination from other types of 
neurodegenerative disorders. We propose a new and promising biomarker for early 
AD.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-10-108
PMCID: PMC2987856
PMID: 21047401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2439. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2010 Oct 17;2010:536538. doi: 10.4061/2010/536538.

Cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for dementia with lewy bodies.

Mukaetova-Ladinska EB(1), Monteith R, Perry EK.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle 
University, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle NE5 5PL, UK.

More than 750,000 of the UK population suffer from some form of cognitive 
impairment and dementia. Of these, 5-20% will have Dementia with Lewy Bodies 
(DLB). Clinico-pathological studies have shown that it is the low frequency of 
DLB clinical core features that makes the DLB diagnosis hardly recognisable 
during life, and easily misdiagnosed for other forms of dementia. This has an 
impact on the treatment and long-term care of the affected subjects. Having a 
biochemical test, based on quantification of a specific DLB biomarker within 
Cerebrospinal Fluid (CSF) could be an effective diagnostic method to improve the 
differential diagnosis. Although some of the investigated DLB CSF biomarkers are 
well within the clinical criteria for sensitivity and specificity (>90%), they 
all seem to be confounded by the contradictory data for each of the major groups 
of biomarkers (α-synuclein, tau and amyloid proteins). However, a combination of 
CSF measures appear to emerge, that may well be able to differentiate DLB from 
other dementias: α-synuclein reduction in early DLB, a correlation between CSF 
α-synuclein and Aβ42 measures (characteristic for DLB only), and t-tau and 
p-tau181 profile (differentiating AD from DLB).

DOI: 10.4061/2010/536538
PMCID: PMC2965495
PMID: 21048932


2440. Can J Neurol Sci. 2010 Sep;37(5):601-7. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100010763.

Prevalence of primitive reflexes and Parkinsonian signs in dementia.

Links KA(1), Merims D, Binns MA, Freedman M, Chow TW.

Author information:
(1)Baycrest Rotman Research Institute, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Primitive reflexes and parkinsonian signs are used by clinicians to 
differentiate among dementias. We reviewed our clinical sample to determine 
whether primitive reflexes were more prevalent in frontally-based dementias and 
whether parkinsonian signs were more common in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
than in other types of dementia.
DESIGN: We retrospectively reviewed charts from 204 patients with dementia who 
presented for consultation at Baycrest's Ross Memory Clinic between April, 2003, 
to December, 2007.
RESULTS: A greater proportion of subjects with DLB and dementia of the Alzheimer 
type with cardiovascular disease had primitive reflexes than subjects with 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Primitive reflexes were not positively predictive 
of FTD or vascular dementia (VaD). Dementia with Lewy bodies subjects were more 
likely to have parkinsonian signs than the other dementias, and bradykinesia and 
rigidity were positively predictive of FTD. The palmomental reflex was the most 
common primitive reflex in the sample, and cogwheeling was the most common 
parkinsonian sign. There was no significant difference between early- and 
late-stage groups in presence of primitive reflexes or parkinsonian signs.
CONCLUSIONS: Primitive reflexes appear not to be clinically discriminative of 
frontally-based dementias such as FTD and VaD.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100010763
PMID: 21059505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2441. Neurology. 2010 Nov 9;75(19):1717-25. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fc29c9.

The MoCA: well-suited screen for cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease.

Dalrymple-Alford JC(1), MacAskill MR, Nakas CT, Livingston L, Graham C, Crucian 
GP, Melzer TR, Kirwan J, Keenan R, Wells S, Porter RJ, Watts R, Anderson TJ.

Author information:
(1)Van der Veer Institute for Parkinson's and Brain Research, 66 Stewart St., 
Christchurch 8011, New Zealand. john.dalrymple-alford@canterbury.ac.nz

Comment in
    Neurology. 2011 May 31;76(22):1944; author reply 1944-5.

OBJECTIVE: To establish the diagnostic accuracy of the Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment (MoCA) when screening externally validated cognition in Parkinson 
disease (PD), by comparison with a PD-focused test (Scales for Outcomes in 
Parkinson disease-Cognition [SCOPA-COG]) and the standardized Mini-Mental State 
Examination (S-MMSE) as benchmarks.
METHODS: A convenience sample of 114 patients with idiopathic PD and 47 healthy 
controls was examined in a movement disorders center. The 21 patients with 
dementia (PD-D) were diagnosed using Movement Disorders Society criteria, 
externally validated by detailed independent functional and neuropsychological 
tests. The 21 patients with mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) scored 1.5 SD or 
more below normative data in at least 2 measures in 1 of 4 cognitive domains. 
Other patients had normal cognition (PD-N).
RESULTS: Primary outcomes using receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
analyses showed that all 3 mental status tests produced excellent discrimination 
of PD-D from patients without dementia (area under the curve [AUC], 87%-91%) and 
PD-MCI from PD-N patients (AUC, 78%-90%), but the MoCA was generally better 
suited across both assessments. The optimal MoCA screening cutoffs were <21/30 
for PD-D (sensitivity 81%; specificity 95%; negative predictive value [NPV] 92%) 
and <26/30 for PD-MCI (sensitivity 90%; specificity 75%; NPV 95%). Further 
support that the MoCA is at least equivalent to the SCOPA-COG, and superior to 
the S-MMSE, came from the simultaneous classification of the 3 PD patient groups 
(volumes under a 3-dimensional ROC surface, chance = 17%: MoCA 79%, confidence 
interval [CI] 70%-89%; SCOPA-COG 74%, CI 62%-86%; MMSE-Sevens item 56%, CI 
44%-68%; MMSE-World item 62%, CI 50%-73%).
CONCLUSIONS: The MoCA is a suitably accurate, brief test when screening all 
levels of cognition in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181fc29c9
PMID: 21060094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2442. Clin Sports Med. 2011 Jan;30(1):179-88, xi. doi: 10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy: a potential late effect of sport-related 
concussive and subconcussive head trauma.

Gavett BE(1), Stern RA, McKee AC.

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy and Alzheimer's Disease 
Center, Boston University School of Medicine, 72 East Concord Street, B-7800, 
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) is a form of neurodegeneration believed 
to result from repeated head injuries. Originally termed dementia pugilistica 
because of its association with boxing, the neuropathology of CTE was first 
described by Corsellis in 1973 in a case series of 15 retired boxers. CTE has 
recently been found to occur after other causes of repeated head trauma, 
suggesting that any repeated blows to the head, such as those that occur in 
American football, hockey, soccer, professional wrestling, and physical abuse, 
can also lead to neurodegenerative changes. These changes often include cerebral 
atrophy, cavum septi pellucidi with fenestrations, shrinkage of the mammillary 
bodies, dense tau immunoreactive inclusions (neurofibrillary tangles, glial 
tangles, and neuropil neurites), and, in some cases, a TDP-43 proteinopathy. In 
association with these pathologic changes, disordered memory and executive 
functioning, behavioral and personality disturbances (eg, apathy, depression, 
irritability, impulsiveness, suicidality), parkinsonism, and, occasionally, 
motor neuron disease are seen in affected individuals. No formal clinical or 
pathologic diagnostic criteria for CTE currently exist, but the distinctive 
neuropathologic profile of the disorder lends promise for future research into 
its prevention, diagnosis, and treatment.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.csm.2010.09.007
PMCID: PMC2995699
PMID: 21074091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2443. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Mar;131(3):631-6. doi: 10.1038/jid.2010.357. Epub 2010 
Nov 18.

The relationship between neurological disease and bullous pemphigoid: a 
population-based case-control study.

Langan SM(1), Groves RW, West J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Immunodermatology, St John's Institute of Dermatology, King's 
College, London, UK. sinead.langan@kcl.ac.uk

Previous small studies and case reports have suggested that neurological 
disorders may be associated with bullous pemphigoid (BP). The objective of this 
study was to assess BP risk in patients with neurological diseases. Computerized 
medical records from the Health Improvement Network, a large population-based UK 
general practice database, were used to conduct a matched case-control analysis. 
Conditional logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios for specified 
neurological disorders. Comparing cases (n=868) to controls (n=3,453), stroke 
was seen in 8 vs. 5%, odds ratio (OR) 1.8 (1.3-2.5); dementia in 7 vs. 2%, OR 
3.4 (2.4-4.8); Parkinson's disease in 3 vs. 1%, OR 3.0 (1.8-5.0); epilepsy in 2 
vs. 1%, OR 1.7 (1.0-3.0); and multiple sclerosis in 1 vs 0.1% (OR 10.7 
(2.8-40.2). Estimates were not altered greatly when diagnoses up to 3 years 
before BP were excluded, except the association with epilepsy was no longer 
significant. Significant associations were only observed where neurological 
disease was diagnosed before the onset of pemphigoid. Study findings, except the 
association with epilepsy, were robust to sensitivity analysis. Strong 
associations were observed between specific neurological diseases and the later 
development of BP, supporting possible causal associations. Mechanisms for 
disease occurrence based on these findings include immobility or age-related 
autoimmunity.

DOI: 10.1038/jid.2010.357
PMID: 21085189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2444. Drugs Aging. 2010 Dec 1;27(12):987-97. doi: 10.2165/11584430-000000000-00000.

Prevalence and predictors of anticholinergic medication use in elderly nursing 
home residents with dementia: analysis of data from the 2004 National Nursing 
Home Survey.

Chatterjee S(1), Mehta S, Sherer JT, Aparasu RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Administration, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Houston, Texas Medical Center, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Medications with anticholinergic properties are frequently used in 
the elderly population. However, evidence suggests that these medications are 
associated with significant adverse effects and may lead to worsening of 
cognitive impairment, particularly in elderly patients with dementia.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the utilization of anticholinergic medications and factors 
associated with anticholinergic medication use in elderly nursing home patients 
with dementia.
METHODS: The study examined anticholinergic medication utilization for patients 
aged ≥65 years with dementia, using the 2004 US National Nursing Home Survey 
(NNHS) data. Anticholinergic drugs were identified using the Anticholinergic 
Drug Scale (ADS), which classifies anticholinergic drugs into four levels in 
increasing order of their anticholinergic activity. Descriptive analysis was 
conducted using sampling weights to determine the prevalence of anticholinergic 
medication use. Multiple logistic regression within the conceptual framework of 
the Andersen Behavioral Model was used to examine the factors associated with 
anticholinergic medication use in the study population. Use of medications with 
marked anticholinergic activities (ADS level 2 or 3) was the dependent variable, 
and independent variables were the various predisposing, enabling and need 
factors.
RESULTS: According to the 2004 NNHS, 509,931 (95% CI 490,160, 529,702) or 73.62% 
(95% CI 72.23, 75.00) of elderly patients with dementia used anticholinergic 
medications. The highest prevalence of anticholinergic medication use among 
elderly patients with dementia was seen for level-1 medications (67.96%; 95% CI 
66.51, 69.41), and 21.27% (95% CI 19.93, 22.60) used ADS level-2 or level-3 
medications. Multivariate regression analysis showed that the predisposing 
factor of age was negatively associated with the use of medications with marked 
anticholinergic activities (ADS level 2 or 3) and the enabling factor of 
Medicaid as the source of payment increased the likelihood of receiving these 
higher-level anticholinergics. Among the need factors, dependence in 
decision-making ability and behavioural symptoms decreased the likelihood of 
receiving higher-level anticholinergics, whereas factors such as total number of 
medications, depressed mood indicators and diagnoses of schizophrenia, anxiety 
and Parkinson's disease increased the likelihood of use of such medications.
CONCLUSIONS: Over one in five elderly nursing home residents with dementia used 
medications with marked anticholinergic activities. The study findings suggest 
the need to optimize the use of anticholinergic medications in vulnerable 
patients with dementia given the potentially severe adverse cognitive effects of 
these agents.

DOI: 10.2165/11584430-000000000-00000
PMID: 21087068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2445. Neurophysiol Clin. 2010 Nov-Dec;40(5-6):255-65. doi: 
10.1016/j.neucli.2010.08.001.

Revisiting P300 cognitive studies for dementia diagnosis: Early dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer disease (AD).

Bonanni L(1), Franciotti R, Onofrj V, Anzellotti F, Mancino E, Monaco D, Gambi 
F, Manzoli L, Thomas A, Onofrj M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, Aging Research Center, Institute of 
Neurology, Ce.S.I., Gabriele d'Annunzio University Foundation, University G. 
d'Annunzio of Chieti-Pescara, Via dei Vestini, 66013 Chieti, Italy.

AIMS OF THE STUDY: Earlier P300 studies were conducted when the prevalence of 
dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) was unknown. Our study aims to examine whether 
P300 abnormalities are present in DLB and to evidence possible differences 
between DLB and Alzheimer's disease (AD). A second aim of this study is to look 
for correlations between P300 recordings and EEG, as abnormal EEG variability 
has been described in DLB.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Auditory P300 responses were recorded by a classic oddball 
paradigm in 50 controls, in 36 DLB patients, and in 40 AD patients with MMSE>20.
RESULTS: Reliable auditory P300 responses were obtained in 26 DLB (72%), 33 AD 
(82.5%), and 46 controls (92%). P300 was more delayed and had lower amplitude in 
DLB compared to AD groups. P300 topography was also different as the 
anterior-to-posterior scalp amplitude gradient was reversed in DLB. P300 latency 
correlated with neuropsychological test scores and with EEG variables. Gradient 
inversion and delayed P300 responses in frontal derivations evidenced 
differences between DLB and AD patients with a sensitivity of 70% and a 
specificity of 97%.
CONCLUSIONS: P300 recordings are abnormal in DLB and can be useful to 
distinguish DLB from AD.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neucli.2010.08.001
PMID: 21093797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2446. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):90-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.070. Epub 2010 Nov 19.

MAPK signaling in H9c2 cardiomyoblasts exposed to cholesterol secoaldehyde--role 
of hydrogen peroxide.

Laynes L(1), Raghavamenon AC, D'Auvergne O, Achuthan V, Uppu RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Toxicology, Southern University and A & M 
College, Baton Rouge, LA 70813, USA.

3β-Hydroxy-5,6-secocholestan-6-al (cholesterol secoaldehyde or ChSeco), an 
oxysterol known to be formed in ozone- and singlet oxygen-mediated oxidations of 
cholesterol, has been detected in the atherosclerotic plaque and in the brain of 
patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia. Previously, 
we have shown that, in H9c2 cardiomyoblasts, ChSeco induces oxidative stress 
followed by apoptosis involving both intrinsic and extrinsic signaling pathways. 
In the present study, we investigated the nature of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) and its associated redox signaling in H9c2 cells upon treatment with 
ChSeco. Both catalase and deferoxamine, which lowered intracellular ROS, were 
found to alleviate the ChSeco-induced cytotoxicity. ChSeco-treated H9c2 cells 
showed a significant decrease in the intracellular catalase activity, suggesting 
the involvement of H(2)O(2) in the associated cytotoxicity. Additionally, in 
ChSeco-exposed cells, there was a marked increase in lipid peroxidation and 
pre-treatment with SB 203580 (p38 MAPK inhibitor) and MEK1/2 inhibitor (ERK1/2 
and JNK inhibitor) rendered protection against the cytotoxicity. An early 
increase in the expression of p-SAPK/JNK or delayed p38 MAPK did not alter ATF-2 
but decreased c-Jun expression in these cells. Overall, these findings are 
consistent with MAPK signaling resulting from increased cellular H(2)O(2) in 
ChSeco-induced cytotoxicity in cardiomyoblasts.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.070
PMID: 21094128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2447. PLoS One. 2010 Nov 17;5(11):e14024. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014024.

Influence of comorbidities on therapeutic progression of diabetes treatment in 
Australian veterans: a cohort study.

Vitry AI(1), Roughead EE, Preiss AK, Ryan P, Ramsay EN, Gilbert AL, Caughey GE, 
Shakib S, Esterman A, Zhang Y, McDermott RA.

Author information:
(1)Quality Use of Medicines and Pharmacy Research Centre, Sansom Institute for 
Health Research, University of South Australia, Adelaide, South Australia, 
Australia. agnes.vitry@unisa.edu.au

BACKGROUND: This study assessed whether the number of comorbid conditions 
unrelated to diabetes was associated with a delay in therapeutic progression of 
diabetes treatment in Australian veterans.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: A retrospective cohort study was undertaken 
using data from the Australian Department of Veterans' Affairs (DVA) claims 
database between July 2000 and June 2008. The study included new users of 
metformin or sulfonylurea medicines. The outcome was the time to addition or 
switch to another antidiabetic treatment. The total number of comorbid 
conditions unrelated to diabetes was identified using the pharmaceutical-based 
comorbidity index, Rx-Risk-V. Competing risk regression analyses were conducted, 
with adjustments for a number of covariates that included age, gender, 
residential status, use of endocrinology service, number of hospitalisation 
episodes and adherence to diabetes medicines. Overall, 20,134 veterans were 
included in the study. At one year, 23.5% of patients with diabetes had a second 
medicine added or had switched to another medicine, with 41.4% progressing by 4 
years. The number of unrelated comorbidities was significantly associated with 
the time to addition of an antidiabetic medicine or switch to insulin (subhazard 
ratio [SHR] 0.87 [95% CI 0.84-0.91], P<0.001). Depression, cancer, chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease, dementia, and Parkinson's disease were 
individually associated with a decreased likelihood of therapeutic progression. 
Age, residential status, number of hospitalisations and adherence to 
anti-diabetic medicines delayed therapeutic progression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Increasing numbers of unrelated conditions decreased 
the likelihood of therapeutic progression in veterans with diabetes. These 
results have implications for the development of quality measures, clinical 
guidelines and the construction of models of care for management of diabetes in 
elderly people with comorbidities.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0014024
PMCID: PMC2984440
PMID: 21103337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2448. Int Psychogeriatr. 2011 Jun;23(5):780-7. doi: 10.1017/S1041610210002140. Epub 
2010 Nov 29.

Vascular risk factors and the effect of white matter lesions on extrapyramidal 
signs in Alzheimer's disease.

Park MH(1), Min JY, Kwon DY, Lee SH, Na HR, Cho ST, Na DL.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center for Dementia (CRCD), Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Extrapyramidal signs (EPSs), which are important characteristics of 
Parkinson's disease (PD), occur frequently in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Although 
AD and PD share common clinical features such as EPSs, these diseases vary with 
respect to vascular risk factors. The presence of vascular risk factors 
increases the risk of AD; however, these factors have been known to be inversely 
associated with PD. We aimed to assess the effect of vascular risk factors and 
white matter lesions (WMLs) on EPSs in AD.
METHODS: We recruited 1,187 AD patients and 333 controls with neither cognitive 
impairment nor EPSs. All participants underwent detailed clinical evaluations 
which included assessments of vascular risk factors, cognitive function, and 
EPSs, as well as WMLs on brain MRIs. EPS subtypes were classified into 
tremor-dominant, postural instability gait difficulty, or indeterminate; WMLs 
subtypes were classified into periventricular WML (pvWML) or deep WML (dWML).
RESULTS: EPSs were present in 17.9% of subjects with AD and were significantly 
associated with vascular risk factors such as age, male gender, diabetes 
mellitus, and WMLs. Additionally, a multivariate logistic regression analysis 
showed that EPSs in AD were associated with pvWML (odds ratio (OR), 1.61-2.52), 
not with dWML. With respect to EPS subtypes, the majority (78.4%) of EPSs in AD 
were postural instability gait difficulty, which was also associated with WMLs 
(OR 1.84-2.41), pvWML (OR 2.09-3.14), and dWML (OR 1.83-3.42).
CONCLUSIONS: EPSs in AD are associated with selected vascular risk factors as 
well as WMLs.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610210002140
PMID: 21110907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2449. Qual Life Res. 2011 Jun;20(5):703-11. doi: 10.1007/s11136-010-9804-4. Epub 2010 
Dec 2.

Predictors of quality of life in carers for people with a progressive 
neurological illness: a longitudinal study.

O'Connor EJ(1), McCabe MP.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Deakin University, 221 Burwood Highway, Melbourne, 
Burwood, VIC 3125, Australia.

PURPOSE: The aim of the present research was to determine the predictors of 
quality of life (QOL) among carers for people living with a chronic degenerative 
neurological illness, with comparisons of the differences in significant 
predictors of QOL between illness groups.
METHODS: Psychosocial and economic variables were examined among 192 carers for 
people living at home with motor neurone disease, Huntington's disease, multiple 
sclerosis, and Parkinson's, over a twelve-month period, to determine their 
contribution to the prediction of carer QOL.
RESULTS: Mood was the only consistent predictor of carer QOL across groups; 
however, marital relationship satisfaction, social support satisfaction, income, 
and economic pressure significantly predicted carer QOL for at least one of the 
illness groups, in addition to mood.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings highlight the importance of recognising the varying 
roles that psychosocial and economic variables play on the prediction of carer 
QOL within each of these illness groups.

DOI: 10.1007/s11136-010-9804-4
PMID: 21127997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2450. Aust N Z J Public Health. 2010 Dec;34(6):589-93. doi: 
10.1111/j.1753-6405.2010.00613.x. Epub 2010 Oct 7.

Factors associated with choice of antipsychotic treatment in elderly veterans: 
potential confounders for observational studies.

Pratt N(1), Roughead E, Salter A, Ryan P.

Author information:
(1)Data Management and Analysis Centre, Discipline of Public Health, University 
of Adelaide, South Australia. nicole.pratt@adelaide.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Antipsychotics are commonly used in the elderly despite limited 
efficacy and safety data from randomised controlled trials. Observational 
comparative safety studies of antipsychotics vary, which may be due to 
confounding.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the characteristics of typical and atypical antipsychotic 
initiators.
METHODS: Using the Australian Government Department of Veterans' Affairs claims 
dataset, we compared patient and prescribing physician characteristics and 
health care utilisation between atypical and typical antipsychotic initiators. 
Significant independent predictors of use were calculated using a multivariate 
log-binomial model.
RESULTS: Compared to patients initiated on typical antipsychotics (n=10,966), 
patients initiated on atypical antipsychotics (n=9,239) were less likely to be 
male (Relative Risk (RR)=0.91, 95% CI 0.89-0.94) and have prior dispensing of 
morphine (RR=0.53, 95% CI 0.49-0.57) and oral corticosteroids (RR=0.86, 95% CI 
0.81-0.91) and to have been hospitalised for myocardial infarction or pneumonia. 
Patients initiated on atypical antipsychotics were more likely to be in aged 
care (RR=1.08, 95% CI 1.05-1.12), to be prescribed the medicine by their usual 
doctor (RR=1.12, 95% CI 1.09-1.16) and have prior dispensing of 
anticholinesterases (RR=1.19, 95% CI 1.15-1.23), antidepressants (RR=1.18 95% CI 
1.15-1.22) and anti-parkinson medications (RR=1.30, 95% CI 1.25-1.36).
CONCLUSIONS: Differences between typical and atypical antipsychotic initiators 
indicate the potential for confounding in observational studies. Future 
pharmacoepidemiogical research in Australia, investigating the adverse events of 
antipsychotics, should consider the variables identified in this study to 
control for confounding.

© 2010 The Authors. ANZJPH © 2010 Public Health Association of Australia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1753-6405.2010.00613.x
PMID: 21134060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2451. Mol Neurodegener. 2010 Dec 7;5:55. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-5-55.

α-synuclein induced synapse damage is enhanced by amyloid-β1-42.

Bate C(1), Gentleman S, Williams A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Infectious Diseases, Royal Veterinary College, 
Hawkshead Lane, North Mymms, Herts,, AL9 7TA, UK. cbate@rvc.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) is associated with the accumulation of aggregated forms of the 
α-synuclein (αSN) protein. An early event in the neuropathology of PD and DLB is 
the loss of synapses and a corresponding reduction in the level of synaptic 
proteins. However, the molecular mechanisms involved in synapse damage in these 
diseases are poorly understood. In this study the process of synapse damage was 
investigated by measuring the amount of synaptophysin, a pre-synaptic membrane 
protein essential for neurotransmission, in cultured neurons incubated with αSN, 
or with amyloid-β (Aβ) peptides that are thought to trigger synapse degeneration 
in Alzheimer's disease.
RESULTS: We report that the addition of recombinant human αSN reduced the amount 
of synaptophysin in cultured cortical and hippocampal neurons indicative of 
synapse damage. αSN also reduced synaptic vesicle recycling, as measured by the 
uptake of the fluorescent dye FM1-43. These effects of αSN on synapses were 
modified by interactions with other proteins. Thus, the addition of βSN reduced 
the effects of αSN on synapses. In contrast, the addition of amyloid-β (Aβ)1-42 
exacerbated the effects of αSN on synaptic vesicle recycling and synapse damage. 
Similarly, the addition of αSN increased synapse damage induced by Aβ1-42. 
However, this effect of αSN was selective as it did not affect synapse damage 
induced by the prion-derived peptide PrP82-146.
CONCLUSIONS: These results are consistent with the hypothesis that oligomers of 
αSN trigger synapse damage in the brains of Parkinson's disease patients. 
Moreover, they suggest that the effect of αSN on synapses may be influenced by 
interactions with other peptides produced within the brain.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-5-55
PMCID: PMC3017026
PMID: 21138585


2452. Neurochem Res. 2011 Mar;36(3):355-66. doi: 10.1007/s11064-010-0347-4. Epub 2010 
Dec 8.

TRPM2 cation channels, oxidative stress and neurological diseases: where are we 
now?

Nazıroğlu M(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Center, Süleyman Demirel University, Isparta, Turkey. 
mnaziroglu@med.sdu.edu.tr

The Na+ and Ca(2+)-permeable melastatin related transient receptor potential 2 
(TRPM2) channels can be gated either by ADP-ribose (ADPR) in concert with Ca(2+) 
or by hydrogen peroxide (H(2)O(2)), an experimental model for oxidative stress, 
binding to the channel's enzymatic Nudix domain. Since the mechanisms that lead 
to TRPM2 gating in response to ADPR and H(2)O(2) are not understood in neuronal 
cells, I summarized previous findings and important recent advances in the 
understanding of Ca(2+) influx via TRPM2 channels in different neuronal cell 
types and disease processes. Considering that TRPM2 is activated by oxidative 
stress, mediated cell death and inflammation, and is highly expressed in brain, 
the channel has been investigated in the context of central nervous system. 
TRPM2 plays a role in H(2)O(2) and amyloid β-peptide induced striatal cell 
death. Genetic variants of the TRPM2 gene confer a risk of developing Western 
Pacific amyotropic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex and 
bipolar disorders. TRPM2 also contributes to traumatic brain injury processes 
such as oxidative stress, inflammation and neuronal death. There are a limited 
number of TRPM2 channel blockers and they seem to be cell specific. For example, 
ADPR-induced Ca(2+) influx in rat hippocampal cells was not blocked by 
N-(p-amylcinnomoyl)anthralic acid (ACA), the IP(3) receptor inhibitor 
2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate or PLC inhibitor flufenamic acid (FFA). However, 
the Ca(2+) entry in rat primary striatal cells was blocked by ACA and FFA. In 
conclusion TRPM2 channels in neuronal cells can be gated by either ADPR or 
H(2)O(2). It seems to that the exact relationship between TRPM2 channels 
activation and neuronal cell death still remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-010-0347-4
PMID: 21140288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2453. Free Radic Biol Med. 2011 Feb 1;50(3):469-76. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.11.033. Epub 2010 Dec 8.

Association of Parkinson disease-related protein PINK1 with Alzheimer disease 
and multiple sclerosis brain lesions.

Wilhelmus MM(1), van der Pol SM, Jansen Q, Witte ME, van der Valk P, Rozemuller 
AJ, Drukarch B, de Vries HE, Van Horssen J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurosciences, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU 
University Medical Center, 1007 MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress are hallmarks of various 
neurological disorders, including multiple sclerosis (MS), Alzheimer disease 
(AD), and Parkinson disease (PD). Mutations in PINK1, a mitochondrial kinase, 
have been linked to the occurrence of early onset parkinsonism. Currently, 
various studies support the notion of a neuroprotective role for PINK1, as it 
protects cells from stress-mediated mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress, 
and apoptosis. Because information about the distribution pattern of PINK1 in 
neurological diseases other than PD is scarce, we here investigated PINK1 
expression in well-characterized brain samples derived from MS and AD 
individuals using immunohistochemistry. In control gray matter PINK1 
immunoreactivity was observed in neurons, particularly neurons in layers IV-VI. 
Astrocytes were the most prominent cell type decorated by anti-PINK1 antibody in 
the white matter. In addition, PINK1 staining was observed in the 
cerebrovasculature. In AD, PINK1 was found to colocalize with classic senile 
plaques and vascular amyloid depositions, as well as reactive astrocytes 
associated with the characteristic AD lesions. Interestingly, PINK1 was absent 
from neurofibrillary tangles. In active demyelinating MS lesions we observed a 
marked astrocytic PINK1 immunostaining, whereas astrocytes in chronic lesions 
were weakly stained. Taken together, we observed PINK1 immunostaining in both AD 
and MS lesions, predominantly in reactive astrocytes associated with these 
lesions, suggesting that the increase in astrocytic PINK1 protein might be an 
intrinsic protective mechanism to limit cellular injury.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2010.11.033
PMID: 21145388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2454. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Aug 10;221(2):555-63. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.058. Epub 
2010 Dec 9.

The cholinergic system in aging and neuronal degeneration.

Schliebs R(1), Arendt T.

Author information:
(1)Paul Flechsig Institute for Brain Research, University of Leipzig, D-04109 
Leipzig, Germany. schre@medizin.uni-leipzig.de

The basal forebrain cholinergic complex comprising medial septum, horizontal and 
vertical diagonal band of Broca, and nucleus basalis of Meynert provides the 
mayor cholinergic projections to the cerebral cortex and hippocampus. The 
cholinergic neurons of this complex have been assumed to undergo moderate 
degenerative changes during aging, resulting in cholinergic hypofunction that 
has been related to the progressing memory deficits with aging. However, the 
previous view of significant cholinergic cell loss during aging has been 
challenged. Neuronal cell loss was found predominantly in pathological aging, 
such as Alzheimer's disease, while normal aging is accompanied by a gradual loss 
of cholinergic function caused by dendritic, synaptic, and axonal degeneration 
as well as a decrease in trophic support. As a consequence, decrements in gene 
expression, impairments in intracellular signaling, and cytoskeletal transport 
may mediate cholinergic cell atrophy finally leading to the known age-related 
functional decline in the brain including aging-associated cognitive 
impairments. However, in pathological situations associated with cognitive 
deficits, such as Parkinsons's disease, Down-syndrome, progressive supranuclear 
palsy, Jakob-Creutzfeld disease, Korsakoff's syndrome, traumatic brain injury, 
significant degenerations of basal forebrain cholinergic cells have been 
observed. In presenile (early onset), and in the advanced stages of late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), a severe loss of cortical cholinergic innervation has 
extensively been documented. In contrast, in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI, a prodromal stage of AD), and early forms of AD, apparently no 
cholinergic neurodegeneration but a loss of cholinergic function occurs. In 
particular imbalances in the expression of NGF, its precursor proNGF, the high 
and low NGF receptors, trkA and p75NTR, respectively, changes in acetylcholine 
release, high-affinity choline uptake, as well as alterations in muscarinic and 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor expression may contribute to the cholinergic 
dysfunction. These observations support the suggestion of a key role of the 
cholinergic system in the functional processes that lead to AD. Malfunction of 
the cholinergic system may be tackled pharmacologically by intervening in 
cholinergic as well as neurotrophic signaling cascades that have been shown to 
ameliorate the cholinergic deficit at early stages of the disease, and slow-down 
the progression. However, in contrast to many other, dementing disorders, in AD 
the cholinergic dysfunctions are accompanied by the occurrence of two major 
histopathological hallmarks such as β-amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary 
tangles, provoking the question whether they play a particular role in inducing 
or mediating cholinergic dysfunction in AD. Indeed, there is abundant evidence 
that β-amyloid may trigger cholinergic dysfunction through action on α7 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptors, affecting NGF signaling, mediating tau 
phosphorylation, interacting with acetylcholinesterase, and specifically 
affecting the proteome in cholinergic neurons. Therefore, an early onset of an 
anti β-amyloid strategy may additionally be potential in preventing 
aging-associated cholinergic deficits and cognitive impairments.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.11.058
PMID: 21145918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2455. Nucl Med Rev Cent East Eur. 2010;13(1):23-31.

Neuroimaging diagnosis in neurodegenerative diseases.

Szymański P(1), Markowicz M, Janik A, Ciesielski M, Mikiciuk-Olasik E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry and Drug Analysis, Medical University, 
Lodz, Poland.

Dementia affects about 8% of people age 65 years and older. Identification of 
dementia is particularly difficult in its early phases when family members and 
physicians often incorrectly attribute the patient's symptoms to normal aging. 
The most frequently occurring ailments that are connected with neurodegeneration 
are: Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, and multiple sclerosis. A variety of powerful techniques that 
have allowed visualization of organ structure and function with exact detail 
have been introduced in the last twenty-five years. One such neuroimaging 
technique is positron emission tomography (PET), which measures in detail the 
functioning of distinct areas of the human brain and as a result plays a 
critical role in clinical and research applications. Radiotracer-based 
functional imaging provides a sensitive means of recognizing and characterizing 
the regional changes in brain metabolism and receptor binding associated with 
cognitive disorders. The next functional imaging technique widely used in the 
diagnosis of cognitive disorders is single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT). New radiotracers are being developed and promise to expand further the 
list of indications for PET. Prospects for developing new tracers for imaging 
other organ diseases also appear to be very promising. In this review, we 
present current opportunities of neuroimaging techniques in the diagnosis and 
differentiation of neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 21154313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2456. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;23(4):607-15. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101428.

Coffee intake in midlife and risk of dementia and its neuropathologic 
correlates.

Gelber RP(1), Petrovitch H, Masaki KH, Ross GW, White LR.

Author information:
(1)Honolulu-Asia Aging Study at Kuakini Medical Center, VA Pacific Islands 
Healthcare System, Honolulu, HI, USA. rpgelber@gmail.com

Erratum in
    J Alzheimers Dis. 2013 Jan 1;36(4):809.

While animal data suggest a protective effect of caffeine on cognition, studies 
in humans remain inconsistent. We examined associations of coffee and caffeine 
intake in midlife with risk of dementia, its neuropathologic correlates, and 
cognitive impairment among 3494 men in the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (mean age 
52 at cohort entry, 1965-1968) examined for dementia in 1991-1993, including 418 
decedents (1992-2004) who underwent brain autopsy. Caffeine intake was 
determined according to self-reported coffee, tea, and cola consumption at 
baseline. Logistic regression was used to calculate odds ratios (OR) and 95% 
confidence intervals (CI) for overall dementia, Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
vascular dementia (VaD), cognitive impairment (Cognitive Abilities Screening 
Instrument score <74), and neuropathologic lesions at death (Alzheimer lesions, 
microvascular ischemic lesions, cortical Lewy bodies, hippocampal sclerosis, 
generalized atrophy), according to coffee and caffeine intake. Dementia was 
diagnosed in 226 men (including 118 AD, 80 VaD), and cognitive impairment in 
347. There were no significant associations between coffee or caffeine intake 
and risk of cognitive impairment, overall dementia, AD, VaD, or moderate/high 
levels of the individual neuropathologic lesion types. However, men in the 
highest quartile of caffeine intake (>/=411.0 mg/d) [corrected] were less likely 
than men in the lowest quartile (</=137.0 mg) [corrected] to have any of the 
lesion types (adjusted-OR, 0.45; 95% CI, 0.23-0.89; p, trend = 0.04). Coffee and 
caffeine intake in midlife were not associated with cognitive impairment, 
dementia, or individual neuropathologic lesions, although higher caffeine intake 
was associated with a lower odds of having any of the lesion types at autopsy.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101428
PMCID: PMC3731132
PMID: 21157028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2457. Mol Neurobiol. 2011 Apr;43(2):87-96. doi: 10.1007/s12035-010-8157-x. Epub 2010 
Dec 15.

Neuroglial roots of neurodegenerative diseases?

Rodríguez JJ(1), Verkhratsky A.

Author information:
(1)IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science, 48011, Bilbao, Spain. 
j.rodriguez-arellano@ikerbasque.org

Neuroglia is critically important for controlling the brain homeostasis and for 
mounting the brain defence against pathological insults. Here, we overview 
recent data about the role of neuroglia in various types of neurodegenerative 
diseases (Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, fronto-temporal dementia, 
Wernicke encephalopathy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and immunodeficiency 
virus-1-associated dementia). In all these forms of neurodegeneration, astroglia 
undergoes complex morphological and functional changes. The early and mid-term 
stages of neurodegenerative processes, and specifically of Alzheimer's disease, 
are associated with generalised atrophy of astroglia, whereas the later stages 
are characterised with an astrogliosis and microglial activation linked to 
neuropathological lesions such as senile plaques. Atrophic changes in astroglia 
may contribute to the initial cognitive deficits due to reduced glial synaptic 
coverage and decreased neuroprotection.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-010-8157-x
PMID: 21161612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2458. Lancet Neurol. 2011 Jan;10(1):83-98. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3.

Huntington's disease: from molecular pathogenesis to clinical treatment.

Ross CA(1), Tabrizi SJ.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology, Pharmacology, and Neuroscience, and 
Program in Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of 
Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. ca.ross@jhu.edu

Huntington's disease is a progressive, fatal, neurodegenerative disorder caused 
by an expanded CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene, which encodes an abnormally 
long polyglutamine repeat in the huntingtin protein. Huntington's disease has 
served as a model for the study of other more common neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. These disorders 
all share features including: delayed onset; selective neuronal vulnerability, 
despite widespread expression of disease-related proteins during the whole 
lifetime; abnormal protein processing and aggregation; and cellular toxic 
effects involving both cell autonomous and cell-cell interaction mechanisms. 
Pathogenic pathways of Huntington's disease are beginning to be unravelled, 
offering targets for treatments. Additionally, predictive genetic testing and 
findings of neuroimaging studies show that, as in some other neurodegenerative 
disorders, neurodegeneration in affected individuals begins many years before 
onset of diagnosable signs and symptoms of Huntington's disease, and it is 
accompanied by subtle cognitive, motor, and psychiatric changes (so-called 
prodromal disease). Thus, Huntington's disease is also emerging as a model for 
strategies to develop therapeutic interventions, not only to slow progression of 
manifest disease but also to delay, or ideally prevent, its onset.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70245-3
PMID: 21163446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2459. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2011 Sep-Oct;53(2):e222-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2010.11.025. Epub 2010 Dec 15.

Cognitive dysfunction in drug induced parkinsonism (DIP).

Kim YD(1), Kim JS, Chung SW, Song IU, Yang DW, Hong YJ, Kim YI, Ahn KJ, Kim HT, 
Lee KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul St Mary's 
Hospital, 505 Banpo-dong, Seocho-gu, Seoul 137-701, Republic of Korea.

Several studies have suggested that the presence of dementia increases the risk 
of developing DIP. However, these prior studies exclusively focused on the 
underlying conditions before the development of DIP and there are no studies 
about the characteristics and prognosis of the cognitive status associated with 
DIP. We investigate the cognitive impairments associated with DIP by comparing 
neuro-psychological test results in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
normal controls and the longitudinal outcome of cognition in DIP. The cohort in 
this study included 13 consecutive patients with DIP and 91 patients with PD; 
all subjects completed a clinical assessment, neuropsychological investigation, 
and magnetic resonance imaging of brain. All patients with DIP were followed 
closely for more than six months after withdrawal of the offending drug. The 
cognitive function in DIP was significantly worse than in controls for most 
domains; however, there were no significant differences found in the comparisons 
with the PD patients. In addition, the severity of motor impairment was in part 
associated with cognitive function. Some patients had transient and reversible 
cognitive impairment, similar to other Parkinsonian motor features, and others 
experienced persistence and eventual worsening of their cognitive dysfunction 
after discontinuation of the offending drug. The results of this study suggest 
that cognitive impairment in patients with DIP reflects the toxic/metabolic 
symptoms associated with the offending drug in addition to being a risk factor 
for DIP.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2010.11.025
PMID: 21163539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2460. Mutagenesis. 2011 Jan;26(1):85-92. doi: 10.1093/mutage/geq067.

Association of micronucleus frequency with neurodegenerative diseases.

Migliore L(1), Coppedè F, Fenech M, Thomas P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Environmental Sciences, University of Pisa, Via S. 
Giuseppe 22, 56126 Pisa, Italy. l.migliore@geog.unipi.it

Micronuclei (MNi) can originate either from chromosome breakage or chromosome 
malsegregation events and are therefore ideal biomarkers to investigate genomic 
instability. Studies in peripheral lymphocytes of patients with 
neurodegenerative diseases, mainly Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD), revealed an increased micronucleus (MN) frequency in both 
disorders but originating mainly from chromosome malsegregation events in AD and 
from chromosome breakage events in PD. Studies in other neurodegenerative 
diseases are largely missing, and some data in premature ageing disorders 
characterised by neurodegeneration and/or neurological complications, such as 
Ataxia telangiectasia, Werner's syndrome, Down's syndrome (DS) and Cockayne's 
syndrome, indicate that MNi increase with ageing in cultured cells. An increased 
frequency of aneuploidy characterises several tissues of AD patients, as well as 
of individuals at increased risk to develop AD, such as mothers of DS 
individuals and DS subjects themselves. The use of the buccal MN cytome assay in 
AD and DS subjects allowed finding significant changes in the MN frequency as 
well as other cellular modifications reflecting reduced regenerative capacity 
compared to age- and gender-matched controls. These changes in buccal cytome 
ratios may prove useful as potential future diagnostics to identify individuals 
of increased risk for these disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/mutage/geq067
PMID: 21164187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2461. J Neurol. 2011 Jun;258(6):1034-41. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5876-x. Epub 2010 Dec 
25.

Summary of cerebrospinal fluid routine parameters in neurodegenerative diseases.

Jesse S(1), Brettschneider J, Süssmuth SD, Landwehrmeyer BG, von Arnim CA, 
Ludolph AC, Tumani H, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Steinhövelstr. 1, 89075, Ulm, 
Germany. sarah.jesse@uni-ulm.de

In neurodegenerative diseases, cerebrospinal fluid analysis (CSF) is 
predominantly performed to exclude inflammatory diseases and to perform a risk 
assessment in dementive disorders by measurement of tau proteins and amyloid 
beta peptides. However, large scale data on basic findings of CSF routine 
parameters are generally lacking. The objective of the study was to define a 
normal reference spectrum of routine CSF parameters in neurodegenerative 
diseases. Routine CSF parameters (white cell count, lactate and albumin 
concentrations, CSF/serum quotients of albumin (Q (alb)), IgG, IgA, IgM, and 
oligoclonal IgG bands (OCB)) were retrospectively analyzed in an academic 
research setting. A total of 765 patients (Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD), vascular dementia (VD), 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
multisystem atrophy (MSA), motor neuron diseases (MND), spinocerebellar ataxia 
(SCA), Huntington's disease (HD)) and non-demented control groups including a 
group of patients with muscular disorders (MD). The main outcome measures 
included statistical analyses of routine CSF parameters. Mildly elevated Q (alb) 
were found in a small percentage of nearly all subgroups and in a higher 
proportion of patients with PSP, MSA, VD, PDD, and MND. With the exception of 1 
MND patient, no intrathecal Ig synthesis was observed. Isolated OCBs in CSF were 
sometimes found in patients with neurodegenerative diseases without elevated 
cell counts; lactate levels were always normal. A slightly elevated Q (alb) was 
observed in a subgroup of patients with neurodegenerative diseases and does not 
exclude the diagnosis. Extensive elevation of routine parameters is not 
characteristic and should encourage a re-evaluation of the clinical diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-010-5876-x
PMCID: PMC3101362
PMID: 21188408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2462. Curr Mol Med. 2011 Feb;11(1):1-12. doi: 10.2174/156652411794474419.

Converging pathways in the occurrence of endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress in 
Huntington's disease.

Vidal R(1), Caballero B, Couve A, Hetz C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Sciences, FONDAP Center for Molecular Studies of the 
Cell (CEMC), Faculty of Medicine, University of Chile, Santiago, Chile.

A variety of neurological diseases including Huntington's disease (HD), 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease share common neuropathology, 
primarily featuring the presence of abnormal protein inclusions containing 
specific misfolded proteins. Mutations leading to expansion of a poly-glutamine 
track in Huntingtin cause HD, and trigger its misfolding and aggregation. Recent 
evidence indicates that alterations in the secretory pathway, in particular the 
endoplasmic reticulum (ER), are emerging features of HD. Although it is not 
clear how cytoplasmic/nuclear located mutant Huntingtin alters the function of 
the ER, several reports indicate that mutant Huntingtin affects many essential 
processes related to the secretory pathway, including inhibition of 
ER-associated degradation, altered ER/Golgi vesicular trafficking and axonal 
transport, disrupted autophagy and abnormal ER calcium homeostasis. All these 
alterations are predicted to have a common pathological outcome associated to 
disturbance of protein folding and maturation pathways at the ER, generating 
chronic ER stress and neuronal dysfunction. Here, we review recent evidence 
involving ER stress in HD pathogenesis and discuss possible therapeutic 
strategies to target organelle function in the context of disease.

DOI: 10.2174/156652411794474419
PMID: 21189122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2463. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2011 Jan-Mar;25(1):17-23. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e3182037edf.

Risk of decline in functional activities in dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer disease.

Gill DP(1), Koepsell TD, Hubbard RA, Kukull WA.

Author information:
(1)National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, Department of Epidemiology, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. dpgill2@uw.edu

We examined the risk of 1-year decline in 4 everyday activities in patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), relative to patients with Alzheimer disease 
(AD). Data were from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, gathered from 
32 Alzheimer's Disease Centers. Participants (n=1880) were: aged 60+ years, 
demented with a primary clinical diagnosis of probable AD or DLB, and had a 
global Clinical Dementia Rating of 0.5 to 2. The activities were measured with 
the Functional Activities Questionnaire. In modified Poisson regression models 
adjusted for demographics, baseline activity, years from symptom onset, 
cognitive impairment, and comorbidities; DLB participants aged 67 to 81 years 
had 1.5 to 2 times increased risk of decline in performing basic kitchen tasks, 
engaging in games/hobbies, and paying attention/understanding, relative to AD 
participants of the same age (P<0.05). There was no significant difference 
between AD and DLB participants beyond this age range. For decline in ability to 
go shopping alone, there was also no significant difference between AD and DLB 
participants. In summary, the functional course of DLB, relative to AD, may 
depend on the age of the patient. These findings may provide anticipatory 
guidance to families and healthcare providers, which may be useful in the 
planning of care strategies.

Copyright © 2011 by Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3182037edf
PMCID: PMC3053143
PMID: 21192240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2464. J Parkinsons Dis. 2011;1(3):287-98. doi: 10.3233/JPD-2011-11016.

Predicting outcomes in Parkinson's disease: comparison of simple motor 
performance measures and The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale-III.

Grill S(1), Weuve J, Weisskopf MG.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's and Movement Disorders Center of Maryland, Elkridge, MD 21075, 
USA. sgrill@pdmdcenter.com

The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part III is the principal 
motor assessment method for Parkinson's disease (PD), but has recognized 
limitations including subjectivity and insensitivity. Easy to administer, 
objective, quantitative tests that are good indicators of PD progression could 
offer advantages in both clinical and research settings. We administered four 
simple, motor performance measures--functional reach, timed hall walk, a timed 
block sort task, and timed dotting--as well as the UPDRS to 609 PD patients of a 
single neurologist. The unadjusted Spearman correlations of these performance 
measures with the UPDRS motor score (UPDRS III) ranged from 0.29 to 0.49. 
Moreover, these measures generally had high reliability on repeated testing. We 
defined specific outcomes in PD--overall disability, gait instability and falls, 
as well as non-motor outcomes of depression, dementia, and psychosis, and 
assessed the ability of the measures to predict these outcomes over the entire 
follow-up of the cohort (average: 2.4 years) and over the first year of 
follow-up. The associations between the measures and the outcomes were generally 
stronger and more precise for the performance measures than for the UPDRS III. A 
summary score of the performance measures was a particularly good predictor of 
the outcomes. These motor performance measures could provide a rapid, simple 
means of assessing PD progression that could benefit both clinical and research 
endeavors.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-2011-11016
PMID: 23939309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2465. OTJR (Thorofare N J). 2011 Winter;31(1):S16-22. doi: 
10.3928/15394492-20101108-04.

Everyday executive function is associated with activity participation in 
Parkinson disease without dementia.

Foster ER, Hershey T.

Individuals with Parkinson disease (PD) who do not have dementia reliably 
demonstrate mild executive deficits on laboratory-based tests, but the impact of 
these deficits on occupational performance is unclear. The purpose of this study 
was to determine the relevance of executive dysfunction in PD without dementia 
to instrumental, leisure, and social activity participation. Twenty-four 
individuals with PD and 30 matched adult volunteers performed an experimental 
working memory test and rated their everyday executive function and activity 
participation. Participants with PD had worse working memory performance, tended 
to report more everyday executive problems, and reported lower activity 
participation compared to controls. Within PD, lower everyday executive function 
was associated with reduced activity participation after controlling for motor 
dysfunction and depressive symptoms. Executive function is an independent 
predictor of complex activity participation in early PD. These results suggest 
the need for occupational therapists to consider executive dysfunction during 
evaluation and treatment of individuals with PD.

Copyright 2011, SLACK Incorporated.

DOI: 10.3928/15394492-20101108-04
PMID: 24650258


2466. Compr Psychiatry. 2011 Nov-Dec;52(6):659-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.comppsych.2010.10.016. Epub 2010 Dec 28.

Does late onset depression predispose to dementia? A retrospective, 
case-controlled study.

Ohanna I(1), Golander H, Barak Y.

Author information:
(1)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, 59100 Israel.

BACKGROUND: Recent research suggests that there are clinical and biologic 
characteristics typical of late onset depression (LOD). Furthermore, evidence 
has been put forward that LOD may be a prodrome of dementia.
OBJECTIVE: This study aims to assess the association between LOD and the 
development of dementia.
SETTING: The study was conducted in a tertiary care, university-affiliated 
mental health center providing services for an urban catchment population of 
800,000 subjects.
METHOD: A retrospective, case-controlled study was used.
RESULTS: Fifty-one patients with LOD who developed dementia at least 1 year 
after diagnosis of LOD were defined as the index group: 18 males and 33 females, 
with a mean age of 75.4 ± 9.2 years. These were compared with 51 patients with 
LOD who did not develop dementia during a 10-year follow-up period. Dementia 
types were as follows: 73% Alzheimer disease, 24% vascular and mixed dementia, 
and 3% Parkinson dementia. Patients with LOD who developed dementia were 
significantly characterized by having longer hospitalization for their first 
depressive episode (P = .048), having a family history of dementia (P = .022), 
and having been exposed to the Holocaust as young adults (P = .013).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with a history of significant traumatic experience in 
early life and a prolonged onset of depression may be at particular risk of 
developing dementia. This issue requires further long-term prospective studies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.comppsych.2010.10.016
PMID: 21193180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2467. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2011 Apr;167(4):324-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2010.10.003. 
Epub 2010 Dec 30.

[Building and validation of a test evaluating verbal recognition memory: The 
Forty test (f40)].

[Article in French]

Marqué A(1), Hommet C, Constans T, Perrier D, Bardet F, Chaput M, Mondon K.

Author information:
(1)Centre mémoire de ressources et de recherche du centre, CHRU de Tours, 2, 
boulevard Tonnellé, 37044 Tours cedex, France. marque.aurelie@neuf.fr

INTRODUCTION: Neuropsychologic evaluation is a primordial diagnostic tool. 
Numerous tests explore episodic memory but few tests exist to assess incidental 
verbal episodic memory or verbal recognition memory. This memory is however 
impaired early in certain neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's 
disease. Our objective was to create a test sensitive and specific to this 
cognitive dysfunction.
METHOD: Our test was performed by 33 healthy volunteers and 51 patients (19 with 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease, 16 with Alzheimer's disease at the prodromal 
stage and 16 with Alzheimer's disease).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Independently of age, education level and global 
cognitive impairment, the young and old healthy volunteers and the patients with 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease displayed results significantly better than the 
group of Alzheimer's disease at the prodromal stage and Alzheimer's disease 
patients. Our test appears to be sensitive to dysfunction of verbal recognition 
memory. A score of 30/40 or less on the Forty test discriminates 91% of subjects 
with a cortical pattern of memory. This test could be recommended for clinical 
neuropsychological practice.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2010.10.003
PMID: 21195442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2468. Neuroimage. 2011 Mar 15;55(2):522-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.073. 
Epub 2010 Dec 31.

Antemortem differential diagnosis of dementia pathology using structural MRI: 
Differential-STAND.

Vemuri P(1), Simon G, Kantarci K, Whitwell JL, Senjem ML, Przybelski SA, Gunter 
JL, Josephs KA, Knopman DS, Boeve BF, Ferman TJ, Dickson DW, Parisi JE, Petersen 
RC, Jack CR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA. vemuri.prashanthi@mayo.edu

The common neurodegenerative pathologies underlying dementia are Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), Lewy body disease (LBD) and frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD). Our aim was to identify patterns of atrophy unique to each of these 
diseases using antemortem structural MRI scans of pathologically confirmed 
dementia cases and build an MRI-based differential diagnosis system. Our 
approach of creating atrophy maps using structural MRI and applying them for 
classification of new incoming patients is labeled Differential-STAND 
(Differential Diagnosis Based on Structural Abnormality in Neurodegeneration). 
Pathologically confirmed subjects with a single dementing pathologic diagnosis 
who had an MRI at the time of clinical diagnosis of dementia were identified: 48 
AD, 20 LBD, 47 FTLD-TDP (pathology-confirmed FTLD with TDP-43). Gray matter 
density in 91 regions-of-interest was measured in each subject and adjusted for 
head size and age using a database of 120 cognitively normal elderly. The 
atrophy patterns in each dementia type when compared to pathologically confirmed 
controls mirrored known disease-specific anatomic patterns: AD-temporoparietal 
association cortices and medial temporal lobe; FTLD-TDP-frontal and temporal 
lobes and LBD-bilateral amygdalae, dorsal midbrain and inferior temporal lobes. 
Differential-STAND based classification of each case was done based on a mixture 
model generated using bisecting k-means clustering of the information from the 
MRI scans. Leave-one-out classification showed reasonable performance compared 
to the autopsy gold standard and clinical diagnosis: AD (sensitivity: 90.7%; 
specificity: 84%), LBD (sensitivity: 78.6%; specificity: 98.8%) and FTLD-TDP 
(sensitivity: 84.4%; specificity: 93.8%). The proposed approach establishes a 
direct a priori relationship between specific topographic patterns on MRI and 
"gold standard" of pathology which can then be used to predict underlying 
dementia pathology in new incoming patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.12.073
PMCID: PMC3039279
PMID: 21195775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2469. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2011 Feb;17(1):32-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2010.00216.x. 
Epub 2010 Dec 28.

Parkinson's disease dementia and potential therapeutic strategies.

Caviness JN(1), Lue L, Adler CH, Walker DG.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, USA. jcaviness@mayo.edu

Dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD-D) has only been acknowledged in the recent 
three decades, but research in this field has accelerated. The purpose of this 
review was to discuss advances in PD-D regarding biomarker correlates and 
potential therapeutic targets. Attention and executive dysfunction, memory 
deficits that improve with cueing, and visual hallucinations are characteristic 
in PD-D. PD-D dramatically increases the disability and misery of the disease. 
Current treatment for PD-D is symptomatic, modest, and only transiently 
effective. There is wide agreement that more effective treatment is needed, but 
this will require more knowledge about PD-D pathophysiology. Advances in the 
pathogenesis of PD have focused on the substantia nigra, which is the location 
from where the pathophysiology of motor symptoms primarily arises in initial 
stages. In contradistinction, pathology studies have suggested that cognitive 
decline correlates with cortical and subcortical-cortical projection pathway 
abnormalities. There is evidence that substantia nigra mechanisms, including 
protein aggregation of α-synuclein (e.g., Lewy bodies) may also play a role in 
cortical neuron degeneration. Other different mechanisms, such as Alzheimer's 
disease pathology (e.g., Aβ aggregation) may be operant for PD-D. Biomarkers of 
various types are being proposed for the study of PD-D as well as for objective 
measures of PD-D prediction and progression. Therapeutic targets are currently 
derived mostly from general PD neurodegeneration research rather than cortical 
PD neurodegeneration per se. Protein aggregation, genes that are associated with 
PD, oxidative stress, inflammation, and trophic factors constitute the major 
classes of therapeutic targets for PD-D. More research is needed on the specific 
aspects of cortical dysfunction and degeneration that create PD-D.

© 2010 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2010.00216.x
PMCID: PMC6493795
PMID: 21199444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflict of interest.


2470. Arch Neurol. 2011 Jan;68(1):90-3. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.319.

Familial aggregation of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Nervi A(1), Reitz C, Tang MX, Santana V, Piriz A, Reyes D, Lantigua R, Medrano 
M, Jiménez-Velázquez IZ, Lee JH, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

BACKGROUND: Familial aggregation of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) remains 
unclear.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the degree of family aggregation of DLB by comparing 
DLB risk between siblings of probands with clinically diagnosed DLB and siblings 
of probands with clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease in a cohort of Caribbean 
Hispanic families and to explore the degree of aggregation of specific clinical 
manifestations (ie, cognitive fluctuations, visual hallucinations, and 
parkinsonism) in DLB.
DESIGN: Familial cohort study.
SETTING: Academic research.
PATIENTS: We separately compared risks of possible DLB, probable DLB, and 
clinical core features of DLB (cognitive fluctuations, visual hallucinations, 
and parkinsonism) between siblings of probands with clinically diagnosed DLB (n 
= 344) and siblings of probands with clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease (n = 
280) in 214 Caribbean Hispanic families with extended neurologic and 
neuropsychological assessment.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We applied general estimating equations to adjust for 
clustering within families. In these models, age and proband disease status were 
independent variables, and disease status of siblings was the measure of disease 
risk and the dependent variable.
RESULTS: Compared with siblings of probands having clinically diagnosed 
Alzheimer disease, siblings of probands having clinically diagnosed DLB had 
higher risks of probable DLB (odds ratio [OR], 2.29; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 1.04-5.04) and visual hallucinations (2.32; 1.16-4.64). They also had 
increased risks of possible DLB (OR, 1.51; 95% CI, 0.97-2.34) and cognitive 
fluctuations (1.55; 0.95-2.53).
CONCLUSIONS: Dementia with Lewy bodies and core features of DLB aggregate in 
families. Compared with siblings of probands having clinically diagnosed AD, 
siblings of probands having clinically diagnosed DLB are at increased risks of 
DLB and visual hallucinations. These findings are an important step in 
elucidating the genetic risk factors underlying DLB and in delineating DLB from 
other neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.319
PMCID: PMC3268781
PMID: 21220678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2471. J Sex Med. 2011 Apr;8(4):1092-100. doi: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.02172.x. Epub 
2011 Jan 14.

Pedophilic behavior from brain disease.

Mendez M(1), Shapira JS.

Author information:
(1)VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, Los Angeles, CA, USA. 
mmendez@ucla.edu

INTRODUCTION: Child molestation or other pedophilic behavior may result as a 
consequence of a brain disorder.
AIM: To characterize the mechanisms of pedophilic behavior associated with 
neurological diseases.
METHODS: We report eight patients with pedophilic behavior as a manifestation of 
their brain disorder and review the literature.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The sexual, neuropsychiatric, and neurological aspects of 
a series of patients.
RESULTS: All eight developed sexual behavior toward prepubescent children in 
mid- to late-life coincident with the development of a neurological disorder. 
Five had limited insight, anxiety, or concern for their behavior and tended to 
have frontal lobe executive deficits. Most of this group had frontally 
predominant disorders. Two others retained insight and concern in the context of 
marked hypersexuality. This second group had treated Parkinson's disease and 
resembled reports of pedophilic behavior from subcortical lesions. The further 
presence of right temporal lobe-amygdala involvement may have predisposed to 
specific sexual preoccupation in some patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain disorders may release a predisposition to sexual attraction 
for children through disinhibition with frontal disease, sexual preoccupation 
with right temporal disease, or hypersexuality with subcortical disease in 
non-motor basal ganglia, hypothalamus, or septal nuclei. Differentiating these 
mechanisms of pedophilic behavior from brain disease could facilitate targeted 
interventions.

© 2011 International Society for Sexual Medicine.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1743-6109.2010.02172.x
PMID: 21235721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2472. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Feb;33(2):430.e1-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.12.001. Epub 2011 Jan 13.

CSF α-synuclein does not differentiate between parkinsonian disorders.

Aerts MB(1), Esselink RA, Abdo WF, Bloem BR, Verbeek MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Parkinson Center Nijmegen (ParC), Donders Institute 
for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
the Netherlands.

Differentiating between Parkinson's disease (PD) and atypical Parkinsonism (AP) 
is clinically relevant but challenging. A timely and correct diagnosis might 
result in better targeted treatment strategies, adequate patient counseling, and 
early recognition of disease-specific complications. We aimed to investigate 
whether cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) concentrations of α-synuclein are of 
additional diagnostic value. We examined 142 consecutive patients with 
parkinsonism, mean disease duration 39.7 mo (Parkinson's disease (PD), n = 58; 
MSA, n = 47; dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), n = 3; VaP, n = 22; progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP), n = 10; CBD, n = 2). Gold standard was the clinical 
diagnosis established after 2 years of clinical follow-up. CSF concentrations of 
α-synuclein, blood pigments and the erythrocyte count were determined. No 
differences between CSF α-synuclein concentrations of patients with PD with the 
reference values from our laboratory were observed. We neither found significant 
differences between patients with PD and AP nor between AP subgroups. Adjustment 
for age, disease severity or presence of erythrocytes or blood pigments in CSF 
did not alter these results. Our results imply that CSF α-synuclein is currently 
unsuitable as biomarker to differentiate between PD and AP.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.12.001
PMID: 21236518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2473. J Clin Neurosci. 2011 Mar;18(3):352-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2010.07.106. Epub 
2011 Jan 14.

"DASH" symptoms in patients with Parkinson's disease: red flags for early 
cognitive decline.

Naismith SL(1), Lewis SJ.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Research Clinic, Brain & Mind Research Institute, 
University of Sydney, 94 Mallett Street, Camperdown, New South Wales 2050, 
Australia.

Neuropsychiatric features in Parkinson's Disease (PD) are associated with 
developing dementia longitudinally. Therefore, identifying appropriate screening 
methods for such features, and their association with early cognitive 
dysfunction, may help to inform early intervention approaches. In this study, 53 
PD patients without dementia underwent detailed neurological and 
neuropsychological assessment. The sum scores of the four items detailing 
Depression, Anxiety, Sleep disturbance and Hallucinosis (DASH) were calculated 
from the Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39) and examined in relation to 
cognitive tasks. Results demonstrated that higher DASH scores were significantly 
correlated with poorer working memory and set-shifting performance, even after 
controlling for age, predicted intellect, depression, disease stage and 
duration. These data indicate that DASH symptoms are related to executive 
dysfunction even in non-demented patients with PD. The DASH score may represent 
a simple screening method for highlighting early cognitive decline, which in 
turn is associated with the development of dementia in PD.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2010.07.106
PMID: 21237647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2474. Ann Neurol. 2011 May;69(5):811-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.22282. Epub 2011 Jan 18.

Olfaction and color vision identify impending neurodegeneration in rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Vendette M, Desjardins C, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: For development of neuroprotective therapy, neurodegenerative disease 
must be identified as early as possible. However, current means of identifying 
"preclinical" neurodegeneration are limited. Patients with idiopathic rapid eye 
movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) are at >50% risk of 
synuclein-mediated neurodegenerative disease--this provides a unique opportunity 
to directly observe preclinical synucleinopathy and to test potential markers of 
preclinical disease.
METHODS: Patients with RBD without neurodegenerative disease were enrolled in a 
prospective cohort starting in 2004. Olfaction and color vision were tested at 
baseline, then annually for 5 years. Test results were compared between patients 
who developed neurodegenerative disease and those who remained disease-free.
RESULTS: Out of 64 patients, 62 (97%) participated in annual follow-up. During 
follow-up, 21 developed disease, and 41 remained disease-free. Out of 21, 16 
developed a combination of parkinsonism and dementia, 4 developed isolated 
parkinsonism (all with tremor), and 1 developed isolated dementia. Compared to 
those remaining disease-free, patients destined to develop disease had worse 
baseline olfaction (University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test [UPSIT] 
= 58.3 ± 27.0% age/sex-adjusted normal vs 80.2 ± 26.3%; p = 0.003) and color 
vision (Farnsworth-Munsell 100-Hue color test [FM-100] errors 153.0 ± 82.2% 
normal vs 120.2 ± 26.5%; p = 0.022). Kaplan-Meier 5-year-disease-free survival 
in those with normal olfaction was 86.0%, vs 35.4% with impaired olfaction (p = 
0.029). Disease-free survival with normal color vision was 70.3%, vs 26.0% with 
impaired vision (p = 0.009). Both olfaction and color vision were reduced as 
much as 5 years before disease diagnosis, with only slight decline in 
preclinical stages.
INTERPRETATION: Olfaction and color vision identify early-stage 
synuclein-mediated neurodegenerative diseases. In most cases, abnormalities are 
measurable at least 5 years before disease onset, and progress slowly in the 
preclinical stages.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22282
PMID: 21246603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2475. Am J Hematol. 2011 Feb;86(2):230-4. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21932.

Alpha- and beta-synucleins are new diagnostic tools for acute erythroid leukemia 
and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia.

Maitta RW(1), Wolgast LR, Wang Q, Zhang H, Bhattacharyya P, Gong JZ, Sunkara J, 
Albanese JM, Pizzolo JG, Cannizzaro LA, Ramesh KH, Ratech H.

Author information:
(1)Montefiore Medical Center /Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, Bronx, 
New York 10467, USA.

α-Synuclein is a key component of the Lewy body, a large globular protein 
complex that forms in the nervous system of patients with Parkinson disease and 
other dementias [1-3]. Since α-synuclein also occurs in megakaryocytic and 
erythroid lineages [4-7], we wondered what role synucleins had in the 
hematopoietic system. Therefore, we studied the expression of α-, β-, and 
γ-synucleins in a comprehensive panel of patient bone marrows and leukemic cell 
lines. We observed under expression of α-synuclein in the megakaryocytes of 
myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN), but not normal reactive marrow (NRM) or 
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Conversely, we observed over expression of 
β-synuclein in the blasts of megakaryoblastic leukemias (MegL), but not acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML) or erythroleukemia (EryL), suggesting that α- and 
β-synucleins could be useful adjunct markers for the early detection of MDS and 
the differential diagnosis of EryL and MegL from other AMLs.

DOI: 10.1002/ajh.21932
PMID: 21264917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2476. Neurotherapeutics. 2011 Jan;8(1):82-92. doi: 10.1007/s13311-010-0012-2.

Neuroimaging in dementia.

Tartaglia MC(1), Rosen HJ, Miller BL.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Francisco Memory and Aging Center, San 
Francisco, California 94143, USA. ctartaglia@memory.ucsf.edu

Dementia is a common illness with an incidence that is rising as the aged 
population increases. There are a number of neurodegenerative diseases that 
cause dementia, including Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and 
frontotemporal dementia, which is subdivided into the behavioral variant, the 
semantic variant, and nonfluent variant. Numerous other neurodegenerative 
illnesses have an associated dementia, including corticobasal degeneration, 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, Huntington's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, 
multiple system atrophy, Parkinson's disease dementia, and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. Vascular dementia and AIDS dementia are secondary dementias. 
Diagnostic criteria have relied on a constellation of symptoms, but the definite 
diagnosis remains a pathologic one. As treatments become available and target 
specific molecular abnormalities, differentiating amongst the various primary 
dementias early on becomes essential. The role of imaging in dementia has 
traditionally been directed at ruling out treatable and reversible etiologies 
and not to use imaging to better understand the pathophysiology of the different 
dementias. Different brain imaging techniques allow the examination of the 
structure, biochemistry, metabolic state, and functional capacity of the brain. 
All of the major neurodegenerative disorders have relatively specific imaging 
findings that can be identified. New imaging techniques carry the hope of 
revolutionizing the diagnosis of neurodegenerative disease so as to obtain a 
complete molecular, structural, and metabolic characterization, which could be 
used to improve diagnosis and to stage each patient and follow disease 
progression and response to treatment. Structural and functional imaging 
modalities contribute to the diagnosis and understanding of the different 
dementias.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-010-0012-2
PMCID: PMC3026935
PMID: 21274688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2477. Nucl Med Commun. 2011 Apr;32(4):298-302. doi: 10.1097/MNM.0b013e328343d4ec.

Impact of 123I-FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) SPECT on the diagnosis and management of 
patients with dementia with Lewy bodies: a retrospective study.

Kemp PM(1), Clyde K, Holmes C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Southampton University Hospitals Trust, UK. 
Paul.Kemp@suht.swest.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: To assess the impact of imaging the presynaptic dopaminergic terminal 
using DaTSCAN single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) on the clinical 
diagnosis and subsequent management of patients with possible dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB), who were referred for imaging.
METHODS: A retrospective case note study was undertaken, involving a series of 
consecutive patients who had undergone DaTSCAN SPECT 12-24 months earlier.
RESULTS: Case notes of 80 patients were reviewed. DaTSCAN imaging results were 
abnormal (indicating DLB) in 20 (25%) and normal (suggesting an alternative 
diagnosis or absence of disease) in 60 (75%) patients. Of the 20 patients with 
an abnormal scan, 18 had a postscan working clinical diagnosis of DLB (90%), one 
had diagnosis of vascular dementia (5%) and another had no recorded outcome 
(5%). Fifty-eight out of the 60 patients with a normal DaTSCAN image result had 
an alternative clinical diagnosis of DLB (95%). Consequently, DaTSCAN findings 
were concordant with the outcome clinical diagnosis in 76 out of the 80 (95%) 
cases. Subsequent to DaTSCAN SPECT, scan findings and diagnoses were discussed 
with patients and/or their carers in 94% of cases and subsequent treatment 
options discussed in 93% of cases.
CONCLUSION: It would seem that DaTSCAN imaging has a marked influence on the 
working clinical diagnosis and subsequent management of patients with suspected 
DLB.

DOI: 10.1097/MNM.0b013e328343d4ec
PMID: 21278615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2478. Br J Psychiatry. 2011 Feb;198(2):109-14. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.110.078816.

Neuropathological correlates of late-life depression in older people.

Tsopelas C(1), Stewart R, Savva GM, Brayne C, Ince P, Thomas A, Matthews FE; 
Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study.

Author information:
(1)Section of Epidemiology (Box 60), Institute of Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park, 
London SE5 8AF, UK.

BACKGROUND: Depression is common in old age and is associated with risk of 
dementia, but its neuropathological correlates in the community are unknown.
AIMS: To investigate for the first time in a population-representative sample of 
people with no dementia the association between depression observed during life 
and neurofibrillary tangles, diffuse and neuritic plaques, Lewy bodies, brain 
atrophy and cerebrovascular disease found in the brain at post-mortem.
METHOD: Out of 456 donations to a population-based study, 153 brains were 
selected where donors had no dementia measured in life. Alzheimer and vascular 
pathology measures, Lewy bodies and neuronal loss were compared between those 
with (n = 36) and without (n = 117) depression ascertained using a fully 
structured diagnostic interview during life. Brain areas examined included 
frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital cortical areas as well as the 
entorhinal cortex, hippocampus and brain-stem monoaminergic nuclei.
RESULTS: Depression was significantly associated with the presence of 
subcortical Lewy bodies. No association was found between depression and 
cerebrovascular or Alzheimer pathology in cortical or subcortical areas, 
although depression was associated with neuronal loss in the hippocampus as well 
as in some of the subcortical structures investigated (nucleus basalis, 
substantia nigra, raphe nucleus).
CONCLUSIONS: Late-life depression was associated with subcortical and 
hippocampal neuronal loss but not with cerebrovascular or Alzheimer pathology.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.110.078816
PMID: 21282780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2479. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;31(2):126-31. doi: 10.1159/000323867. Epub 2011 
Jan 29.

The Montreal Cognitive Assessment and the mini-mental state examination as 
screening instruments for cognitive impairment: item analyses and threshold 
scores.

Damian AM(1), Jacobson SA, Hentz JG, Belden CM, Shill HA, Sabbagh MN, Caviness 
JN, Adler CH.

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona College of Medicine Phoenix Campus, Phoenix, AZ, USA.

AIMS: To perform an item analysis of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) 
versus the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) in the prediction of cognitive 
impairment, and to examine the characteristics of different MoCA threshold 
scores.
METHODS: 135 subjects enrolled in a longitudinal clinicopathologic study were 
administered the MoCA by a single physician and the MMSE by a trained research 
assistant. Subjects were classified as cognitively impaired or cognitively 
normal based on independent neuropsychological testing.
RESULTS: 89 subjects were found to be cognitively normal, and 46 cognitively 
impaired (20 with dementia, 26 with mild cognitive impairment). The MoCA was 
superior in both sensitivity and specificity to the MMSE, although not all MoCA 
tasks were of equal predictive value. A MoCA threshold score of 26 had a 
sensitivity of 98% and a specificity of 52% in this population. In a population 
with a 20% prevalence of cognitive impairment, a threshold of 24 was optimal 
(negative predictive value 96%, positive predictive value 47%).
CONCLUSION: This analysis suggests the potential for creating an abbreviated 
MoCA. For screening in primary care, the MoCA threshold of 26 appears optimal. 
For testing in a memory disorders clinic, a lower threshold has better 
predictive value.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000323867
PMID: 21282950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2480. Biochem Pharmacol. 2011 Jun 15;81(12):1422-34. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.01.021. 
Epub 2011 Feb 3.

Developing predictive CSF biomarkers-a challenge critical to success in 
Alzheimer's disease and neuropsychiatric translational medicine.

Flood DG(1), Marek GJ, Williams M.

Author information:
(1)Worldwide Discovery Research, Cephalon, Inc., West Chester, PA 19380, USA.

The need to develop effective treatments for Alzheimer's disease has been 
confounded by repeated clinical failures where promising new chemical entities 
that have been extensively characterized in preclinical models of Alzheimer's 
disease have failed to show efficacy in the human disease state. This has been 
attributed to: the selection of drug targets that have yet to be shown as causal 
to the disease as distinct from being the result of the disease process, a lack 
of congruence in the animal models of Alzheimer's disease, wild-type and 
transgenic, to the human disease, and the enrollment of patients in proof of 
concept clinical trials who are at too advanced a stage of the disease to 
respond to any therapeutic. The development of validated biomarkers that can be 
used for disease diagnosis and progression is anticipated to improve patient 
enrollment in clinical trials, to develop new animal models and to identify new 
disease targets for drug discovery. The present review assesses the status of 
current efforts in developing CSF biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease and briefly 
discusses the status of CSF biomarker efforts in schizophrenia, depression, 
Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2011.01.021
PMID: 21295552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2481. Brain Nerve. 2011 Feb;63(2):119-29.

[Muro disease: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex in 
Kii peninsula of Japan].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Welfare, Faculty of Health Science, Suzuka University 
of Medical Science, Mie, Japan.

Muro disease refers to the endemic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) in the high incidence ALS focus in the Muro 
district of the Kii peninsula. Kii paralysis was first described in the 1680s in 
a folk literature, and as ALS in the medical literature by Kin-no-suke Miura in 
1911. Two high-incidence ALS foci were discovered in 1960s by Kimura and Yase, 
and retro- and anterospective epidemiological surveys were started. Kii ALS was 
neuropathologically characterized by classical ALS pathology together with many 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in the brain, similar to Guamanian ALS. The 
incidence rates of ALS dramatically declined during the 1950s and 1980s, 
resulting in the disappearance of the high-incidence foci. In the early 1990s, 
however, Kuzuhara found existence of high-incidence of ALS in the region, and, 
in addition, of a high-incidence of PDC with abundant NFTs, similar to Guamanian 
PDC. The incidence rates of PDC dramatically rose during the 1980s and 1990s, 
and PDC replaced ALS. Unsuccessful attempts were made to identify cause and 
pathogenesis of the disease in minerals and environmental factors. More than 70% 
of patients in the endemic region had a family history of ALS or PDC; therefore, 
genetic factors were suspected as the cause. The authors analyzed the causative 
and risk candidate genes in the affected and unaffected family members, but 
failed to find genes related to ALS/PDC. The changing pattern of Muro disease 
from ALS with a younger onset and rapid progression to PDC with a later onset 
and longer survival suggests that some unknown environmental factor(s) might 
modulate the disease process, which basically might be programmed in the 
gene(s).

PMID: 21301036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2482. Lancet Neurol. 2011 Mar;10(3):230-40. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70014-X.

α-Synuclein and tau concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of patients presenting 
with parkinsonism: a cohort study.

Mollenhauer B(1), Locascio JJ, Schulz-Schaeffer W, Sixel-Döring F, Trenkwalder 
C, Schlossmacher MG.

Author information:
(1)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel, Germany. brit.mollenhauer@pk-mx.de

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2011 Apr;10(4):297.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2011 Mar;10(3):203-5.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and multiple system 
atrophy are brain disorders characterised by intracellular α-synuclein deposits. 
We aimed to assess whether reduction of α-synuclein concentrations in CSF was a 
marker for α-synuclein deposition in the brain, and therefore diagnostic of 
synucleinopathies.
METHODS: We assessed potential extracellular-fluid markers of α-synuclein 
deposition in the brain (total α-synuclein and total tau in CSF, and total 
α-synuclein in serum) in three cohorts: a cross-sectional training cohort of 
people with Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, Alzheimer's disease, or other neurological disorders; a group of 
patients with autopsy-confirmed dementia with Lewy bodies, Alzheimer's disease, 
or other neurological disorders (CSF specimens were drawn ante mortem during 
clinical investigations); and a validation cohort of patients who between 
January, 2003, and December, 2006, were referred to a specialised movement 
disorder hospital for routine inpatient admission under the working diagnosis of 
parkinsonism. CSF and serum samples were assessed by ELISA, and clinical 
diagnoses were made according to internationally established criteria. Mean 
differences in biomarkers between diagnostic groups were assessed with 
conventional parametric and non-parametric statistics.
FINDINGS: In our training set, people with Parkinson's disease, multiple system 
atrophy, and dementia with Lewy bodies had lower CSF α-synuclein concentrations 
than patients with Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders. CSF 
α-synuclein and tau values separated participants with synucleinopathies well 
from those with other disorders (p<0·0001; area under the receiver operating 
characteristic curve [AUC]=0·908). In the autopsy-confirmed cases, CSF 
α-synuclein discriminated between dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's 
disease (p=0·0190; AUC=0·687); in the validation cohort, CSF α-synuclein 
discriminated Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies versus 
progressive supranuclear palsy, normal-pressure hydrocephalus, and other 
neurological disorders (p<0·0001; AUC=0·711). Other predictor variables tested 
in this cohort included CSF tau (p=0·0798), serum α-synuclein (p=0·0502), and 
age (p=0·0335). CSF α-synuclein concentrations of 1·6 pg/μL or lower showed 
70·72% sensitivity (95% CI 65·3-76·1%) and 52·83% specificity (39·4-66·3%) for 
the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease. At this cutoff, the positive predictive 
value for any synucleinopathy was 90·7% (95% CI 87·3-94·2%) and the negative 
predictive value was 20·4% (13·7-27·2%).
INTERPRETATION: Mean CSF α-synuclein concentrations as measured by ELISA are 
significantly lower in Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and 
multiple system atrophy than in other neurological diseases. Although 
specificity was low, the high positive predictive value of CSF α-synuclein 
concentrations in patients presenting with synucleinopathy-type parkinsonism 
might be useful in stratification of patients in future clinical trials.
FUNDING: American Parkinson Disease Association, Stifterverband für die Deutsche 
Wissenschaft, Michael J Fox Foundation for Parkinson's Research, National 
Institutes of Health, Parkinson Research Consortium Ottawa, and the Government 
of Canada.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(11)70014-X
PMID: 21317042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2483. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011 Jan 30;4(2):147-55.

TDP-43 in aging and Alzheimer's disease - a review.

Wilson AC(1), Dugger BN, Dickson DW, Wang DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Wisconsin 
School of Medicine and Public Health, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Transactive response DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43), an RNA and DNA 
binding protein involved in transcriptional repression, RNA splicing and RNA 
metabolism during the stress response, is the major component of neuronal 
inclusions in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions, now referred to as FTLD-TDP. While 
initially thought to be relatively specific to ALS and FTLD-TDP, TDP-43 
pathology has now been detected in a number of other neurodegenerative diseases, 
many associated with tau pathology, including Guam Parkinson dementia complex 
and Alzheimer's disease (AD). TDP-43 pathology is detected in 25% to 50% of AD 
cases, especially those with more severe clinical phenotype and greater 
Alzheimer type pathology, as well as AD cases with hippocampal sclerosis (HS). 
HS is characterized by selective neuronal loss affecting CA1 sector of the 
hippocampus, and most cases of HS, with or without AD, have TDP-43 pathology. 
Whether TDP-43 pathology is merely an incidental finding in AD or actually 
contributing to the more severe clinical phenotype remains unresolved. Presence 
of TDP-43 in normal elderly, who are at increased risk for AD, would strengthen 
the argument that it is not merely a secondary or incidental finding in end 
stage AD. Limited studies suggest that TDP-43 pathology is infrequent in 
neurologically normal elderly (3% or less). We provide an overview of what is 
known about TDP-43 in AD, normal aging and in other disorders and suggest that 
TDP-43 proteinopathies be considered in two classes - primary and secondary.

PMCID: PMC3037200
PMID: 21326809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2484. Stud Health Technol Inform. 2011;163:8-10.

Sleep dysfunctions influence decision making in undemented Parkinson's disease 
patients: a study in a virtual supermarket.

Albani G(1), Raspelli S, Carelli L, Priano L, Pignatti R, Morganti F, Gaggioli 
A, Weiss PL, Kizony R, Katz N, Mauro A, Riva G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences and Neurorehabilitation, Istituto Auxologico 
Italiano, IRCCS, Piancavallo-Verbania, Italy.

In the early-middle stages of Parkinson's disease (PD), polysomnographic studies 
show early alterations of the structure of the sleep, which may explain frequent 
symptoms reported by patients, such as daytime drowsiness, loss of attention and 
concentration, feeling of tiredness. The aim of this study was to verify if 
there is a correlation between the sleep dysfunction and decision making 
ability. We used a Virtual Reality version of the Multiple Errand Test (VMET), 
developed using the NeuroVR free software (http://www.neurovr2.org), to evaluate 
decision-making ability in 12 PD not-demented patients and 14 controls. Five of 
our not-demented 12 PD patients showed abnormalities in the polysomnographic 
recordings associated to significant differences in the VMET performance.

PMID: 21335749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2485. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2011 Jun;17(5):386-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.01.020. Epub 2011 Feb 22.

Altered subjective fear responses in Huntington's disease.

Eddy CM(1), Mitchell IJ, Beck SR, Cavanna AE, Rickards HE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, The Barberry National Centre for Mental 
Health, Birmingham and Solihull Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust, 25 Vincent 
Drive, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2FG, UK. clare.eddy@bsmhft.nhs.uk

Patients with Huntington's disease (HD) have been shown to exhibit impairment in 
the recognition of facial expressions such as disgust, as well as deficits in 
disgust responses to olfactory and gustatory stimuli. The present study 
investigated whether HD is associated with changes in emotional responses to a 
variety of visual and verbal stimuli selected to elicit core disgust, moral 
disgust, fear and happiness. Thirteen patients with HD and twelve controls 
provided emotional ratings after both reading emotion eliciting scenarios and 
viewing pictures from the International Affective Picture System database. 
Patients with HD exhibited executive dysfunction. In comparison to controls, 
they gave similar ratings for happy stimuli and did not differ significantly in 
response to core disgust or moral disgust stimuli. However, they did exhibit 
lower fear ratings in response to both sets of fear stimuli (pictures and 
scenarios), and higher anger ratings than controls in response to fear pictures. 
These differences in fear response could reflect dysfunction within 
frontostriatal pathways involving the amygdala. Changes to fear responses in HD 
may impair decision making and lead to increased risk-taking behaviour with 
significant personal or social consequences.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.01.020
PMID: 21345712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2486. J Nutr. 2011 Apr 1;141(4):729S-739S. doi: 10.3945/jn.110.130351. Epub 2011 Feb 
23.

HFE gene variants affect iron in the brain.

Nandar W(1), Connor JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Pennsylvania State University, M. S. Hershey 
Medical Center, Hershey, PA 17033, USA.

Iron accumulation in the brain and increased oxidative stress are consistent 
observations in many neurodegenerative diseases. Thus, we have begun examination 
into gene mutations or allelic variants that could be associated with loss of 
iron homeostasis. One of the mechanisms leading to iron overload is a mutation 
in the HFE gene, which is involved in iron metabolism. The 2 most common HFE 
gene variants are C282Y (1.9%) and H63D (8.9%). The C282Y HFE variant is more 
commonly associated with hereditary hemochromatosis, which is an autosomal 
recessive disorder, characterized by iron overload in a number of systemic 
organs. The H63D HFE variant appears less frequently associated with 
hemochromatosis, but its role in the neurodegenerative diseases has received 
more attention. At the cellular level, the HFE mutant protein resulting from the 
H63D HFE gene variant is associated with iron dyshomeostasis, increased 
oxidative stress, glutamate release, tau phosphorylation, and alteration in 
inflammatory response, each of which is under investigation as a contributing 
factor to neurodegenerative diseases. Therefore, the HFE gene variants are 
proposed to be genetic modifiers or a risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases 
by establishing an enabling milieu for pathogenic agents. This review will 
discuss the current knowledge of the association of the HFE gene variants with 
neurodegenerative diseases: amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, and ischemic stroke. Importantly, the data herein also 
begin to dispel the long-held view that the brain is protected from iron 
accumulation associated with the HFE mutations.

DOI: 10.3945/jn.110.130351
PMID: 21346098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2487. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2011 Oct-Dec;25(4):364-8. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e31820f8f50.

Hippocampal sclerosis in the elderly: genetic and pathologic findings, some 
mimicking Alzheimer disease clinically.

Pao WC(1), Dickson DW, Crook JE, Finch NA, Rademakers R, Graff-Radford NR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hippocampal sclerosis (HpScl) in the elderly is often associated 
with neurodegeneration.
METHODS: We studied the clinical and pathologic features of HpScl in 205 
consecutive patients with dementia who came to autopsy from 1997 to 2008, 
focusing on associations with TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) pathology and 
allelic variants in the progranulin (GRN) and apolipoprotein E (APOE).
RESULTS: Of the 205 dementia patients, 28 had HpScl (14%). TDP-43 pathology was 
more frequent in cases with HpScl compared with those without HpScl (89% vs. 
24%). GRN rs5848 T-allele but not APOE ε4 was associated with HpScl. In cases of 
HpScl with TDP-43 pathology and age of onset after 75 years (n=11), 8 had 
Alzheimer disease (AD)-like amnestic syndrome, but most (6 of 8) had pathology 
not consistent with AD (Braak stage III or less), including 4 with 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP, 1 with diffuse Lewy body disease, 
and 1 with "pure HpScl."
CONCLUSIONS: HpScl is common in an elderly cohort with dementia, occurring in 
14% of the cases in this series, and 89% have TDP-43 pathology, often associated 
with a risk variant in GRN. Patients with HpScl who present after the age of 75 
years often have presentations consistent with AD, but at autopsy have 
non-Alzheimer pathologies. Elderly patients with HpScl may be mistaken for AD.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e31820f8f50
PMCID: PMC3107353
PMID: 21346515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2488. Sleep Med. 2011 May;12(5):445-53. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.12.009. Epub 2011 
Feb 23.

Validation of the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire to screen for REM sleep behavior 
disorder in an aging and dementia cohort.

Boeve BF(1), Molano JR, Ferman TJ, Smith GE, Lin SC, Bieniek K, Haidar W, 
Tippmann-Peikert M, Knopman DS, Graff-Radford NR, Lucas JA, Petersen RC, Silber 
MH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. bboeve@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Sleep Med. 2011 May;12(5):429-30.

OBJECTIVE: To validate a questionnaire focused on rapid eye movement sleep (REM) 
sleep behavior disorder (RBD) among participants in an aging and dementia 
cohort.
BACKGROUND: RBD is a parasomnia that can develop in otherwise 
neurologically-normal adults as well as in those with a neurodegenerative 
disease. Confirmation of RBD requires polysomnography (PSG). A simple screening 
measure for RBD is desirable for clinical and research purposes.
METHODS: We had previously developed the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire (MSQ), a 16 
item measure, to screen for the presence of RBD and other sleep disorders. We 
assessed the validity of the MSQ by comparing the responses of patients' bed 
partners with the findings on PSG. All subjects recruited in the Mayo 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at Mayo Clinic Rochester and Mayo Clinic 
Jacksonville from 1/00 to 7/08 who had also undergone a PSG were the focus of 
this analysis.
RESULTS: The study sample was comprised of 176 subjects (150 male; median age 71 
years (range 39-90)), with the following clinical diagnoses: normal (n = 8), 
mild cognitive impairment (n = 44), Alzheimer's disease (n = 23), dementia with 
Lewy bodies (n = 74), as well as other dementia and/or parkinsonian syndromes (n 
= 27). The core question on recurrent dream enactment behavior yielded a 
sensitivity (SN) of 98% and specificity (SP) of 74% for the diagnosis of RBD. 
The profile of responses on four additional subquestions on RBD and one on 
obstructive sleep apnea improved specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that among aged subjects with cognitive 
impairment and/or parkinsonism, the MSQ has adequate SN and SP for the diagnosis 
of RBD. The utility of this scale in other patient populations will require 
further study.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.12.009
PMCID: PMC3083495
PMID: 21349763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2489. BMC Neurol. 2011 Feb 28;11:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-11-29.

Causes and consequences of cerebral small vessel disease. The RUN DMC study: a 
prospective cohort study. Study rationale and protocol.

van Norden AG(1), de Laat KF, Gons RA, van Uden IW, van Dijk EJ, van Oudheusden 
LJ, Esselink RA, Bloem BR, van Engelen BG, Zwarts MJ, Tendolkar I, Olde-Rikkert 
MG, van der Vlugt MJ, Zwiers MP, Norris DG, de Leeuw FE.

Author information:
(1)Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Centre for 
Neuroscience, Department of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Centre, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral small vessel disease (SVD) is a frequent finding on CT and 
MRI scans of elderly people and is related to vascular risk factors and 
cognitive and motor impairment, ultimately leading to dementia or parkinsonism 
in some. In general, the relations are weak, and not all subjects with SVD 
become demented or get parkinsonism. This might be explained by the diversity of 
underlying pathology of both white matter lesions (WML) and the normal appearing 
white matter (NAWM). Both cannot be properly appreciated with conventional MRI. 
Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) provides alternative information on 
microstructural white matter integrity. The association between SVD, its 
microstructural integrity, and incident dementia and parkinsonism has never been 
investigated.
METHODS/DESIGN: The RUN DMC study is a prospective cohort study on the risk 
factors and cognitive and motor consequences of brain changes among 503 
non-demented elderly, aged between 50-85 years, with cerebral SVD. First follow 
up is being prepared for July 2011. Participants alive will be included and 
invited to the research centre to undergo a structured questionnaire on 
demographics and vascular risk factors, and a cognitive, and motor, assessment, 
followed by a MRI protocol including conventional MRI, DTI and resting state 
fMRI.
DISCUSSION: The follow up of the RUN DMC study has the potential to further 
unravel the causes and possibly better predict the consequences of changes in 
white matter integrity in elderly with SVD by using relatively new imaging 
techniques. When proven, these changes might function as a surrogate endpoint 
for cognitive and motor function in future therapeutic trials. Our data could 
furthermore provide a better understanding of the pathophysiology of cognitive 
and motor disturbances in elderly with SVD. The execution and completion of the 
follow up of our study might ultimately unravel the role of SVD on the 
microstructural integrity of the white matter in the transition from "normal" 
aging to cognitive and motor decline and impairment and eventually to incident 
dementia and parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-11-29
PMCID: PMC3053228
PMID: 21356112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2490. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 18;6(2):e17258. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017258.

The impact of multifunctional genes on "guilt by association" analysis.

Gillis J(1), Pavlidis P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of British Columbia, Centre for 
High-Throughput Biology, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Many previous studies have shown that by using variants of 
"guilt-by-association", gene function predictions can be made with very high 
statistical confidence. In these studies, it is assumed that the "associations" 
in the data (e.g., protein interaction partners) of a gene are necessary in 
establishing "guilt". In this paper we show that multifunctionality, rather than 
association, is a primary driver of gene function prediction. We first show that 
knowledge of the degree of multifunctionality alone can produce astonishingly 
strong performance when used as a predictor of gene function. We then 
demonstrate how multifunctionality is encoded in gene interaction data (such as 
protein interactions and coexpression networks) and how this can feed forward 
into gene function prediction algorithms. We find that high-quality gene 
function predictions can be made using data that possesses no information on 
which gene interacts with which. By examining a wide range of networks from 
mouse, human and yeast, as well as multiple prediction methods and evaluation 
metrics, we provide evidence that this problem is pervasive and does not reflect 
the failings of any particular algorithm or data type. We propose computational 
controls that can be used to provide more meaningful control when estimating 
gene function prediction performance. We suggest that this source of bias due to 
multifunctionality is important to control for, with widespread implications for 
the interpretation of genomics studies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017258
PMCID: PMC3041792
PMID: 21364756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2491. Mov Disord. 2011 Mar;26(4):653-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.23499. Epub 2011 Mar 2.

The patients' perception of prodromal symptoms before the initial diagnosis of 
Parkinson's disease.

Gaenslen A(1), Swid I, Liepelt-Scarfone I, Godau J, Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute of Clinical Brain Research, 
Tübingen, Germany. alexandra.gaenslen@klinikum.uni-tuebingen.de

BACKGROUND: Before the occurrence of motor symptoms permits the clinical 
diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD), about or even more than 50% of the 
dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra have degenerated. This time be 
called the prodromal phase of PD.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the time span from onset of first prodromal symptoms to 
the initial diagnosis of PD as well as the order of symptom occurrence.
METHODS: Retrospective study of 93 consecutively interviewed PD patients without 
dementia and 93 sex and age matched controls free of neurodegenerative 
disorders. A standardized in-house telephone worksheet assessing 19 nonmotor and 
six early motor signs was used.
RESULTS: A total of 98.8% of all patients interviewed reported to have 
experienced prodromal symptoms prior to receiving the initial diagnosis of PD. 
Patients noticed an average of 7.6 different symptoms during this time interval. 
The mean time span between the recalled onset of any one symptom and PD 
diagnosis was 10.2 years. In both groups, the course of prodromal sign onset was 
associated with early neuropathological disease stages proposed by Braak.
OUTLOOK: These retrospectively gathered data confirm the existence of a long 
prodromal phase for PD that is consistent with neuropathological staging. A 
standardized questionnaire assessing such early symptoms may be helpful in 
identifying subjects at high risk for PD while they are still in the prodromal 
phase of the disorder.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23499
PMCID: PMC3130930
PMID: 21370256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2492. Practitioner. 2011 Jan;255(1736):15-7, 2.

Tackling dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Rolinski M(1), Ebmeier KP.

Author information:
(1)FFulbrook Centre, Oxford.

Dementia more than one year after the onset of motor features associated with 
Parkinson's disease is defined as Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD). If it 
develops within one year of the motor features, the term dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) is used. Since clinical and pathological features are similar, it 
is generally accepted that both represent a continuum of the same disorder. PDD 
together with DLB account for around one fifth of all cases of dementia in the 
elderly. Studies suggest that most patients with Parkinson's disease would 
eventually develop dementia if they lived long enough. The diagnosis of PDD in 
the presence of long-standing pronounced motor features rarely poses a 
diagnostic dilemma. However, the diagnosis of DLB may be more difficult. It 
relies on the revised consensus clinical criteria which require the presence of 
at least two of the following three syndromes: persistent visual hallucinations, 
fluctuating defects in cognitive and functional ability, and parkinsonism. An 
early referral to a specialist clinic may not only help to confirm the 
diagnosis, but also to co-ordinate the group of professionals working with the 
patient. Well lit rooms and the use of glasses and hearing aids can help to 
reduce hallucinations. Cholinesterase inhibitors used in Alzheimer's disease 
have a role in DLB and PDD. Trials show moderate improvements in cognitive 
function in patients treated with rivastigmine. The greatest impact, however, 
seems to be on the psychotic features of the disease. Patients with DLB are less 
likely to have a good motor response from L-dopa than patients with Parkinson's 
disease or PDD.

PMID: 21370709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2493. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2011 Jan-Feb;45(1):24-31. doi: 
10.1016/s0028-3843(14)60056-6.

Educational level and cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson disease.

Kierzynka A(1), Kaźmierski R, Kozubski W.

Author information:
(1)Klinika Neurologii, Uniwersytet Medyczny w Poznaniu, ul. Przybyszewskiego 49, 
60-335 Poznañ. annc@poczta.onet.pl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Parkinson disease (PD) is a risk factor for dementia. In 
addition, specific cognitive deficits can occur in PD patients without dementia. 
A patient's level of education could have an influence on the development of 
cognitive impairment in PD. The aim of this study was to examine the 
relationship between the level of education and cognitive performance in 
non-demented patients with PD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Thirty-seven consecutive, nondemented PD patients and 40 
healthy controls fulfilled the inclusion criteria and were enrolled in the 
case-control study. Each of the controls and PD patients were classified, for 
the purpose of this study, into one of three groups (low, intermediate, higher), 
categorized by the number of years of education. There were no differences in 
education and age between the controls and PD patients. All of the subjects were 
evaluated with a battery of neuropsychological tests: Mini-Mental State 
Examination, Trail Making Tests, Stroop Test, Mental Rotation Test, and Verbal 
Fluency Test.
RESULTS: Less (low and intermediate) education was correlated with poor results 
from tests. The comparison of all groups of PD patients and controls 
demonstrated that PD subjects received lower test scores, especially for the low 
and intermediate groups. However, no statistically significant difference was 
reached between educationally advanced PD patients and the appropriate control 
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: As compared to the controls, most non-demented PD patients 
presented executive-type cognitive dysfunction. The higher educational level, 
however, was associated with a lower risk of cognitive deterioration. We 
conclude that higher education might have protective effects in cognitive 
decline in PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3843(14)60056-6
PMID: 21384290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2494. Sleep Med. 2011 Apr;12(4):397-402. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.09.006.

Daytime sleepiness in mild Alzheimer's disease with and without parkinsonian 
features.

Park M(1), Shah RC, Fogg LF, Wyatt JK.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Service and Research Center, Department of Behavioral 
Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612-3833, USA. 
margaret_park@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) and nocturnal sleep disruption 
are common in Alzheimer's disease (AD). However, little is known regarding risk 
factors for developing EDS and sleep disruption in AD. In AD, EDS is associated 
with parkinsonian motor features (PF), which are associated with faster 
cognitive decline. The primary aim of this exploratory study was to evaluate 
whether differences in EDS and nocturnal sleep disruption exist between AD 
participants with versus without PF.
METHODS: Thirty-six participants with mild AD were evaluated for PF using the 
modified motor UPDRS (mmUPDRS) scoring system and classified according to 
absence (AD-PF, n=19) or presence (AD+PF, n=17) of PF. EDS was assessed using 
questionnaires and a multiple sleep latency test (MSLT) performed the day after 
nocturnal polysomnogram. Participants were considered "Sleepy" or "Not Sleepy" 
according to mean MSLT scores (cutoff score=10.4 min).
RESULTS: Results showed that the AD+PF group were sleepier than the AD-PF group 
by subjective and objective measures, despite similarities in nocturnal sleep. 
The AD+PF group had higher scores on the Epworth Sleepiness Scale (8.5 versus 
3.9, p=.001). The AD+PF group also had higher percentage of participants that 
had "Sleepy" MSLT scores compared to the AD-PF group (75% versus 31.6%, 
respectively; χ(2)=6.56, p=.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of parkinsonian features may be an independent risk 
factor for sleepiness in mild AD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.09.006
PMID: 21388877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2495. J Neurol. 2011 Aug;258(8):1513-7. doi: 10.1007/s00415-011-5972-6. Epub 2011 Mar 
11.

How well do we recognise non-motor symptoms in a British Parkinson's disease 
population?

Hu M(1), Cooper J, Beamish R, Jones E, Butterworth R, Catterall L, Ben-Shlomo Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Milton Keynes Hospital NHS Foundation Trust and 
Oxford Radcliffe Hospitals, Oxford, UK. michele.hu@clneuro.ox.ac.uk

Although awareness of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD) has 
recently increased, little is known about their recognition and treatment in 
routine clinical practice. We therefore applied non-motor rating scales for 
dementia, depression, anxiety and excessive daytime sleepiness to a 
community-ascertained cohort of 202 PD patients. Hospital case notes were 
reviewed for evidence that the non-motor problems had been recognized and 
whether any action had been taken to ameliorate or assess these symptoms. The 
prevalence of each non-motor problem was as follows: dementia 25.3% (95% CI 
19.0, 32.4), depression 37.3% (95% CI 30.6, 44.4), anxiety 31.3% (95% CI 25.0, 
38.2), excessive daytime sleepiness 59.4% (95% CI 52.2, 66.3). However, these 
features were only recognised in 27.2, 38.7, 9.5, and 12.8%, respectively. We 
did not identify any specific factor that predicted under-recognition. Our study 
shows that when rating scales are applied to formally assess for non-motor 
symptoms a large clinical 'iceberg effect' emerges with the majority of symptoms 
going unrecognised and untreated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-011-5972-6
PMID: 21394490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2496. Consult Pharm. 2011 Mar;26(3):190-6. doi: 10.4140/TCP.n.2011.190.

Multiple-system atrophy and medications: how to minimize the risk of falling.

Kohli J(1), Brandt N.

Author information:
(1)Omnicare Pharmacy Services, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15205, USA. 
janet.mahoney@omnicare.com

Comment in
    Consult Pharm. 2011 Jul;26(7):449-50.
    Consult Pharm. 2011 Jul;26(7):450.

An 89-year-old female resident in the assisted living section of a continuing 
care retirement community complained of dizziness and lightheadedness at 10 am 
daily and was experiencing frequent falls. The facility staff requested a 
consultant pharmacist perform an extensive review of her medications and medical 
conditions. Following a chart review and interview with the resident, the 
consultant pharmacist found that her past medical history consists of coronary 
artery disease, atrial fibrillation, congestive heart failure, hypertension, 
dyslipidemia, osteoporosis, gastroesophageal reflux disease, glaucoma, mild 
dementia, overactive bladder, and Parkinson's disease (PD). The nursing staff 
monitored the resident's blood pressure during these episodes and determined 
that the resident was experiencing orthostatic hypotension (OH). During the 
review, the consultant pharmacist found a recent neurology note that concluded 
the resident may have multiple-system atrophy (MSA) and her therapy for PD may 
not be beneficial. As autonomic dysfunction is a common feature of MSA, it is 
important to minimize the use of medications that can cause or aggravate OH. 
Additionally, data suggest only a modest and nonsustained response to levodopa 
in patients with MSA. Therefore, the pharmacist recommended multiple medication 
changes as well as follow-up monitoring by the patient and assisted living 
community staff to minimize medication-related problems such as falls.

DOI: 10.4140/TCP.n.2011.190
PMID: 21402519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2497. Arch Neurol. 2011 Mar;68(3):359-64. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.17.

Dementia risk in Parkinson disease: disentangling the role of MAPT haplotypes.

Setó-Salvia N(1), Clarimón J, Pagonabarraga J, Pascual-Sedano B, Campolongo A, 
Combarros O, Mateo JI, Regaña D, Martínez-Corral M, Marquié M, Alcolea D, 
Suárez-Calvet M, Molina-Porcel L, Dols O, Gómez-Isla T, Blesa R, Lleó A, 
Kulisevsky J.

Author information:
(1)Memory Unit, Neurology Department, Hospital de Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma 
de Barcelona, Sant Antoni M. Claret 167, 08025 Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Dementia in Parkinson disease (PD) causes nursing home placement, 
caregiver distress, higher health care burden, and increased mortality.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) H1 
haplotype and MAPT subhaplotypes play a role in the risk of PD and Parkinson 
disease-dementia (PDD) complex.
DESIGN: Case-control genetic analysis.
SETTING: Movement Disorders and Memory Units, Hospital de Sant Pau, Barcelona, 
Spain.
PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred two patients with PD (48 of whom developed dementia>2 
years after disease onset), 41 patients with Lewy body dementia (LBD, 
pathologically confirmed in 17), 164 patients with Alzheimer disease (AD), and 
374 controls.
METHODS: The MAPT haplotype was determined by testing for a 238-base pair 
deletion between exons 9 and 10, which is characteristic of the H2 haplotype. 
Haploview was used to visualize linkage disequilibrium relationships between all 
genetic variants (5 single-nucleotide polymorphisms and the del-In9 variant) 
within and surrounding the MAPT region.
RESULTS: The H1 haplotype was significantly overrepresented in PD patients 
compared with controls (P=.001). Stratifying the PD sample by the presence of 
dementia revealed a stronger association in PDD patients (sex- and age-adjusted 
odds ratio, 3.73; P=.002) than in PD patients without dementia (sex- and 
age-adjusted odds ratio, 1.89; P=.04). Examination of specific subhaplotypes 
showed that a rare version of the H1 haplotype (named H1p) was overrepresented 
in PDD patients compared with controls (2.3% vs 0.1%; P=.003). No positive 
signals for any of the MAPT variants or H1 subhaplotypes were found in AD or 
LBD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm that MAPT H1 is associated with PD and has a 
strong influence on the risk of dementia in PD patients. Our results also 
suggest that none of the MAPT subhaplotypes play a significant role in other 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as LBD or AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.17
PMID: 21403021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2498. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2011 Feb;108(8):131; author reply 132. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.2011.0131b. Epub 2011 Feb 25.

Lewy body and parkinsonian dementia: common, but often misdiagnosed conditions: 
Evidence is not satisfactory.

Landau R.

Comment on
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2010 Oct;107(39):684-91.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2011.0131b
PMCID: PMC3055259
PMID: 21403806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2499. Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2011 Feb;108(8):131; author reply 132. doi: 
10.3238/arztebl.2011.0131a. Epub 2011 Feb 25.

Lewy body and parkinsonian dementia: common, but often misdiagnosed conditions: 
Hydrocephalus should not be forgotten.

Vahl CF.

Comment on
    Dtsch Arztebl Int. 2010 Oct;107(39):684-91.

DOI: 10.3238/arztebl.2011.0131a
PMCID: PMC3055258
PMID: 21403807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2500. Mov Disord. 2011 Feb 1;26(2):297-301. doi: 10.1002/mds.23443. Epub 2010 Dec 13.

Ventricular enlargement and mild cognitive impairment in early Parkinson's 
disease.

Dalaker TO(1), Zivadinov R, Ramasamy DP, Beyer MK, Alves G, Bronnick KS, Tysnes 
OB, Aarsland D, Larsen JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. 
datu@sus.no

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) may predict future development of dementia in 
Parkinson's disease (PD). We aimed to examine the extent of subcortical brain 
atrophy in patients with early PD with and without MCI compared to normal 
controls (NC). Participating in a population-based study were 43 early, 
drug-naïve PD patients and 41 NC. Eleven patients were classified with MCI (MCI 
PD) and 32 patients without (non-MCI PD). Volumetric segmentation of 3D-T1 
weighted brain MRI was performed using FreeSurfer. Groups were compared applying 
MANCOVA corrected for total intracranial volume, age, and sex. Results showed 
that left inferior lateral ventricle and third ventricle volumes were 
significantly larger in MCI PD than in non-MCI PD and NC. Fourth ventricular 
size in MCI PD was significantly different from NC and highly correlated with 
memory performance in MCI PD patients. This suggests that cognitive dysfunction 
in early PD may be associated with ventricular enlargement.

Copyright © 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23443
PMID: 21412836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]