2001. Spatial Navigation (Water Maze) Tasks.

Terry AV Jr.

In: Buccafusco JJ(1), editor. Methods of Behavior Analysis in Neuroscience. 2nd 
edition. Boca Raton (FL): CRC Press/Taylor & Francis; 2009. Chapter 13.
Frontiers in Neuroscience.

Author information:
(1)Medical College of Georgia, Augusta

Since the early part of the 20th century, a variety of experimental procedures 
have been developed for animals that employ the escape from water as a means to 
motivate learning and memory processes [1–4]. Water maze tasks primarily 
designed to measure spatial learning and recall have become quite useful for 
evaluating the effects of aging, experimental lesions, and drug effects, 
especially in rodents. For more than 25 years the Morris water maze (MWM) [5] 
has been the task most extensively used and accepted by behavioral physiologists 
and pharmacologists. A cursory literature search revealed that well over 2500 
journal articles have been published since 1982 in which this model (or 
variations of the model) was used to assess and compare spatial learning and 
memory in rodents. The MWM, while simple at first glance, is a challenging task 
for rodents that employs a variety of sophisticated mnemonic processes. These 
processes encompass the acquisition and spatial localization of relevant visual 
cues that are subsequently processed, consolidated, retained, and then retrieved 
in order to successfully navigate and thereby locate a hidden platform to escape 
the water [5] (see also review [6]). The general processes used for 
“visuospatial navigation” in rats also contribute considerably to human 
day-to-day cognitive processes. Importantly, several lines of evidence confirm 
the utility of the model for investigations relevant to the study of 
neurodegenerative and neuropsychiatric illnesses where cognition is impaired 
(e.g., Alzheimer’s disease, Parkinson’s disease, schizophrenia). While one would 
readily acknowledge the differences in complexity between human and rodent 
behaviors, several salient observations regarding the utility of the MWM are 
notable: (1) The functional integrity of forebrain cholinergic systems, which 
are essential for efficient performance of the MWM, appears to be consistently 
disrupted in patients who suffer from AD. This disruption correlates well with 
the degree of dementia (see reviews [7,8]) and is also present in many PD 
patients who suffer cognitive decline [9,10]. (2) Cortical and hippocampal 
projections from the nucleus basalis magnocellularis (NBM) and medial septum 
(MS), respectively, are reproducibly devastated in AD (reviewed [7]) and 
accordingly, reductions in central cholinergic activity in rodents resulting 
from brain lesions (e.g., NBM, MS, etc.) and age reproducibly impair spatial 
learning in the MWM (reviewed [6]). (3) Other data implicate the hippocampus as 
an essential structure for place learning [11], which, incidentally, is commonly 
atrophic in patients with AD [12,13]. It is interesting to note that the 
hippocampal formation (in particular the hippocampal-dentate complex and the 
adjacent entorhinal cortex), which undergoes significant degeneration with age 
(and particularly so in the setting of dementia), is believed to be intimately 
involved in cognitive mapping and the facilitation of context-dependent behavior 
in a changing spatio-temporal setting (reviewed [14]). Evidence to support this 
premise is now available from living humans where computerized “virtual water 
maze tasks” have been shown to be highly sensitive to hippocampal dysfunction. 
For example, in a virtual analogue of the classic MWM hidden platform task (with 
a three-dimensional pool), patients with unilateral hippocampal resections were 
severely impaired in their performance relative to age-matched controls and 
age-matched patients who had extra-hippocampal resections [15]. (4) 
Anticholinergic agents (e.g., scopolamine), which are routinely used to impair 
performance in the MWM, also impair memory in humans and worsen the dementia in 
those with AD [16] (see also review [17]). (5) Finally, it is also important to 
note that spatial orientation, navigation, learning, and recall (which are used 
extensively in the MWM) are quite commonly disrupted in patients with dementia. 
Visuospatial and visuoperceptual deficits and topographic disorientation are 
detectable very early in the course of AD and become more pronounced as the 
disease progresses [18–20]. The common observations of spatial and visual 
agnosia in AD patients also indicate the disruption of complex processes that 
involve both visual pathways and mnemonic processing [21,22]. The MWM procedure 
offers a number of advantages as a means of assessing cognitive function in 
rodents when compared to others methods: (1) It requires no pretraining period 
and can be accomplished in a short period of time with a relatively modest 
number of animals. For example, young adult, unimpaired (control) rats can 
accomplish the most commonly employed versions of the task with asymptotic 
levels of performance achieved in 10–20 trials, generally requiring no more than 
a few days of testing. (2) Through the use of “training” as well as “probe” or 
“transfer” trials, learning as well as retrieval processes (spatial bias) [5] 
can be analyzed and compared between groups. (3) The confounding nature of 
olfactory trails or cues is eliminated. (4) Through the use of video tracking 
devices and the measure of swim speeds, non-mnemonic behaviors or strategies 
(i.e., taxon, praxis, thygmotaxis, etc.) can be delineated and motoric or 
motivational deficits can be identified. (5) Visible platform tests can identify 
gross visual deficits that might confound interpretation of results obtained 
from standard MWM testing. (6) By changing the platform location, both learning 
and relearning experiments can be accomplished. Accordingly, several doses of 
experimental drugs can be tested in the same group of animals. (7) While 
immersion into water may be somewhat unpleasant, more aversive procedures such 
as food deprivation or exposure to electric shock are circumvented. (8) Through 
the use of curtains, partitions, etc., operation of the video tracking system by 
the experimenter out of site of the test subjects also reduces distraction. (9) 
Finally, the MWM is quite easy to set up in a relatively small laboratory, is 
comparatively less expensive to operate than many types of behavioral tasks, and 
is easy to master by research and technical personnel. We have found the method 
quite useful in drug discovery and development studies for screening compounds 
for potential cognitive enhancing effects [23], as well as delineating 
deleterious effects of neurotoxicants on cognition [24]. For a more extensive 
discussion of the various MWM procedures and their advantages, see Morris [5] 
and reviews [6,25,26].

Copyright © 2009, Taylor & Francis Group, LLC.

PMID: 21204326


2002. Neurology. 2009 Jan 6;72(1):88-91. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000338626.93425.74.

Georges Marinesco and the early research in neuropathology.

Buda O(1), Arsene D, Ceausu M, Dermengiu D, Curca GC.

Author information:
(1)Mina Minovici National Institute of Legal Medicine, Sos. Vitan-Birzesti 9, 
042122 Bucharest 4, Romania. octbuda@voxline.ro

OBJECTIVE: To present the scientific contributions of Georges Marinesco 
(1863-1938) and place his achievements within the context of early 
neuropathology research.
BACKGROUND: Neuropathology is a relatively recent medical field, its origins 
dating to the late 19th century.
RESULTS: One of the most important neuroscientists of that period was the 
Romanian-born Georges Marinesco. He became a neurologist under Charcot's 
guidance at the Salpêtrière Hospital, in Paris. In 1892, Paul Blocq and 
Marinesco gave a first account of senile plaques, having used their pathologic 
skills in the examination of nine deceased epileptic patients. They did not, 
however, relate the plaques to dementia. Marinesco made discoveries in 
neuropathology which he described from a histopathologic perspective, and 
introduced new medical terms such as neuronophagia, chromatolysis, and 
medullomyoblastoma. He also drew correlations between clinical neurologic 
findings and morphology, for example in congenital cerebellar ataxia, 
syringomyelia, and parkinsonism. From 1899 he used cinematography as a medical 
research tool.
CONCLUSION: Marinesco was a prolific researcher in the field of neuropathology, 
especially neurodegeneration but also in clinical neurology. He is now 
considered the founder of the modern Romanian school of neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000338626.93425.74
PMID: 19122036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2003. Neurochem Res. 2009 Apr;34(4):630-8. doi: 10.1007/s11064-008-9900-9. Epub 2009 
Jan 6.

Natural antioxidants protect neurons in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease.

Zhao B(1).

Author information:
(1)State Key Laboratory of Brain and Cognitive Science, Institute of Biophysics, 
Academia Sinica, 15 Datun Road, Chaoyang District, 100101, Beijing, People's 
Republic of China. zhaobl@sun5.ibp.ac.cn

"Modern" medicine and pharmacology require an effective medical drug with a 
single compound for a specific disease. This seams very scientific but usually 
has unavoidable side effects. For example, the chemical therapy to cancer can 
totally damage the immunological ability of the patient leading to death early 
than non-treatment. On the other hand, natural antioxidant drugs not only can 
cure the disease but also can enhance the immunological ability of the patient 
leading to healthier though they usually have several compounds or a mixture. 
For the degenerative disease such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD), natural antioxidant drugs are suitable drugs, because the 
pathogenesis of these diseases is complex with many targets and pathways. These 
effects are more evidence when the clinic trial is for long term treatment. The 
author reviews the studies on the protecting effects of natural antioxidants on 
neurons in neurodegenerative diseases, especially summarized the results about 
protective effect of green tea polyphenols on neurons against apoptosis of 
cellular and animal PD models, and of genestine and nicotine on neurons against 
A beta-induced apoptosis of hippocampal neuronal and transgenic mouse AD models.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-008-9900-9
PMID: 19125328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2004. Ann Pharmacother. 2009 Jan;43(1):143-6. doi: 10.1345/aph.1L467. Epub 2009 Jan 6.

Increases in C-reactive protein may predict recurrence of clozapine-induced 
fever.

Kohen I(1), Afzal N, Hussain S, Manu P.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Psychiatry Division, North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, 
The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY 11004,USA. ikohen@nshs.edu

OBJECTIVE: To report a case of recurrent clozapine-induced fever that was 
associated with a rise in C-reactive protein (CRP).
CASE SUMMARY: A 73-year-old man with Lewy Body dementia was admitted for 
psychosis. He was treated with clozapine (initial dose 12.5 mg/day, titrated to 
75 mg/day over 15 days). On day 15 of clozapine therapy, he developed a benign 
fever (maximum 38.4 degrees C) that was associated with a rise in the CRP level 
(3.96 mg/dL). The level normalized when clozapine was discontinued. However, 
when the patient was rechallenged with clozapine, the CRP level became elevated 
(4.36 mg/dL) after 3 days of therapy, with a subsequent recurrence of fever 
(38.7 degrees C).
DISCUSSION: We postulate that the elevation in CRP levels and the subsequent 
fever were caused by the effects of clozapine on the cytokine system via 
interleukin-6 and tumor necrosis factor-alpha, resulting in an inflammatory 
response with an acute phase reaction. This case is unique, as it is the first 
reported in the literature associating a recurrence of clozapine-induced fever 
with the known immunomodulatory effects of clozapine on cytokines and CRP level. 
According to the Naranjo probability scale, this adverse effect is probably 
associated with clozapine.
CONCLUSIONS: Clozapine-related fever is generally benign but difficult to assess 
and manage, as it can be confused with much more serious conditions. Further 
research is needed to study whether CRP is a useful tool in predicting and 
managing clozapine fever.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1L467
PMID: 19126823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2005. Ann Neurol. 2008 Dec;64 Suppl 2:S81-92. doi: 10.1002/ana.21455.

Parkinson's disease dementia: definitions, guidelines, and research perspectives 
in diagnosis.

Goetz CG(1), Emre M, Dubois B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.

Cognitive impairment is common in Parkinson's disease (PD) and involves 
attentional, executive, visuospatial, and memory dysfunctions. Dementia is more 
frequently encountered in PD than in age-matched control populations, and 
whereas operational definitions of Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies have been developed, Parkinson's disease dementia (PD-D) has remained 
undefined. The Movement Disorder Society developed a task force to define and 
develop diagnostic guidelines for PD-D. This effort was based on existing 
descriptive studies with special emphasis on drawing distinction among 
Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and PD-related cognitive 
impairment without dementia whenever possible. The second goal was to provide 
practical diagnostic procedures to diagnose PD-D. This effort emphasized 
available bedside tools that do not require neuropsychological expertise to 
administer or interpret. This work recently has been completed, and two primary 
articles have been published. The suggested clinical diagnostic criteria for 
PD-D involve four domains and are anchored in core features, associated clinical 
features, features that make the diagnosis uncertain, and features that are not 
compatible with the diagnosis of PD-D. When all four criteria are satisfactorily 
met, probable PD-D is designated; when the first and last criteria are met, but 
clinical characteristics are atypical or uncertainty factors exist, possible 
PD-D is designated. Whereas these definitions are operative and subject to 
change based on future data, they are based on widely available tests. The 
inclusion criteria can be applied internationally and in multicenter research on 
treatment interventions, clinicopathological correlations, and studies of 
cognitive and other nonmotor elements of PD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21455
PMID: 19127578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2006. Ann Neurol. 2008 Dec;64 Suppl 2:S101-10. doi: 10.1002/ana.21461.

Why have we failed to achieve neuroprotection in Parkinson's disease?

Olanow CW(1), Kieburtz K, Schapira AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA. 
warren.olanow@mssm.edu

The development of a neuroprotective therapy that slows, stops, or reverses 
neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease (PD) is the single most important 
unresolved issue in the management of this disorder. Current therapies provide 
effective control of symptoms, particularly in the early stages of the disease, 
but disease progression is associated with the development of "nondopaminergic" 
features such as postural instability, falling, and dementia that are not 
adequately controlled with existing medications. There are many promising 
candidate neuroprotective agents based on pathological and laboratory studies, 
but to date, it has not been possible to determine that any drug has a 
disease-modifying effect in PD. Obstacles to the development of a 
neuroprotective therapy in PD include: (1) uncertainty as to the precise cause 
of cell death in PD and what to target; (2) the lack of an animal model of PD 
that precisely reflects the etiopathogenesis of the disease, the pattern of 
dopaminergic and nondopaminergic pathology, and its chronic, progressive nature; 
(3) determination of the correct dose to use in clinical trials; and (4) 
delineation of a clinical end point that is an accurate measure of the 
underlying disease and is not confounded by potential symptomatic effects of a 
study intervention. New developments in understanding the cause of the disease, 
in the development of animal models of PD, and in clinical trial methodology 
will hopefully hasten the resolution of these problems.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21461
PMID: 19127580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2007. Eur Neurol. 2009;61(3):164-70. doi: 10.1159/000189269. Epub 2009 Jan 8.

Parkinson's disease with and without REM sleep behaviour disorder: are there any 
clinical differences?

Yoritaka A(1), Ohizumi H, Tanaka S, Hattori N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo Urayasu Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. 
ayori@juntendo.ac.jp

Rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) may serve as a useful 
indicator to approach Parkinson's disease (PD); however, PD patients do not 
always exhibit RBD. We wondered whether the presence of RBD would be reflected 
in the expansion of PD lesions and represent the same PD entity. We examined the 
clinical differences between PD with and without RBD and studied the frequency 
of RBD-like symptoms (RBD-s) and clinical differences in 150 PD patients, 
including 81 patients (54.0%) who satisfied the International Classification of 
Sleep Disorders, Revised, minimum clinical criteria for RBD. RBD-s preceding the 
appearance of parkinsonism were found in 44.4% of patients. Statistically, the 
presence of RBD-s was associated with ages above 65 years, male gender, 
constipation, dopa-induced dyskinesia and 'sleep attack', with odds ratios of 
3.709, 2.469, 2.184, 5.046 and 6.562, respectively. No differences were found 
between the 2 groups with regard to symptoms at PD onset, disease duration, 
Hoehn-Yahr stage, hallucination, dementia, wearing-off, orthostatic hypotension, 
cerebral blood flow and antiparkinsonism drugs. In the early stage, RBD and 
autonomic system dysfunction are important factors in the progression of PD.

Copyright (c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000189269
PMID: 19129703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2008. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Nov;31(11):1903-11. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.11.009. Epub 2009 Jan 9.

Myocardial (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy for differentiation of Lewy bodies disease 
from FTD.

Novellino F(1), Bagnato A, Salsone M, Cascini GL, Nicoletti G, Arabia G, 
Pugliese P, Morelli M, Paglionico S, Cipullo S, Manna I, De Marco EV, Condino F, 
Chiriaco C, Morgante L, Zappia M, Quattrone A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, University Magna Graecia, Catanzaro, Italy.

Clinical distinction between Lewy bodies disease (LBD) and frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD) is sometimes difficult. Nigrostriatal dopaminergic degeneration 
occurs in both LBD and FTD, limiting helpfulness of DAT imaging to differentiate 
these forms of dementia. Several studies have emphasized the usefulness of 
myocardial scintigraphy with (123)Metaiodobenzylguanidine ((123)I-MIGB) in 
assessing the sympathetic nerve terminals in LBD demonstrating that cardiac 
(123)I-MIGB uptake is decreased in patients with this disease. We investigated 
the role of cardiac (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy in differentiating patients with 
LBD from those with FTD. Clinical diagnosis of LBD and FTD was determined 
according to established consensus criteria. Nine patients with LBD (1 possible 
and 8 probable), 6 patients with FTD, and 16 control subjects were involved in 
the study. The heart to mediastinum ratio (H/M) of (123)I-MIBG uptake was 
markedly reduced in all patients with LBD (H/M early: 1.25±0.12; delayed: 
1.14±0.13) whereas it was normal in patients with FTD (H/M early: 1.86±0.20; 
delayed: 1.80±0.23) and in controls (H/M early: 1.91±0.17; delayed: 1.99±0.19), 
suggesting that cardiac (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy can help distinguish patients 
with LBD from those with FTD.

Copyright © 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.11.009
PMID: 19135762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2009. Arch Neurol. 2009 Jan;66(1):92-6. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.521.

Olfactory function in corticobasal syndrome and frontotemporal dementia.

Pardini M(1), Huey ED, Cavanagh AL, Grafman J.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1440, USA.

BACKGROUND: Formal olfactory testing may be useful as a bedside tool to help 
differentiate between conditions such as atypical parkinsonism, dementia, and 
psychiatric conditions. However, the neural basis of olfactory dysfunction, the 
effect of concurrent cognitive deficits on olfactory testing results, and the 
exact prevalence of olfactory deficits in populations with corticobasal syndrome 
(CBS) and the frontal variant of frontotemporal dementia (FTD-FV) are to date 
unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the prevalence and the neural basis of olfactory 
recognition deficits in patients with a clinical diagnosis of CBS or FTD-FV.
DESIGN: Retrospective study of clinical, neuropsychological, and imaging data.
SETTING: National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-five patients with CBS, 22 with FTD-FV, and 12 age-matched 
control subjects.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Results of neuropsychological evaluation, formal 
olfactory recognition testing (University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification 
Test [UPSIT]), and voxel-based morphometry analysis of structural magnetic 
resonance images of the brain.
RESULTS: Mean UPSIT percentile scores were 31.6% for the CBS group and 9.5% for 
the FTD-FV group. The voxel-based morphometry correlations between local gray 
matter and UPSIT scores showed a significant volume effect in the right 
midfrontal gyrus for the FTD-FV patients and in the right insula, right 
midfrontal gyrus, and bilateral inferior frontal gyrus for the patients with 
CBS. A linear regression analysis of the UPSIT scores revealed as significant 
predictors the general memory score of the Wechsler Memory Scale and the Boston 
Naming Test total score for the patients with FTD-FV and the Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale total score for the patients with CBS.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data showed a more severe olfactory impairment for CBS patients 
than previously reported. We also showed a significant relationship between 
formal olfactory recognition testing scores and specific cognitive domains. 
These findings could be useful to clinically differentiate FTD-FV and CBS from 
other dementing illnesses and movement disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.521
PMCID: PMC2987736
PMID: 19139305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2010. Braz J Psychiatry. 2008 Dec;30(4):375-83. doi: 10.1590/s1516-44462008000400013.

[Dementia in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Portuguese]

Caixeta L(1), Vieira RT.

Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal de Goiás, Goiânia, GO, Brasil. 
leonardocaixeta1@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: The concomitant presence of psychiatric syndromes, including 
dementia, with motor disturbance has been increasingly recognized during the 
last decade, with emphasis on cognitive impairment in idiopatic Parkinson's 
disease. This review will focus on the epidemiology, clinical aspects, 
differential diagnosis, underlying mechanisms and treatment of dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.
METHOD: A literature review of the studies that investigated the dementia in 
Parkinson's disease was performed.
RESULTS: Dementia is highly prevalent in Parkinson's disease. The prototype of 
dementia in Parkinson's disease is a dysexecutive syndrome with impaired 
attention, executive functions and secondarily impaired memory. Neurochemically 
the most significant deficit seems to be cholinergic; dementia seems to 
correlate best with cortical and limbic Lewy bodies. Preliminary evidence 
suggests that cholinesterase inhibitors may be effective in Parkinson's disease 
dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease is associated to 
specific features and is responsible for substantial disability in these 
patients.

DOI: 10.1590/s1516-44462008000400013
PMID: 19142415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2011. Eur J Neurol. 2009 Feb;16(2):212-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02388.x.

Differences in clinical course between dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Hanyu H(1), Sato T, Hirao K, Kanetaka H, Sakurai H, Iwamoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Tokyo, Japan. 
h-hanyu@tokyo-med.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To investigate whether there may be differences in the 
clinical course and changes in cognitive progression between dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: We compared the time from the first visit to endpoints (discontinuation 
of visits because of admission, death, or institutionalization) between 56 
patients with DLB and 111 patients with AD. Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scores of patients were every 12 months examined up to 60 months.
RESULTS: Dementia with Lewy bodies had a significantly shorter time to reaching 
endpoints than those with AD (median time; 40 months vs. 52 months, P < 0.0001). 
The proportion of admission (or death) was significantly higher in DLB than in 
AD (30% vs. 14%, P < 0.05), while the difference in institutionalization in 
nursing homes did not reach statistical significance (25% vs. 17%). Rates of 
longitudinal MMSE score decline for DLB and AD groups were equivalent.
CONCLUSION: Dementia with Lewy bodies had a greater risk of admission (or death) 
because of most commonly fall-related injuries and bronchopneumonia than AD, but 
the two groups did not differ in rate of cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2008.02388.x
PMID: 19146642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2012. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2009 Aug-Sep;165(8-9):718-27. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2008.11.017. Epub 2009 Jan 15.

[Continuous dopaminergic stimulation by Duodopa in advanced Parkinson's disease: 
Efficacy and safety].

[Article in French]

Annic A(1), Devos D, Seguy D, Dujardin K, Destée A, Defebvre L.

Author information:
(1)EA, IFR, hôpital Roger-Salengro, centre hospitalier et universitaire de 
Lille, France.

INTRODUCTION: When advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) patients experience motor 
complications (fluctuations and dyskinesias) despite standard oral treatment, 
two treatment options are available: deep brain stimulation and subcutaneous 
apomorphine infusion with respects of indications for each strategy. Continuous 
intraduodenal infusion of levodopa (Duodopa) via a gastrojejunal tube may be 
proposed at this stage of the disease and the study of indications and clinical 
results with Duodopa may develop this new therapeutic alternative.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seven patients with advanced PD (dementia for all and 
psychiatric disorders for some of them, axial signs) were treated with Duodopa. 
We evaluated neuropsychological functions, all UPDRS scales, gait and 
quality-of-life just before Duodopa onset and six months after treatment end. 
Moreover, we described all adverse events (early and late) and studied daily 
levodopa doses before and 6 months after treatment.
RESULTS: We demonstrated an improvement in motor UPDRS (44%), in axial signs 
(40% for UPDRS part III axial subscore and 12% for gait) and a reduction of 
fluctuations (37.5%) and in UPDRS part IV dyskinesia (20%). These significant 
results are observed without any change in the quality-of-life. Adverse events 
were due to PEG positioning for four patients, the equipment (pump, connection, 
inner tube) for all patients and levodopa for four patients. Daily levodopa dose 
had to be increased 13.5%.
CONCLUSION: Duodopa can be considered as a new treatment strategy providing 
significant improvements in motor fluctuations, dyskinesia and severe axial 
signs. These results were demonstrated in very advanced PD patients, who had 
been excluded from previous studies, with cognitive disorders and for some of 
them dopaminergic psychosis well controlled by medications.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2008.11.017
PMID: 19150100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2013. Brain. 2009 Apr;132(Pt 4):1093-101. doi: 10.1093/brain/awn349. Epub 2009 Jan 20.

Detection of elevated levels of soluble alpha-synuclein oligomers in post-mortem 
brain extracts from patients with dementia with Lewy bodies.

Paleologou KE(1), Kragh CL, Mann DM, Salem SA, Al-Shami R, Allsop D, Hassan AH, 
Jensen PH, El-Agnaf OM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, School of Health and Medicine, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK.

A number of neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease, dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) and multiple system atrophy are characterized by the 
formation and intraneuronal accumulation of fibrillar aggregates of 
alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) protein in affected brain regions. These and other 
findings suggest that the accumulation of alpha-syn in the brain plays an 
important role in the pathogenesis of these diseases. However, more recently it 
has been reported that early amyloid aggregates or 'soluble oligomers' are the 
pathogenic species that lead to neurodegeneration and neuronal cell death rather 
than the later 'mature fibrils'. In this study, we investigated the presence of 
alpha-syn oligomers in brain lysates prepared from frozen post-mortem brains of 
normal, Alzheimer's disease and DLB patients. The brain extracts were subjected 
to high speed centrifugation, to remove insoluble alpha-syn aggregates, followed 
by specific detection of soluble oligomers in the supernatants by employing 
FILA-1, an antibody that specifically binds to alpha-syn aggregates, but not to 
alpha-syn monomers, or to tau or beta-amyloid aggregates. Using this novel 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) method to quantify the amounts of 
alpha-syn oligomers in the brain extracts, our data clearly show an increase in 
the levels of soluble oligomers of alpha-syn in the DLB brains compared to those 
with Alzheimer's disease and the controls (P < 0.0001). Our findings provide 
strong evidence to support the contention that elevated soluble oligomers of 
alpha-syn are involved in the pathogenesis of DLB. Furthermore, these findings 
establish FILA-1 as a very sensitive tool for the detection of oligomeric forms 
of alpha-syn in human brain lysates.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awn349
PMID: 19155272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2014. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;16(1):29-34. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0926.

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitor treatment is associated with relatively slow 
cognitive decline in patients with Alzheimer's disease and AD + DLB.

Nelson PT(1), Kryscio RJ, Abner EL, Schmitt FA, Jicha GA, Mendiondo MS, Cooper 
G, Smith CB, Markesbery WR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Kentucky Medical Center, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA. pnels2@email.uky.edu

Dementia can be caused by different diseases including Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), or both (AD + DLB). University of Kentucky AD 
Center pathologically-diagnosed AD and AD + DLB cases were evaluated who had 
three or more longitudinal antemortem mental status examinations (n = 156). 
Patients with important concomitant pathology (n = 5) or patients that were 
profoundly demented at recruitment (intake MMSE < 20; n = 86) were excluded to 
strengthen our ability to test the association of specific clinical and 
pathological indices. Patients with pathologically-diagnosed AD + DLB (n = 25) 
lost cognitive capacity faster than patients with AD alone (n = 40). In both 
diseases, treatment with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors was associated with a 
slower rate of cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0926
PMCID: PMC2682919
PMID: 19158418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2015. Neurology. 2009 Apr 14;72(15):1294-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000343502.98134.01. 
Epub 2009 Jan 21.

REM sleep behavior disorder and the risk of developing Parkinson disease or 
dementia.

Britton TC, Chaudhuri KR.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2009 Apr 14;72(15):1296-300.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000343502.98134.01
PMID: 19164135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2016. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008 Sep;56(9):1763-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01814.x.

Is Charles Bonnet syndrome an early stage of dementia with Lewy bodies?

Hanyu H, Takasaki A, Sato T, Akai T, Iwamoto T.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01814.x
PMID: 19166452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2017. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jul;1790(7):615-28. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.12.001. Epub 2008 Dec 29.

Amyloid precursor protein and alpha synuclein translation, implications for iron 
and inflammation in neurodegenerative diseases.

Cahill CM(1), Lahiri DK, Huang X, Rogers JT.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry-Neuroscience, 
Massachusetts General Hospital (East), Harvard Medical School, CNY2, Building 
149, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Recent studies that alleles in the hemochromatosis gene may accelerate the onset 
of Alzheimer's disease by five years have validated interest in the model in 
which metals (particularly iron) accelerate disease course. Biochemical and 
biophysical measurements demonstrated the presence of elevated levels of 
neurotoxic copper zinc and iron in the brains of AD patients. Intracellular 
levels of APP holoprotein were shown to be modulated by iron by a mechanism that 
is similar to the translation control of the ferritin L- and H mRNAs by 
iron-responsive element (IRE) RNA stem loops in their 5' untranslated regions 
(5'UTRs). More recently a putative IRE-like sequence was hypothesized present in 
the Parkinsons's alpha synuclein (ASYN) transcript (see [A.L. Friedlich, R.E. 
Tanzi, J.T. Rogers, The 5'-untranslated region of Parkinson's disease 
alpha-synuclein messenger RNA contains a predicted iron responsive element, Mol. 
Psychiatry 12 (2007) 222-223. [6]]). Together with the demonstration of metal 
dependent translation of APP mRNA, the involvement of metals in the plaque of AD 
patients and of increased iron in striatal neurons in the substantia nigra (SN) 
of Parkinson's disease patients have stimulated the development of metal 
attenuating agents and iron chelators as a major new therapeutic strategy for 
the treatment of these neurodegenerative diseases. In the case of AD, metal 
based therapeutics may ultimately prove more cost effective than the use of an 
amyloid vaccine as the preferred anti-amyloid therapeutic strategy to ameliorate 
the cognitive decline of AD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2008.12.001
PMCID: PMC3981543
PMID: 19166904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2018. Mov Disord. 2009 Jan 30;24(2):286-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.22380.

Microsubthalamotomy effect at day 3: screening for determinants.

Maltête D(1), Chastan N, Derrey S, Debono B, Gérardin E, Lefaucheur R, Mihout B, 
Hannequin D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. 
david.maltete@chu-rouen.fr

A microsubthalamotomy (mSTN) effect has been frequently reported after 
implantation that improves Parkinson's motor disability. It is usually believed 
that mSTN effect reflects the post-traumatic tissue reaction within the STN. 
However, it has never, to our knowledge, been reported whether pre and 
intraoperative factors could predict this mSTN effect. Preoperative clinical 
characteristics, that is, age, disease duration, Mattis Dementia Rating Scale 
score, levodopa responsiveness, severity of motor fluctuations and dyskinesia, 
and intraoperative parameters, that is, the number of tracks, distance of 
typical STN neuronal activity recorded along all microelectrodes, and along the 
definitive electrodes, were assessed in 40 consecutive PD patients submitted for 
STN stimulation. Multiple stepwise regression analysis showed that only the 
number of tracks used for microelectrodes recordings was predictor of the 
contralateral mSTN effect (F (4,73) = 1.83, P = 0.02). This result suggests that 
the contralateral mSTN depends on the tissue changes along the entirety of 
surgical trajectories affecting both STN and its adjacent structures.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22380
PMID: 19170190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2019. Front Neurol Neurosci. 2009;24:107-113. doi: 10.1159/000197889. Epub 2009 Jan 
26.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: clinical diagnosis and therapeutic approach.

Gold G.

Dementia with Lewy bodies is one of the most common dementias in the elderly 
after Alzheimer's disease. It can be recognized on the basis of several clinical 
characteristics including progressive dementia with marked slowing and 
fluctuations, persistent visual hallucinations and an extrapyramidal syndrome. 
Several other clinical and imaging features are highly suggestive such as the 
presence of rapid eye movement sleep disorder, severe sensitivity to 
neuroleptics and specific neuroimaging abnormalities. Therapeutic strategies 
include prescription of L-dopa and cholinesterase inhibitors such as 
rivastigmine, and avoidance of anticholinergic medications and neuroleptics. 
Physicians who care for older people should have a heightened awareness of this 
entity in order to diagnose it early, avoid mistaking it for delirium and 
initiate appropriate treatment.

Copyright (c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000197889
PMID: 19182468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2020. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;27(2):133-8. doi: 10.1159/000198687. Epub 2009 
Feb 2.

Frontal assessment battery and brain perfusion imaging in early dementia.

Yoshida H(1), Terada S, Sato S, Kishimoto Y, Ata T, Ohshima E, Honda H, Ishihara 
T, Kuroda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The frontal assessment battery (FAB) is reported to be a useful 
tool for screening frontal function. However, the neural substrates involved 
remain to be elucidated. The aim of the present study was to identify the brain 
regions responsible for FAB performance in patients with early dementia. We 
sought a correlation between FAB scores and brain perfusion.
METHODS: A total of 117 subjects participated in this study (Alzheimer's disease 
= 51, frontotemporal dementia = 14, vascular dementia = 13, dementia with Lewy 
bodies = 7, psychiatric disease = 7, mild cognitive impairment = 11, controls = 
14). They underwent brain single photon emission computed tomography with 
(99m)Tc-ethylcisteinate dimer, and we analyzed the data, using a regional 
cerebral blood flow (rCBF) quantification software program, 3DSRT (3-dimensional 
stereotaxic region of interest template).
RESULTS: FAB scores had a moderately positive correlation with left 
callosomarginal and precentral rCBF. Comparison of rCBF between high- and 
low-scoring FAB groups revealed that the latter showed significantly lower rCBF 
in the bilateral callosomarginal and left precentral regions.
CONCLUSION: The results in this study suggest that the FAB mainly reflects the 
function of the callosomarginal and precentral segments, especially the left 
side, and that it might be a valid frontal lobe function test.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000198687
PMID: 19182480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2021. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;27(2):139-46. doi: 10.1159/000198688. Epub 2009 
Feb 2.

Risk factors for falls in community-dwelling patients with Alzheimer's disease 
and dementia with Lewy bodies: walking with visuocognitive impairment may cause 
a fall.

Kudo Y(1), Imamura T, Sato A, Endo N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Niigata Rehabilitation Hospital, Niigata, Japan. 
kudo@midori-gr.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To identify risk factors for falls in community-dwelling 
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
PATIENTS: 78 consecutive patients (51 AD, 27 DLB) were recruited from the 
Niigata Rehabilitation Hospital memory clinic.
METHODS: We assessed the number of falls each patient had had in the previous 4 
months. The data for DLB patients without motor parkinsonism were analyzed both 
as part of the whole DLB group and separately to determine the effect of 
parkinsonism alone on falls.
RESULTS: Of 78 patients, 17 (21.8%) reported at least 1 fall during the period. 
A diagnosis of DLB, visual hallucinations, parkinsonism and cognitive 
fluctuation were significant predictors, but none of them was significant in the 
stepwise multivariate analysis. After excluding patients with parkinsonism, the 
use of hypnotics-anxiolytics and a worse score on the constructional task were 
significant and independent predictors of falling.
CONCLUSION: Parkinsonism was a major risk factor for falls. When AD or DLB 
patients walk with incongruent visual information, they may increase their 
postural sway or instability, because of their executive dysfunction. If 
elementary and/or higher-order visuocognitive impairment in AD or DLB patients 
alters visual information sufficiently, they may fall when walking.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000198688
PMID: 19182481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2022. Nat Genet. 2009 Mar;41(3):308-15. doi: 10.1038/ng.300. Epub 2009 Feb 1.

Alpha-synuclein is part of a diverse and highly conserved interaction network 
that includes PARK9 and manganese toxicity.

Gitler AD(1), Chesi A, Geddie ML, Strathearn KE, Hamamichi S, Hill KJ, Caldwell 
KA, Caldwell GA, Cooper AA, Rochet JC, Lindquist S.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research and Howard Hughes Medical 
Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD), dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple system atrophy, 
collectively referred to as synucleinopathies, are associated with a diverse 
group of genetic and environmental susceptibilities. The best studied of these 
is PD. alpha-Synuclein (alpha-syn) has a key role in the pathogenesis of both 
familial and sporadic PD, but evidence linking it to other predisposition 
factors is limited. Here we report a strong genetic interaction between 
alpha-syn and the yeast ortholog of the PD-linked gene ATP13A2 (also known as 
PARK9). Dopaminergic neuron loss caused by alpha-syn overexpression in animal 
and neuronal PD models is rescued by coexpression of PARK9. Further, knockdown 
of the ATP13A2 ortholog in Caenorhabditis elegans enhances alpha-syn misfolding. 
These data provide a direct functional connection between alpha-syn and another 
PD susceptibility locus. Manganese exposure is an environmental risk factor 
linked to PD and PD-like syndromes. We discovered that yeast PARK9 helps to 
protect cells from manganese toxicity, revealing a connection between PD 
genetics (alpha-syn and PARK9) and an environmental risk factor (PARK9 and 
manganese). Finally, we show that additional genes from our yeast screen, with 
diverse functions, are potent modifiers of alpha-syn-induced neuron loss in 
animals, establishing a diverse, highly conserved interaction network for 
alpha-syn.

DOI: 10.1038/ng.300
PMCID: PMC2683786
PMID: 19182805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2023. Curr Psychiatry Rep. 2009 Feb;11(1):20-6. doi: 10.1007/s11920-009-0004-2.

Current treatments for sleep disturbances in individuals with dementia.

Deschenes CL, McCurry SM.

Sleep disturbances are widespread among older adults. Degenerative neurologic 
disorders that cause dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease, exacerbate age-related changes in sleep, as do many common comorbid 
medical and psychiatric conditions. Medications used to treat chronic illness 
and insomnia have many side effects that can further disrupt sleep and place 
patients at risk for injury. This article reviews the neurophysiology of sleep 
in normal aging and sleep changes associated with common dementia subtypes and 
comorbid conditions. Current pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic evidence-based 
treatment options are discussed, including the use of light therapy, increased 
physical and social activity, and multicomponent cognitive-behavioral 
interventions for improving sleep in institutionalized and community-dwelling 
adults with dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s11920-009-0004-2
PMCID: PMC2649672
PMID: 19187704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2024. PLoS One. 2009;4(2):e4389. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004389. Epub 2009 Feb 5.

Risks for central nervous system diseases among mobile phone subscribers: a 
Danish retrospective cohort study.

Schüz J(1), Waldemar G, Olsen JH, Johansen C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Epidemiology, Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
joachim@cancer.dk

The aim of this study was to investigate a possible link between cellular 
telephone use and risks for various diseases of the central nervous system 
(CNS). We conducted a large nationwide cohort study of 420 095 persons whose 
first cellular telephone subscription was between 1982 and 1995, who were 
followed through 2003 for hospital contacts for a diagnosis of a CNS disorder. 
Standardized hospitalization ratios (SHRs) were derived by dividing the number 
of hospital contacts in the cohort by the number expected in the Danish 
population. The SHRs were increased by 10-20% for migraine and vertigo. No 
associations were seen for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis or 
epilepsy in women. SHRs decreased by 30-40% were observed for dementia 
(Alzheimer disease, vascular and other dementia), Parkinson disease and epilepsy 
among men. In analyses restricted to subscribers of 10 years or more, the SHRs 
remained similarly increased for migraine and vertigo and similarly decreased 
for Alzheimer disease and other dementia and epilepsy (in men); the other SHRs 
were close to unity. In conclusion, the excesses of migraine and vertigo 
observed in this first study on cellular telephones and CNS disease deserve 
further attention. An interplay of a healthy cohort effect and reversed 
causation bias due to prodromal symptoms impedes detection of a possible 
association with dementia and Parkinson disease. Identification of the factors 
that result in a healthy cohort might be of interest for elucidation of the 
etiology of these diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004389
PMCID: PMC2632742
PMID: 19194493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2025. Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Apr;117(4):429-44. doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0493-4. Epub 
2009 Feb 5.

Clinicopathological characterization of Pick's disease versus frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration with ubiquitin/TDP-43-positive inclusions.

Yokota O(1), Tsuchiya K, Arai T, Yagishita S, Matsubara O, Mochizuki A, Tamaoka 
A, Kawamura M, Yoshida H, Terada S, Ishizu H, Kuroda S, Akiyama H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Tokyo Institute of Psychiatry, 2-1-8 
Kamikitazawa, Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 156-8585, Japan. oyokota1@yahoo.co.jp

Although frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin/TDP-43-positive 
inclusions (FTLD-TDP) and Pick's disease are common pathological substrates in 
sporadic FTLD, clinical differentiation of these diseases is difficult. We 
performed a retrospective review of medical records and semiquantitative 
examination of neuronal loss of 20 sporadic FTLD-TDP and 19 Pick's disease 
cases. Semantic dementia as the first syndrome developed only in FTLD-TDP 
patients. Impaired speech output in the early stage was five times more frequent 
in Pick's disease than in FTLD-TDP. The total frequency of asymmetric motor 
disturbances (e.g., parkinsonism, pyramidal signs, and contracture) during the 
course was significantly more frequent in FTLD-TDP (78%) than in Pick's disease 
cases (14%). Asymmetric pyramidal signs were found in 7 of 13 FTLD-TDP cases 
with corticospinal tract degeneration similar to primary lateral sclerosis. 
Frontotemporal dementia as the first syndrome was noted in both FTLD-TDP (28%) 
and Pick's disease cases (64%); however, only FTLD-TDP cases subsequently 
developed asymmetric motor disturbances, and some of the cases further exhibited 
hemineglect. Concordant with these clinical findings, degeneration in the 
temporal cortex, caudate nucleus, putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, 
and corticospinal tract was significantly more severe in FTLD-TDP, and 
degeneration in the frontal cortex tended to be more severe in Pick's disease. 
Given these findings, the initial impairment of semantic memory or comprehension 
and subsequent asymmetric motor disturbances in sporadic FTLD patients predict 
sporadic FTLD-TDP rather than Pick's disease, while initial behavioral symptoms 
or non-fluent aphasia without subsequent asymmetric motor disturbances predict 
Pick's disease rather than sporadic FTLD-TDP.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-009-0493-4
PMID: 19194716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2026. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2008 Nov;48(11):831-4. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.831.

[Clinical and pathological study on early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease and 
dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Orimo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital.

Cardiac uptake of meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) is specifically reduced in 
Lewy body disease (LBD). To see pathological basis of the reduced cardiac uptake 
of MIBG in LBD, we immunohistichemically examined cardiac tissues from patients 
with LBD, related movement disorders and Alzheimer's disease (AD). In LBD, 
cardiac sympathetic denervation occurs, which accounts for the reduced cardiac 
uptake of MIBG. Patients with LBD have Lewy bodies (LBs) in the nervous system, 
whereas patients with the other neurodegenerative parkinsonism, 
parkin-associated Parkinson's disease (PD) and AD and have no LBs. Therefore, 
cardiac sympathetic denervation is closely related to the presence of LBs in a 
wide range of neurodegenerative processes. We further investigate how 
a-synuclein aggregates are involved in degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic 
nerve in PD. Accumulation of alpha-synuclein aggregates in the distal axons of 
the cardiac sympathetic nervous system precedes that of neuronal somata or 
neurites in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia and that it heralds 
centripetal degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve in PD. This 
chronological and dynamic relationship between alpha-synuclein aggregates and 
degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nervous system may represent the 
pathological mechanism underlying a common degenerative process in PD.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.831
PMID: 19198094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2027. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2008 Nov;48(11):910-2. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.910.

[Neurodegeneration and inflammation: analysis of a FTDP-17 model mouse].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshiyama Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Laboratory for Neurodegenerative Disorder Research, 
Clinical Research Center, Chiba-East National Hospital.

Filamentous tau inclusions are hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related 
tauopathies, and the discovery of mutations in the tau gene in frontotemporal 
dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) constitutes 
convincing evidence that tau proteins play a key role in the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative disorders. To investigate the pathomechanism of tauopathies, 
we generated and studied P301S mutant human tau transgenic mice (line PS19). 
Filamentous tau lesions developed in PS19 mice at 6-months of age, and 
progressively accumulated in association with striking neuron loss as well as 
hippocampal and entorhinal cortical atrophy by 9-12 months of age. Remarkably, 
hippocampal synapse loss and impaired synaptic function were detected in 3 month 
old PS19 mice before fibrillary tau tangles emerged. Prominent microglial 
activation and proinflammatory cytokine expressions in neurons also preceded 
tangle formation. Importantly, immunosuppression of young PS19 mice with FK506 
attenuated tau pathology, thereby linking neuroinflammation to early progression 
of tauopathies. Recently, an anti-inflammatory function of acetylcholine (ACh) 
has been reported, suggesting that synaptic dysfunction might accelerate 
neuroinflammatory reaction by depletion of ACH. To investigate this, we 
administered donepezil (DZ), an ACh-esterase inhibitor, and trihexiphenidyl 
(TP), an anti-cholinergic agent to PS19 mice. Interestingly, DZ ameliorated but 
TP deteriorated microglial activation, tau pathology and neuronal loss, 
indicating the ACh level in the brain might play roles in not only 
neurotransmission, but also suppressing neuroinflammation in the brain.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.910
PMID: 19198115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2028. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2008 Nov;48(11):999-1001. doi: 
10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.999.

[Early symptoms of frontotemporal lobar degeneration].

[Article in Japanese]

Okamoto K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is the third most common cause of 
cortical dementia, following Alzheimer disease and dementia with Lewy body. 
Clinical criteria of FTLD were reviewed, and the initial symptoms, early 
neuropsychological and behavioral characteristics were also reviewed. In our own 
205 ALS patients, 20 patients were dementia with ALS. In those cases, early and 
progressive loss of social awareness and insight and paragraphia were frequently 
observed. In ALS patients, especially patients with bulbar symptoms, we must 
carefully examine the mental functions and study the brains with MRI and 
SPECT/PET for detection of frontotemporal dysfunction.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.999
PMID: 19198144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2029. Mov Disord. 2009 Apr 30;24(6):854-62. doi: 10.1002/mds.22444.

Distinct patterns of regional cerebral glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease 
with and without mild cognitive impairment.

Hosokai Y(1), Nishio Y, Hirayama K, Takeda A, Ishioka T, Sawada Y, Suzuki K, 
Itoyama Y, Takahashi S, Fukuda H, Mori E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiological Technology and Science, School of Health Science, 
Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

There is no consensus with regard to the clinical and neuroimaging 
characteristics of prodromal dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD). To delineate 
functional neuroimaging features of PD with mild cognitive impairment (PDMCI) 
and with no cognitive impairment (PDNC), we compared regional cerebral glucose 
metabolism (CMRglc) amongst 13 patients with PDMCI, 27 with PDNC, and 13 healthy 
controls. The PDNC patients had limited areas of hypometabolism in the frontal 
and occipital cortices. In the PDMCI patients, there were extensive areas of 
hypometabolism in the posterior cortical regions, including the 
temporo-parieto-occipital junction, medial parietal, and inferior temporal 
cortices. The present results suggest that posterior cortical dysfunction is the 
primary neuroimaging feature of PD patients at risk for dementia.

(c) 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22444
PMID: 19199357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2030. Arch Neurol. 2009 Feb;66(2):250-4. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.552.

GAB2 as an Alzheimer disease susceptibility gene: follow-up of genomewide 
association results.

Schjeide BM(1), Hooli B, Parkinson M, Hogan MF, DiVito J, Mullin K, Blacker D, 
Tanzi RE, Bertram L.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative 
Disease, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, 114 16th St, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

BACKGROUND: Genomewide association (GWA) studies have recently implicated 4 
novel Alzheimer disease (AD) susceptibility loci (GAB2, GOLM1, and 2 
uncharacterized loci to date on chromosomes 9p and 15q). To our knowledge, these 
findings have not been independently replicated.
OBJECTIVE: To assess these GWA findings in 4 large data sets of families 
affected by AD.
DESIGN: Follow-up of genetic association findings in previous studies.
SETTING: Academic research.
PARTICIPANTS: More than 4000 DNA samples from almost 1300 families affected with 
AD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Genetic association analysis testing of 4 GWA signals 
(rs7101429 [GAB2], rs7019241 [GOLM1], rs10519262 [chromosome 15q], and rs9886784 
[chromosome 9p]) using family-based methods.
RESULTS: In the combined analyses, only rs7101429 in GAB2 yielded significant 
evidence of association with the same allele as in the original GWA study (P 
=.002). The results are in agreement with recent meta-analyses of this and other 
GAB2 polymorphisms suggesting approximately a 30% decrease in risk for AD among 
carriers of the minor alleles. None of the other 3 tested loci showed consistent 
evidence for association with AD across the investigated data sets.
CONCLUSIONS: GAB2 contains genetic variants that may lead to a modest change in 
the risk for AD. Despite these promising results, more data from independent 
samples are needed to better evaluate the potential contribution of GAB2 to AD 
risk in the general population.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2008.552
PMCID: PMC2841135
PMID: 19204163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2031. J Occup Environ Hyg. 2009 May;6(5):267-72. doi: 10.1080/15459620902754703.

Welding occupations and mortality from Parkinson's disease and other 
neurodegenerative diseases among United States men, 1985-1999.

Stampfer MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Channing Laboratory, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. mstampfe@hsph.harvard.edu

Comment in
    J Occup Environ Hyg. 2010 Jul;7(7):D43.

Metal welding produces gaseous fumes that contain manganese, resulting in 
potential occupational exposure to welders. It has been hypothesized that 
occupational exposure among welders could increase risk of Parkinson's disease 
and other neurodegenerative diseases. The present study examines welding 
occupation and mortality from neurodegenerative diseases among men in the United 
States using the National Cause of Death databases 1985 to 1999. Information was 
abstracted from death certificates for states that collected data on occupation. 
Of 4,252,490 men who died during the study period, 107,773 had welding-related 
occupations. Multivariable logistic regression models were used to calculate 
mortality odds ratios (MOR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for odds of dying 
from Parkinson's disease or other neurodegenerative diseases among men who were 
welders as compared with men of other occupations, adjusting for attained age, 
race, region of residence, and year of death. During the study period, 49,174 
deaths were attributed to Parkinson's disease, 54,892 to Alzheimer's disease, 
and 19,018 to presenile dementia. There was no evidence of an increased odds of 
Parkinson's disease mortality among welders as compared with men with other 
occupations (MOR = 0.83, 95% CI 0.78-0.88). Furthermore, welding occupation was 
unrelated to the odds of mortality from Alzheimer's disease (MOR = 0.94, 95% CI 
0.89-1.00) or presenile dementia (MOR = 0.96, 95% CI 0.87-1.06). Earlier 
research suggested that welding exposures could predispose individuals to 
earlier onset Parkinson's disease. However, there was no evidence in this data 
of an increased mortality odds ratio associated with welding occupations among 
men younger than 65 (MOR = 1.03, 95% CI 0.74-1.44); while there was a suggestion 
of a lower odds Parkinson's disease death among men age 65 years and older (MOR 
= 0.82, 95% CI 0.77-0.88). Data from this large study do not support an 
association between welding occupations and death from Parkinson's disease or 
other neurodegenerative diseases, nor that welders are at increased odds of 
dying from Parkinson's disease at a younger age.

DOI: 10.1080/15459620902754703
PMID: 19204865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2032. Mov Disord. 2009 Apr 30;24(6):899-905. doi: 10.1002/mds.22472.

Cognitive dysfunctions and pathological gambling in patients with Parkinson's 
disease.

Santangelo G(1), Vitale C, Trojano L, Verde F, Grossi D, Barone P.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Università di Napoli Federico II, Via 
S. Pansini 5, Naples, Italy.

The purpose of this study was to investigate the neuropsychological correlates 
of pathological gambling (PG) in Parkinson's disease (PD). Fifteen patients with 
PD affected by PG (identified based on DSM-IV criteria; PD+PG) without 
clinically evident dementia were compared with 15 nondemented patients with PD 
not affected by PG (PD-PG). Two groups of patients with PD were matched for age, 
length of education, and gender. Clinical and neuropsychiatric features were 
assessed; several cognitive domains, mainly related to executive functions, were 
explored by means of standardized neuropsychological tasks. PD+PG and PD-PG did 
not differ on clinical and neuropsychiatric aspects. PD+PG patients performed 
significantly worse than PD-PG patients on cognitive tasks that evaluated 
visuo-spatial long-term memory and several frontal lobe functions. After 
Bonferroni correction, differences remained significant on the Frontal 
Assessment Battery (FAB) (P = 0.001), on phonological fluency task (P = 0.003), 
and on the Trail Making Test, part B minus part A (P = 0.002). Logistic 
regression analysis demonstrated that low scores on the FAB were the only 
independent predictor of PG (odds ratio, 27.9; 95% CI: 2.82-277.95, P = 0.004). 
The results indicate an association between PG and frontal lobe dysfunctions in 
nondemented patients with PD. Low scores on the FAB indicate patients with PD at 
high risk for PG.

(c) 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22472
PMID: 19205072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2033. Intern Med J. 2010 Mar;40(3):209-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01845.x. Epub 
2008 Nov 11.

Neurological disorders in a rural Western Australian population.

Panegyres PK(1), Gray V, Barrett L, Perceval S.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Disorders Research, Perth, Western Australia, Australia. 
publications@panegyres.com.au

Comment in
    Intern Med J. 2010 Oct;40(10):737; author reply 737-8.

BACKGROUND: There is limited information on the causes of neurological disorders 
in an Australian rural setting.
METHODS: This study reports on a prospective cohort of 160 patients (95 women 
and 65 men) with a mean age of 55.1 years (standard deviation 19.78 years, range 
12-92 years) receiving a neurological work-up from one neurologist attending the 
Geraldton and Midwest region of Western Australia over a 12-month period.
RESULTS: Patients were divided into 15 diagnostic classifications. Movement 
disorders were the most common diagnostic classification (38 of 160 or 23.75%) 
and Parkinson's disease was the most common movement disorder (30 of 38 or 
78.95%) with an estimated period of prevalence of 187.5 persons per 1000. Of the 
other neurological disorder diagnosis classifications the following number of 
patients per group was observed: epilepsy (27 or 16.87%); neuromuscular 
disorders (22 or 13.75%); multiple sclerosis (12 or 7.5%); cerebrovascular 
disease (10 or 6.25%); headaches (7 or 4.37%); neurodegenerative (7 or 4.37%); 
dementias (6 or 3.75%); memory dysfunction (6 or 3.75%); gait disorders (4 or 
2.5%); vestibular syndrome (3 or 1.87%); pain syndrome (3 or 1.87%); sensory 
syndrome (2 or 1.25%); brain injury (1 or 0.62%) and miscellaneous (12 or 7.5%). 
A high number of persons having Parkinson's disease was found.
CONCLUSION: Possible risk factors for Parkinson's disease for individuals living 
in Geraldton and Midwest region need to be investigated. This study raises 
issues pertaining to the provision of services and allocation of resources in 
rural areas, especially for patients with Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1445-5994.2008.01845.x
PMID: 19220537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2034. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2009 Winter;15(1):65-75. doi: 
10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008.00065.x.

Cannabidiol: a promising drug for neurodegenerative disorders?

Iuvone T(1), Esposito G, De Filippis D, Scuderi C, Steardo L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Naples Federico II, Via D. Montesano 49, Naples, Italy. iuvone@unina.it

Neurodegenerative diseases represent, nowadays, one of the main causes of death 
in the industrialized country. They are characterized by a loss of neurons in 
particular regions of the nervous system. It is believed that this nerve cell 
loss underlies the subsequent decline in cognitive and motor function that 
patients experience in these diseases. A range of mutant genes and environmental 
toxins have been implicated in the cause of neurodegenerative disorders but the 
mechanism remains largely unknown. At present, inflammation, a common 
denominator among the diverse list of neurodegenerative diseases, has been 
implicated as a critical mechanism that is responsible for the progressive 
nature of neurodegeneration. Since, at present, there are few therapies for the 
wide range of neurodegenerative diseases, scientists are still in search of new 
therapeutic approaches to the problem. An early contribution of neuroprotective 
and antiinflammatory strategies for these disorders seems particularly desirable 
because isolated treatments cannot be effective. In this contest, marijuana 
derivatives have attracted special interest, although these compounds have 
always raised several practical and ethical problems for their potential abuse. 
Nevertheless, among Cannabis compounds, cannabidiol (CBD), which lacks any 
unwanted psychotropic effect, may represent a very promising agent with the 
highest prospect for therapeutic use.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008.00065.x
PMCID: PMC6494021
PMID: 19228180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: All authors disclose any potential conflicts of 
interest, including all relevant financial interests (e.g. employment, 
significant share ownership, patent rights, consultancy, research funding) in 
any company or institution that might benefit from the publication.


2035. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2009 Feb;64(2):167-70. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/gln071. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Protein homeostasis and aging: taking care of proteins from the cradle to the 
grave.

Morimoto RI(1), Cuervo AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental and Molecular Biology, Institute for Aging 
Studies, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

All cells count on precise mechanisms that regulate protein homeostasis to 
maintain a stable and functional proteome. Alterations in these fine-tuned 
mechanisms underlie the pathogenesis of severe human diseases including, among 
others, common neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's or Parkinson's 
disease. A progressive deterioration in the ability of cells to preserve the 
stability of their proteome occurs with age, even in the absence of disease, and 
it likely contributes to different aspects of "normal" aging. A group of experts 
in different aspects of the biology of aging met recently to discuss the 
implications of altered protein homeostasis in aging, the current gaps in our 
understanding of the mechanisms responsible for proteome maintenance, and future 
opportunities for discovery in this area. We summarize here some of the key 
topics and main outcomes of the discussions.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/gln071
PMCID: PMC2655025
PMID: 19228787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2036. Stroke. 2009 Apr;40(4):1269-74. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.531343. Epub 2009 Feb 
19.

Progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia: contribution of 
cerebrovascular disease compared with medial temporal lobe atrophy.

Staekenborg SS(1), Koedam EL, Henneman WJ, Stokman P, Barkhof F, Scheltens P, 
van der Flier WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer Center, Vrije Universiteit Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. s.staekenborg@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: We sought to determine the predictive value of magnetic 
resonance imaging measures of vascular disease (white matter hyperintensities 
[WMHs], lacunes, microbleeds, and infarcts) compared with atrophy on the 
progression of mild cognitive impairment to dementia.
METHODS: We included 152 consecutive patients with mild cognitive impairment. 
Baseline magnetic resonance imaging was used to determine the presence of medial 
temporal lobe atrophy and vascular disease (presence of lacunes, microbleeds, 
and infarcts was determined, and WMHs were rated on a semiquantitative scale). 
Patients were followed up for 2+/-1 years.
RESULTS: Seventy-two (47%) patients progressed to dementia during follow-up. Of 
these, 56 (37%) patients were diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease, and 16 (10%) 
patients were diagnosed with a non-Alzheimer dementia (including vascular 
dementia, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and Parkinson dementia). Converters 
were older and had a lower Mini-Mental State Examination score at baseline. On 
baseline magnetic resonance imaging, patients who progressed to a non-Alzheimer 
dementia showed more severe WMHs and had a higher prevalence of lacunes in the 
basal ganglia and microbleeds compared with nonconverters. Cox 
proportional-hazard models showed that, adjusted for age and sex, baseline 
medial temporal lobe atrophy (hazard ratio=2.9; 95% CI, 1.7 to 5.3), but not 
vascular disease, was associated with progression to Alzheimer's disease. By 
contrast, deep WMHs (hazard ratio=5.7; 95% CI, 1.2 to 26.7) and periventricular 
hyperintensities (hazard ratio=6.5; 95% CI, 1.4 to 29.8) predicted progression 
to non-Alzheimer dementia. Furthermore, microbleeds (hazard ratio=2.6; 95% CI, 
0.9 to 7.5) yielded a >2-fold increased, though nonsignificant, risk of 
non-Alzheimer dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Medial temporal lobe atrophy and markers of cerebrovascular disease 
predict the development of different types of dementia in mild cognitive 
impairment patients.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.531343
PMID: 19228848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2037. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2008 Nov-Dec;42(6):505-12.

The influence of vascular risk factors and white matter hyperintensities on the 
degree of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Sławek J(1), Wieczorek D, Derejko M, Dubaniewicz M, Brockhuis B, Sitek E, 
Wilczewska L, Roszmann A, Lass P.

Author information:
(1)Zakład Pielêgniarstwa Neurologiczno-Psychiatrycznego, Akademia Medyczna w 
Gdańsku, Szpital Specjalistyczny oew. Wojciecha, Al. Jana Pawła II 50, 80-462 
Gdańsk. jaroslawek@amg.gda.pl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Vascular risk factors may contribute to deterioration of 
cognitive functions in Alzheimer's disease and vascular (or mixed) dementia. 
Parkinson's disease (PD) is an age-related disorder and vascular risk factors 
potentially might be the main co-morbidity responsible for motor and cognitive 
impairment. However, only a few studies focused on this problem have been 
published. The aim of the study was to assess the contribution of vascular risk 
factors and white matter abnormalities in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on 
cognitive impairment in PD patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Sixty consecutive patients (M: 35, F: 25), mean age 68.36 
years (SD: 7.25, range: 51-81) with diagnosis of idiopathic PD underwent a 
semi-structured questionnaire on demographics and vascular risks factors, 
neurological, neuropsychological and neuroimaging (MRI) examinations with 
quantitative assessment according to the scale by Wahlund et al. According to 
cognitive status they were divided into 3 groups: without cognitive disability 
(I, n=17), with mild cognitive impairment (II, n=25) and with dementia (III, 
n=18).
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between groups in terms of the 
number of vascular risk factors (except for the ischaemic heart disease 
difference between group I and III) and severity of white matter 
hyperintensities in MRI studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Vascular risk factors along with white matter vascular 
abnormalities probably do not contribute to cognitive impairment in patients 
with PD. This is in concordance with previously published studies.

PMID: 19235103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2038. Mov Disord. 2009 Feb 15;24(3):414-21. doi: 10.1002/mds.22381.

Amnestic mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: a brain perfusion 
SPECT study.

Nobili F(1), Abbruzzese G, Morbelli S, Marchese R, Girtler N, Dessi B, Brugnolo 
A, Canepa C, Drosos GC, Sambuceti G, Rodriguez G.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurophysiology (DISEM, DipTeC), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy. 
flaviomariano.nobili@hsanmartino.it

The purpose of this study was to investigate cortical dysfunction in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) patients with amnestic deficit (PD-MCI). Perfusion single photon 
emission computed tomography was performed in 15 PD-MCI patients and compared 
(statistical parametric mapping [SPM2]) with three groups, i.e., healthy 
subjects (CTR), cognitively intact PD patients (PD), and common amnestic MCI 
patients (aMCI). Age, depression, and UPDRS-III scores were considered as 
confounding variables. PD-MCI group (P < 0.05, false discovery rate-corrected 
for multiple comparisons) showed relative hypoperfusion in bilateral posterior 
parietal lobe and in right occipital lobe in comparison to CTR. As compared to 
aMCI, MCI-PD demonstrated hypoperfusion in bilateral posterior parietal and 
occipital areas, mainly right cuneus and angular gyrus, and left precuneus and 
middle occipital gyrus. With a less conservative threshold (uncorrected P < 
0.01), MCI-PD showed hypoperfusion in a left parietal region, mainly including 
precuneus and inferior parietal lobule, and in a right 
temporal-parietal-occipital region, including middle occipital and superior 
temporal gyri, and cuneus-precuneus, as compared to PD. aMCI versus PD-MCI 
showed hypoperfusion in bilateral medial temporal lobe, anterior cingulate, and 
left orbitofrontal cortex. PD-MCI patients with amnestic deficit showed cortical 
dysfunction in bilateral posterior parietal and occipital lobes, a pattern that 
can be especially recognized versus both controls and common aMCI patients, and 
to a lesser extent versus cognitively intact PD. The relevance of this pattern 
in predicting dementia should be evaluated in longitudinal studies.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22381
PMID: 19235928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2039. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2009 Jun-Jul;24(3):258-66. doi: 
10.1177/1533317509332093. Epub 2009 Feb 26.

Eye tracking during a visual paired comparison task as a predictor of early 
dementia.

Crutcher MD(1), Calhoun-Haney R, Manzanares CM, Lah JJ, Levey AI, Zola SM.

Author information:
(1)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Emory University, Emory Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Atlanta, Georgia, USA.

The authors present findings from a behavioral task (visual paired comparison) 
using infrared eye-tracking that could potentially be useful in predicting the 
onset of Alzheimer's disease. Delay intervals of 2 seconds and 2 minutes were 
used between the initial viewing of a picture and when the picture was displayed 
alongside a novel picture. Eye-tracking revealed that at the 2-second delay, 6 
patients with mild cognitive impairment, 15 matched control participants (normal 
control), and 4 neurological control participants with Parkinson's disease 
performed comparably, viewing the novel picture greater than 71% of the time. 
When the delay increased to 2 minutes, patients with mild cognitive impairment 
viewed the novel picture only 53% of the time (P < .05), while control 
participants and participants with Parkinson's disease remained above 70%. These 
findings demonstrate the usefulness of this task for assessing normal as well as 
impaired memory function.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317509332093
PMCID: PMC2701976
PMID: 19246573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2040. Neurology. 2009 Feb 17;72(7 Suppl):S65-73. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31819908ce.

Treatments for Parkinson disease--past achievements and current clinical needs.

Poewe W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 
werner.poewe@uibk.ac.at

Although idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD) remains the only neurodegenerative 
disorder for which there are highly effective symptomatic therapies, there are 
still major unmet needs regarding its long-term management. Although levodopa 
continues as the gold standard for efficacy, its chronic use is associated with 
potentially disabling motor complications. Current evidence suggests that these 
are related to mode of administration, whereby multiple oral doses of levodopa 
generate pulsatile stimulation of striatal dopamine receptors. Current dopamine 
agonists, while producing more constant plasma levels, fail to match levodopa's 
efficacy. Strategies to treat levodopa-related motor complications are only 
partially effective, rarely abolishing motor fluctuations or dyskinesias. Best 
results are currently achieved with invasive strategies via subcutaneous (s.c.) 
or intraduodenal delivery of apomorphine or levodopa, or deep brain stimulation 
of the subthalamic nucleus. Another area of major unmet medical need is related 
to nondopaminergic and nonmotor symptoms of PD. Targeting transmitter systems 
beyond the dopamine system is an interesting approach, both for the motor and 
nonmotor problems of PD. So far, clinical trial evidence regarding 5-HT 
agonists, glutamate antagonists, adenosine A(2) antagonists and alpha-adrenergic 
receptor antagonists, has been inconsistent, but trials with cholinesterase 
inhibitors and atypical antipsychotics to treat dementia and psychosis, have 
been successful. However, the ultimate goal of PD medical management is 
modifying disease progression, thereby delaying the evolution of motor and 
nonmotor complications of advanced disease. As understanding of preclinical 
markers for PD develops, there is new hope for neuropreventive strategies to 
target "at risk" populations before clinical onset of disease.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31819908ce
PMID: 19221317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2041. Med Hypotheses. 2009 Jun;72(6):698-700. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2008.12.047. Epub 
2009 Feb 27.

Why do Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease target the same neurons?

Eggers AE(1).

Author information:
(1)SUNY-Downstate Medical Center, Department of Neurology, 450 Clarkson Ave., 
Box 1213, Brooklyn, NY 11203, USA. eggersa@aol.com

The puzzle is to explain how cerebral involvement in the sporadic forms of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) can target the same 
population of vulnerable neurons. These neurons are poorly-myelinated projection 
neurons, lack of myelin being associated with high metabolic demand, high oxygen 
consumption, and high baseline oxidative stress. Yet the two diseases are 
clearly separable, with different intracellular markers, different risk factors, 
and different patterns of subcortical involvement. A theory is developed to show 
how two different pathophysiologies can preferentially affect the same neurons. 
In the case of AD, the hypothesis is as follows: the so-called vascular risk 
factors of AD, which include hypertension, diabetes, hyperlipidemia, and 
smoking, are all associated with increased systemic extracellular oxidative 
stress. High extracellular oxidative stress synergizes with high baseline 
intracellular oxidative stress to cause the disease. In the case of PD, 
mitochondrial failure associated with normal aging leads to diminished energy 
production and increased leakage of reactive oxygen species from mitochondria, a 
process which preferentially targets neurons with high baseline oxidative 
stress. In one case, the extra oxidative stress comes from outside the cell and, 
in the other case, it comes from inside the cell, i.e. from mitochondria. There 
is also evidence that neurofibrillary tangles are a protective mechanism against 
extracellular oxidative stress and that alpha-synuclein is a marker for 
mitochondrial failure. The basic pathophysiological difference is that AD is 
caused by oxidative stress alone, whereas PD is caused by oxidative stress plus 
failure of energy production.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2008.12.047
PMID: 19250756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2042. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Aug 15;283(1-2):99-106. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.321. Epub 
2009 Mar 4.

Blood-brain barrier alterations in ageing and dementia.

Popescu BO(1), Toescu EC, Popescu LM, Bajenaru O, Muresanu DF, Schultzberg M, 
Bogdanovic N.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Victor Babeş National Institute of 
Pathology, Bucharest 050096, Romania. bogdan.popescu@jcmm.org

The current pathogenic scenarios of different types of dementia are based on a 
number of common mechanisms of neurodegeneration, such as accumulation of 
abnormal proteins (within or outside cells), mitochondrial dysfunction and 
oxidative stress, calcium homeostasis dysregulation, early synaptic 
disconnection and late apoptotic cell death. Ageing itself is associated with 
mild cognitive deterioration, probably due to subtle multifactorial changes 
resulting in a global decrease of a functional brain reserve. Increased age is a 
risk factor for neurodegeneration and key pathological features of dementia can 
also be found in aged brains. One of the underexplored brain structures in 
ageing and dementia is the blood-brain barrier (BBB), a complex cellular gate 
which regulates tightly the transport of molecules into and from the central 
nervous system. Disruption of this barrier is now increasingly documented not 
only in brain vascular disease but also in ageing and neurodegenerative 
disorders. To date, such evidence points mainly at an association between 
various dementia forms and disruption of the BBB. But, in reviewing such 
results, and taking into account the exquisite sensitivity of neuronal function 
to the composition of the interstitial brain fluid (IBF), which is regulated by 
the BBB, we would like to propose the existence of a possible causal link 
between alterations of BBB and conditions associated with cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.321
PMID: 19264328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2043. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Aug 15;283(1-2):21-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.326. Epub 
2009 Mar 5.

The role of kynurenines in disorders of the central nervous system: 
possibilities for neuroprotection.

Vamos E(1), Pardutz A, Klivenyi P, Toldi J, Vecsei L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Albert Szent-Györgyi Clinical Centre, University of 
Szeged, Hungary.

The metabolism of tryptophan mostly proceeds through the kynurenine pathway. The 
biochemical reaction includes both an agonist (quinolinic acid) at the 
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor and an antagonist (kynurenic acid). Besides the 
N-methyl-d-aspartate antagonism, an important feature of kynurenic acid is the 
blockade of the alpha7-nicotinic acetylcholine receptor and its influence on the 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-proprionic acid receptor. Kynurenic 
acid has proven to be neuroprotective in several experimental settings. On the 
other hand, quinolinic acid is a potent neurotoxin with an additional and marked 
free radical-producing property. In consequence of these various receptor 
activities, the possible roles of these substances in various neurological 
disorders have been proposed. Moreover, the possibility of influencing the 
kynurenine pathway to reduce quinolinic acid and increase the level of kynurenic 
acid in the brain offers a new target for drug action designed to change the 
balance, decreasing excitotoxins and enhancing neuroprotectants. This review 
surveys both the early and the current research in this field, focusing on the 
possible therapeutic effects of kynurenines.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.326
PMID: 19268309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2044. Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Jul;118(1):151-66. doi: 10.1007/s00401-009-0508-1. Epub 
2009 Mar 7.

RNA oxidation in Alzheimer disease and related neurodegenerative disorders.

Nunomura A(1), Hofer T, Moreira PI, Castellani RJ, Smith MA, Perry G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine 
and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, 1110 Shimokato, Chuo, Yamanashi 
409-3898, Japan. anunomura@yamanashi.ac.jp

RNA oxidation and its biological effects are less well studied compared to DNA 
oxidation. However, RNA may be more susceptible to oxidative insults than DNA, 
for RNA is largely single-stranded and its bases are not protected by hydrogen 
bonding and less protected by specific proteins. Also, cellular RNA locates in 
the vicinity of mitochondria, the primary source of reactive oxygen species. 
Oxidative modification can occur not only in protein-coding RNAs, but also in 
non-coding RNAs that have been recently revealed to contribute towards the 
complexity of the mammalian brain. Damage to coding and non-coding RNAs will 
cause errors in proteins and disturbances in the regulation of gene expression. 
While less lethal than mutations in the genome and not inheritable, such 
sublethal damage to cells might be associated with underlying mechanisms of 
degeneration, especially age-associated neurodegeneration that is commonly found 
in the elderly population. Indeed, oxidative RNA damage has been described 
recently in most of the common neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer 
disease, Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis. Of particular interest, the accumulating evidence obtained from 
studies on either human samples or experimental models coincidentally suggests 
that oxidative RNA damage is a feature in vulnerable neurons at early-stage of 
these neurodegenerative disorders, indicating that RNA oxidation actively 
contributes to the onset or the development of the disorders. Further 
investigations aimed at understanding of the processing mechanisms related to 
oxidative RNA damage and its consequences may provide significant insights into 
the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders and lead to better therapeutic 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-009-0508-1
PMID: 19271225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2045. Neuropsychiatr. 2009;23(1):52-7.

[The pupillary response test as a method to differentiate various types of 
dementia].

[Article in German]

Grünberger J(1), Prause W, Frottier P, Stöhr H, Saletu B, Haushofer M, Rainer M.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für klinische Psychodiagnostik, Universitätsklinik für Psychiatrie 
und Psychotherapie, Medizinische Universität Wien.

AIM: Pupillometry is a non-invasive measurement technique based on the pupillary 
response to specific sensoric, mental and emotional variables. After topical 
application of a cholinergic antagonist (tropicamide) an increased pupillary 
dilatation response in Alzheimers s disease patients was described ("receptor 
test"). The aim of the present study was to evaluate the usefulness of the 0.01% 
tropicamide receptor test in differentiating types of dementia.
METHOD: 425 patients (159 men, 266 women, mean age 75 years) of the Memory 
Clinic of the SMZ Ost Vienna, Austria were included in the study. 195 patients 
suffered from a dementia in Alzheimer's disease with late onset (ICD-10: F00.1), 
42 from dementia in Alzheimer's disease with early onset (F00.0), 71 from 
vascular dementia (F01), 34 from Lewy-Body dementia (F03) and 83 from mixed 
dementia (F00.2). All patients were investigated by means of a computer-assisted 
pupillometer. The pupillary diameter of the left eye was measured 4 times 
(baseline=0 minutes, after 20, 40 and 60 minutes). 4 minutes after baseline one 
drop of 0.01% tropicamide solution was installed onto the left eye of the 
patients.
RESULTS: At baseline the pupillary diameter was largest in Lewy-Body dementia, 
smallest in vascular dementia. Significant differences were observed between 
vascular dementia and early-onset dementia in Alzheimer's disease as well as 
between Lewy-Body dementia and all other dementia syndromes (except dementia in 
Alzheimer's disease with early onset). The 0.01% tropicamide receptor test made 
it possible to differentiate early-onset dementia in Alzheimer's disease from 
vascular and mixed dementia.
CONCLUSION: Utilizing pupillometry in combination with the 0.01% tropicamide 
receptor test allows to discriminate between different dementia types of, as 
demonstrated in our study.

PMID: 19272292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2046. Front Biosci (Landmark Ed). 2009 Jan 1;14(5):1823-34. doi: 10.2741/3344.

Cognitive and limbic circuits that are affected by deep brain stimulation.

Haber SN(1), Brucker JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, University of Rochester School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, 601 Elmwood Avenue, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. 
suzanne_haber@urmc.rochester.edu

Several lines of evidence indicate that the neural network that underlies the 
pathophysiology of obsessive-compulsive disorder and depression centers on the 
prefronto-basal ganglia system. Particularly involved are anterior cingulate 
cortex, the orbital prefrontal cortex, the ventral striatum, and parts of the 
thalamus. Additional integral parts of the network include, the amygdala, the 
midbrain dopamine cells and the serotonergic neurons. Collectively, these brain 
regions are involved in various aspects of reward-based learning and good 
decision-making skills. They are also associated with sadness and depression, 
pathological risk-taking, addictive behaviors, and obsessive-compulsive 
disorder. Two of the most successful deep brain stimulation targets for 
obsessive-compulsive disorder and depression are centered in white matter 
tracts. These targets were chosen for their central location and ability to 
capture specific ascending and descending connections, with a particular focus 
on fibers connecting the subgenual anterior cingulate and orbital cortex with 
the basal ganglia, thalamus, and amygdala. As more knowledge is obtained 
concerning the details of these connections, more precise targets may be 
possible.

DOI: 10.2741/3344
PMID: 19273166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2047. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;16(3):627-34. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0996.

Gene expression as peripheral biomarkers for sporadic Alzheimer's disease.

Grünblatt E(1), Bartl J, Zehetmayer S, Ringel TM, Bauer P, Riederer P, Jacob CP.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry, National Parkinson Foundation Centre of Excellence 
Research Laboratories, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry, Psychosomatic and 
Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg, Würzburg, Germany. 
Gruenblatt.E@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia, is a progressive 
neurodegenerative disease. At present, diagnosis of AD is rather late in the 
disease. Therefore, we attempted to find peripheral biomarkers for the early 
diagnosis of AD. We investigated the profiles of 33 genes, previously found by 
our group to have altered expression in postmortem brains of AD. The gene 
profiles were studied via 
quantitative-real-time-reverse-transcription-polymerase-chain-reaction, in whole 
blood samples (collected with the PAXgene blood RNA system) isolated from a 
population clinically diagnosed with AD and healthy controls (1-year period/ up 
to 4 samples). Five genes showed significant correlation to the dementia score, 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). Focusing on the two genes with the 
smallest p-value, H3-histone and cannabinoid-receptor-2, notable increases in 
these genes were found in peripheral blood mRNA in subjects with lower MMSE 
scores. Seasonal variations in gene expression were not significant due to 
sample size, but did seem to vary due to time of sample withdrawal. In 
conclusion, gene expression profiling might be a promising method to 
investigating a large population with the aim of developing an early diagnosis 
of AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-0996
PMID: 19276557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2048. J Neurol. 2009 Aug;256(8):1351-3. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5096-4. Epub 2009 Mar 
12.

Depression and psychiatric symptoms preceding onset of dementia in a family with 
early-onset Alzheimer disease with a novel PSEN1 mutation.

Kasuga K, Ohno T, Ishihara T, Miyashita A, Kuwano R, Onodera O, Nishizawa M, 
Ikeuchi T.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5096-4
PMID: 19280102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2049. Int J Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2009 Mar;47(3):141-52. doi: 10.5414/cpp47141.

Pharmacotherapy guidelines for the aged by family doctors for the use of family 
doctors: part C--Special pharmacology.

Bergert FW(1), Conrad D, Ehrenthal K, Fessler J, Gross J, Gundermann K, Kluthe 
B, Lang Heinrich W, Liesenfeld A, Loew PG, Luther E, Pchalek R, Seffrin J, 
Sterzing A, Wolfring HJ, Zimmermann U.

Author information:
(1)General practitioners, Association of Statuatory Health Insurance Physicians 
in Hesse (Kassenärztliche Vereinigung in Hessen (KVH) Frankfurt (Main)), 
Germany.

The part "Special pharmacology of the aged" of this guideline contains 
recommendations for typical conditions in the family doctors practice: in the 
January issue 2009 dementia and Morbus Parkinson, in this issue osteoporosis and 
urinary incontinence and in the next issue rectal incontinence and obstipation. 
This issue of the IJCPT contains the third part of the Pharmacotherapy 
guidelines for the aged by family doctors for family doctors. Part 3: 
Osteoporosis and urinary incontinence. Osteoporosis is a systematic disease 
characterized by low bone mass and declining bone structure. Exercise, adequate 
diet, nicotine abstinence as well as reduction of alcohol consumption may 
counteract the progression of the disease. Osteoporosis manifests in bone 
fractures with minimal trauma. Attention must be given to the risk of falling, 
e.g., by avoiding drugs that increase the risk of falling: e.g., psychotropic 
agents, analgesic drugs and antiarrhythmic agents. Specific osteoporosis 
medication e.g. calcium, vitamin D, biphosphonates and SERM (selective estrogen 
receptor modulators) is evaluated by family doctors according to indication, 
dosage, contraindications, long-term therapy and nature of any fracture. 
Duration of therapy is at least 3 - max. 5 years followed by reassessment of 
indication. There are 3 types of urine incontinence (urge-, stress-, and 
overflow-incontinence). Another standardization of urinary incontinence follows 
dysfunctions of the pelvic floor: detrusor muscle-dependent, due to sphincter 
spasm, prostate gland dependent. Urge incontinence with a dysfunction of the 
detrusor muscle is the most common type. Mixed types are frequent. Non-drug 
measures (e.g. pelvic muscle training, bladder training, toilet training are 
first choice treatments. Drug therapy (estrogen, imipramine) are without proven 
effect.

DOI: 10.5414/cpp47141
PMID: 19281722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2050. Brain. 2009 Jul;132(Pt 7):1783-94. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp044. Epub 2009 Mar 13.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations in clinical and pathologically proven Parkinson's 
disease.

Neumann J(1), Bras J, Deas E, O'Sullivan SS, Parkkinen L, Lachmann RH, Li A, 
Holton J, Guerreiro R, Paudel R, Segarane B, Singleton A, Lees A, Hardy J, 
Houlden H, Revesz T, Wood NW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2009 Oct;132(Pt 10):e125.

Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) are associated with Gaucher's 
disease, the most common lysosomal storage disorder. Parkinsonism is an 
established feature of Gaucher's disease and an increased frequency of mutations 
in GBA has been reported in several different ethnic series with sporadic 
Parkinson's disease. In this study, we evaluated the frequency of GBA mutations 
in British patients affected by Parkinson's disease. We utilized the DNA of 790 
patients and 257 controls, matched for age and ethnicity, to screen for 
mutations within the GBA gene. Clinical data on all identified GBA mutation 
carriers was reviewed and analysed. Additionally, in all cases where brain 
material was available, a neuropathological evaluation was performed and 
compared to sporadic Parkinson's disease without GBA mutations. The frequency of 
GBA mutations among the British patients (33/790 = 4.18%) was significantly 
higher (P = 0.01; odds ratio = 3.7; 95% confidence interval = 1.12-12.14) when 
compared to the control group (3/257 = 1.17%). Fourteen different GBA mutations 
were identified, including three previously undescribed mutations, K7E, D443N 
and G193E. Pathological examination revealed widespread and abundant 
alpha-synuclein pathology in all 17 GBA mutation carriers, which were graded as 
Braak stage of 5-6, and had McKeith's limbic or diffuse neocortical Lewy 
body-type pathology. Diffuse neocortical Lewy body-type pathology tended to 
occur more frequently in the group with GBA mutations compared to matched 
Parkinson's disease controls. Clinical features comprised an early onset of the 
disease, the presence of hallucinations in 45% (14/31) and symptoms of cognitive 
decline or dementia in 48% (15/31) of patients. This study demonstrates that GBA 
mutations are found in British subjects at a higher frequency than any other 
known Parkinson's disease gene. This is the largest study to date on a 
non-Jewish patient sample with a detailed genotype/phenotype/pathological 
analyses which strengthens the hypothesis that GBA mutations represent a 
significant risk factor for the development of Parkinson's disease and suggest 
that to date, this is the most common genetic factor identified for the disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp044
PMCID: PMC2702833
PMID: 19286695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2051. Exp Neurol. 2009 Jun;217(2):434-9. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.03.003. Epub 
2009 Mar 13.

Anti-aggregation and fibril-destabilizing effects of sex hormones on 
alpha-synuclein fibrils in vitro.

Hirohata M(1), Ono K, Morinaga A, Ikeda T, Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.

The alpha-synuclein aggregation in the brain is the hallmark of Lewy body 
diseases, including Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies, and 
multiple system atrophy. Some epidemiological studies have revealed that 
estrogen therapy reduces the risk of Parkinson's disease in females. We examined 
the effects of estriol, estradiol, estrone, androstenedione, and testosterone on 
the formation and destabilization of alpha-synuclein fibrils at pH 7.5 and 37 
degrees C in vitro, using fluorescence spectroscopy with thioflavin S and 
electron microscopy. These sex hormones, especially estriol, significantly exert 
anti-aggregation and fibril-destabilizing effects; and hence, could be valuable 
preventive and therapeutic agents for alpha-synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.03.003
PMID: 19289119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2052. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2009 Summer;15(2):157-82. doi: 
10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008.00064.x. Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Neurochemical approaches in the laboratory diagnosis of Parkinson and Parkinson 
dementia syndromes: a review.

Jesse S(1), Steinacker P, Lehnert S, Gillardon F, Hengerer B, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The diagnosis of Parkinson disease (PD) is rendered on the basis of clinical 
parameters, whereby laboratory chemical tests or morphological imaging is only 
called upon to exclude other neurodegenerative diseases. The differentiation 
between PD and other diseases of the basal ganglia, especially the postsynaptic 
Parkinson syndromes multisystem atrophy (MSA) and progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP), is of decisive importance, on the one hand, for the response to an 
appropriate therapy, and on the other hand, for the respective prognosis of the 
disease. However, particularly at the onset of symptoms, it is difficult to 
precisely distinguish these diseases from each other, presenting with an 
akinetic-rigid syndrome. It is not yet possible to conduct a neurochemical 
differentiation of Parkinson syndromes. Therefore, a reliable biomarker is still 
to be found that might predict the development of Parkinson dementia. Since this 
situation is currently the subject of various different studies, the following 
synopsis is intended to provide a brief summary of the investigations addressing 
the field of the early neurochemical differential diagnosis of Parkinson 
syndromes and the early diagnosis of Parkinson dementia, from direct 
alpha-synuclein detection to proteomic approaches. In addition, an overview of 
the tested biomarkers will be given with regard to their possible introduction 
as a screening method.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1755-5949.2008.00064.x
PMCID: PMC2730483
PMID: 19298613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Concept/design: Sarah Jesse, Petra Steinacker, 
Bastian Hengerer, and Markus Otto; critical revision of article: Markus Otto, 
Petra Steinacker, Stefan Lehnert, Bastian Hengerer, Frank Gillardon, and Sarah 
Jesse; approval of article: Markus Otto, Petra Steinacker, Stefan Lehnert, 
Bastian Hengerer, Frank Gillardon, and Sarah Jesse; and data collection: Sarah 
Jesse and Markus Otto. The authors have no conflict of interest.


2053. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Aug;35(2):165-76. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.02.019. Epub 2009 
Mar 19.

Metabolomics tools for identifying biomarkers for neuropsychiatric diseases.

Quinones MP(1), Kaddurah-Daouk R.

Author information:
(1)Center for Bipolar Illness Intervention in Hispanic Communities, Department 
of Psychiatry and University of Texas Health Science at San Antonio, San 
Antonio, TX, USA.

The repertoire of biochemicals (or small molecules) present in cells, tissue, 
and body fluids is known as the metabolome. Today, clinicians utilize only a 
very small part of the information contained in the metabolome, as revealed by 
the quantification of a limited set of analytes to gain information on human 
health. Examples include measuring glucose or cholesterol to monitor diabetes 
and cardiovascular health, respectively. With a focus on comprehensively 
studying the metabolome, the rapidly growing field of metabolomics captures the 
metabolic state of organisms at the global or "-omics" level. Given that the 
overall health status of an individual is captured by his or her metabolic 
state, which is a reflection of what has been encoded by the genome and modified 
by environmental factors, metabolomics has the potential to have a great impact 
upon medical practice by providing a wealth of relevant biochemical data. 
Metabolomics promises to improve current, single metabolites-based clinical 
assessments by identifying metabolic signatures (biomarkers) that embody global 
biochemical changes in disease, predict responses to treatment or medication 
side effects (pharmachometabolomics). State of the art metabolomic analytical 
platforms and informatics tools are being used to map potential biomarkers for a 
multitude of disorders including those of the central nervous system (CNS). 
Indeed, CNS disorders are linked to disturbances in metabolic pathways related 
to neurotransmitter systems (dopamine, serotonin, GABA and glutamate); fatty 
acids such as arachidonic acid-cascade; oxidative stress and mitochondrial 
function. Metabolomics tools are enabling us to map in greater detail 
perturbations in many biochemical pathways and links among these pathways this 
information is key for development of biomarkers that are disease-specific. In 
this review, we elaborate on some of the concepts and technologies used in 
metabolomics and its promise for biomarker discovery. We also highlight early 
findings from metabolomic studies in CNS disorders such as schizophrenia, Major 
Depressive Disorder (MDD), Bipolar Disorder (BD), Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) and Parkinson's disease (PD).

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.02.019
PMID: 19303440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2054. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Jun;34(3):484-6. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.03.002. Epub 2009 
Mar 20.

Cerebrospinal fluid beta-glucocerebrosidase activity is reduced in Dementia with 
Lewy Bodies.

Parnetti L(1), Balducci C, Pierguidi L, De Carlo C, Peducci M, D'Amore C, 
Padiglioni C, Mastrocola S, Persichetti E, Paciotti S, Bellomo G, Tambasco N, 
Rossi A, Beccari T, Calabresi P.

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, University of Perugia, Italy. parnetti@unipg.it

The autophagy-lysosomal degradation pathway plays a role in the onset and 
progression of neurodegenerative diseases. Clinical and genetic studies indicate 
that mutations of beta-glucocerebrosidase represent genetic risk factors for 
synucleinopathies, including Parkinson's Disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy 
Bodies (DLB). We recently found a decreased activity of lysosomal hydrolases, 
namely beta-glucocerebrosidase, in cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients. We have 
thus measured the activity of these enzymes - alpha-mannosidase (EC 3.2.1.24), 
beta-mannosidase (EC 3.2.1.25), beta-glucocerebrosidase (EC 3.2.1.45), 
beta-galactosidase (EC 3.2.1.23) and beta-hexosaminidase (EC 3.2.1.52) - in 
cerebrospinal fluid of patients suffering from DLB, Alzheimer's Disease (AD), 
Fronto-Temporal Dementia (FTD) and controls. Alpha-mannosidase activity showed a 
marked decrease across all the pathological groups as compared to controls. 
Conversely, beta-glucocerebrosidase activity was selectively reduced in DLB, 
further suggesting that this enzyme might specifically be impaired in 
synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.03.002
PMID: 19303930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2055. Muscle Nerve. 2009 Jun;39(6):754-60. doi: 10.1002/mus.21263.

Vibratory thresholds and mobility in older persons.

Buchman AS(1), Wilson RS, Leurgans S, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Armour Academic Facility, Suite #1038; 600 
South Paulina, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. 
Aron_S_Buchman@rush.edu

We tested the hypothesis that vibratory thresholds in the elderly are related to 
mobility. In all, 629 older persons without dementia underwent testing including 
11 lower extremity performance measures and modified United Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale (UPDRS), summarized as composite mobility and global parkinsonian 
signs. Vibratory thresholds were measured at the ankle and toes bilaterally 
using the graduated Rydel-Seiffer tuning fork. In linear regression models 
adjusted for age, sex, and education, vibratory threshold was associated with 
composite mobility (estimate, 0.047, SE = 0.011, P < 0.001) and global 
parkinsonian signs score (estimate, -0.252, SE = 0.126, P = 0.047). These 
findings were primarily due to the association of vibratory threshold with gait 
and balance components of composite mobility and parkinsonian gait. These 
results were unchanged when we controlled for body mass index, physical 
activity, cognition, depression, vascular risk factors, vascular disease burden, 
joint pain, and falls. Vibratory thresholds are associated with mobility, 
supporting the link between peripheral sensory nerve function and mobility in 
the elderly.

DOI: 10.1002/mus.21263
PMCID: PMC2812864
PMID: 19306325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2056. J Neurol. 2009 Mar;256(3):493-8. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-0119-8. Epub 2009 Mar 
18.

Apolipoprotein E genotype as a risk factor for susceptibility to and dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Williams-Gray CH(1), Goris A, Saiki M, Foltynie T, Compston DA, Sawcer SJ, 
Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Dept. of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 2PY, UK. 
chm27@cam.ac.uk

Further to the well-established association between apolipoprotein E (APOE) and 
Alzheimer's disease, this gene has also been implicated in both susceptibility 
to, and dementia in, Parkinson's disease (PD). However studies to date have 
produced contradictory findings. We conducted a case-control study in a 
population of 528 PD patients and 512 healthy controls and found no significant 
difference in allele or genotype distribution of APOE between the two groups. An 
updated meta-analysis showed a modest increase of APOE-epsilon2 carriers amongst 
PD patients compared to controls [P = 0.017, OR = 1.16 (95 % CI 1.03-1.31)]. 107 
of our patients were incident cases participating in a population-based 
epidemiological study. Longitudinal follow-up of this cohort over a mean of 5.0 
+/- 0.7 years from diagnosis revealed no significant impact of APOE-epsilon4 
carrier status on risk of dementia or rate of cognitive decline. An updated 
meta-analysis indicated an over-representation of APOE-epsilon4 carriers amongst 
PD dementia compared to non dementia cases [OR 1.74 (1.36-2.23), P = 1 x 
10(-4)], although small sample sizes, heterogeneity of odds ratios and 
publication bias may have confounded this finding. In conclusion, our study does 
not support previously reported associations between APOE genotype and 
susceptibility to, or cognitive decline in, PD. An updated meta-analysis 
indicates any association with PD susceptibility is at most modest, an 
observation with important implications for further study of this issue. Large 
scale longitudinal studies would be best placed to further evaluate any impact 
of APOE genotype on cognitive decline in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-0119-8
PMID: 19308307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2057. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009 Apr;17(4):291-8. doi: 
10.1097/jgp.0b013e31818a0e35.

Apathy predicts more severe parkinsonism in Alzheimer's disease.

Starkstein SE(1), Merello M, Brockman S, Bruce D, Petracca G, Power BD.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences, University of Western 
Australia, WA, Australia. ses@cyllene.uwa.edu.au

OBJECTIVES: Parkinsonian signs are frequent in Alzheimer disease (AD) and are 
associated with a faster cognitive decline, worse quality of life, and early 
nursing home admission. Cross-sectional studies in AD reported a significant 
association between parkinsonism and apathy. The aim of this study was to assess 
the chronological association between apathy and parkinsonism in AD.
DESIGN: Longitudinal study of a consecutive series of patients with AD.
SETTING: Dementia clinic from a tertiary clinical center.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred sixty-nine patients meeting diagnostic criteria for 
AD.
INTERVENTION: A consecutive series of 169 patients with probable AD were 
assessed for the presence of parkinsonism, cognitive deficits, apathy, and 
depression with the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale and a comprehensive 
neuropsychiatry assessment. One hundred thirty-six (80%) of the patients had a 
follow-up assessment between 1 and 4 years after the baseline evaluation.
MEASUREMENTS: Scores on apathy, parkinsonism, and depression scales at follow-up 
were the main outcome measures.
RESULTS: Patients with apathy at baseline or those who developed apathy during 
follow-up had a significant increase in parkinsonism at follow-up when compared 
with patients with no apathy at both assessments. The association between apathy 
and increasing parkinsonism was unrelated to age, gender, the severity of 
cognitive deficits, the presence of depression, or use of psychotropic 
medications. On the other hand, neither the presence of parkinsonism nor 
depression at baseline was significantly associated with more severe apathy at 
follow-up.
CONCLUSION: Apathy may be an early manifestation of a more aggressive AD 
phenotype characterized by loss of motivation, increasing parkinsonism, a faster 
cognitive and functional decline, and more severe depression.

DOI: 10.1097/jgp.0b013e31818a0e35
PMID: 19322935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2058. Neuropathology. 2009 Dec;29(6):720-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2009.01012.x. 
Epub 2009 Mar 23.

The overlap of corticobasal degeneration and Alzheimer changes: an autopsy case.

Zhang W(1), Zheng R, Wang Z, Yuan Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, First Hospital, Peking University, Beijing, China.

The aspects of various neurodegenerative diseases can be observed overlapping 
with each other during autopsy. Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a rare 
neurodegenerative disease, whereas Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common 
cause of dementia. In this article, we present the combination of CBD and AD in 
an autopsy case. The patient, an 82-year-old right-handed woman developed 
asymmetrical parkinsonism, visuospatial dysfunction and memory loss, as well as 
subsequent non-influent aphasia over the past 10 years. The autopsy revealed 
characteristic CBD-related pathology, ballooned neurons, globose tangles and 
astrocytic plaques, mainly in the frontal cortex and basal ganglia. The 
Alzheimer-related pathology was also present concomitantly. Senile plagues 
deposited diffusively throughout the hippocampus and neocortices. 
Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) were more confined to the hippocampus. The 
autopsy demonstrated pathological overlap of CBD and AD, which therefore 
explained the clinical early development of dementia and parkinsonism. We should 
suspect the concurrence of various neurodegenerative disorders in any case with 
atypical or complex clinical manifestations. Tau pathology is a prominent 
feature in both CBD and AD. Such a combination would be a clue for the 
pathogenesis of various tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2009.01012.x
PMID: 19323789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2059. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Aug 15;283(1-2):119-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.364. Epub 
2009 Mar 25.

Biobanks for biomarkers in neurological disorders: the Da Vinci bridge for 
optimal clinico-pathological connection.

Ravid R(1).

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Institute for Neurosciences, Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA, Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. rivkagravid@gmail.com

The diagnosis of dementing disorders is severely hampered by the absence of 
reliable biomarkers that can be measured in body fluids such as blood, urine and 
cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF). Searching for biomarkers is hampered by the huge 
variability between individuals; the use of autopsy specimens induces 
significant data fluctuation due to rapid post-mortem changes in the specimens. 
The search for biomarkers obtained from living donors has contributed already a 
vast amount of data. The role of amyloid and tau as early diagnostic markers in 
the pathology of dementia has been reported in differential involvement in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), late onset Alzheimer disease (LOAD), Lewy Body 
dementia (DLBD), Vascular dementia, fronto-temporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), 
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and non neurological controls. In the coming 
decennia, brain/tissue/biobanks (BTB-banks) will have a major role in 
identifying the relevant biomarkers and will collect, preserve and type RNA and 
DNA extracted from brain/tissue/body fluids in order to update the pathological 
hallmarks of dementing disorders. The present paper reviews and compares the 
currently known/clinically applied biomarkers in dementia which can be 
identified and incorporated into clinical drug trials and elucidate proposed 
mechanisms of disease and drug action. Furthermore, the review screens a panel 
of biomarkers used for early and differential diagnosis and comments on the 
validity of these biomarkers in reflecting the typical hallmarks of neurological 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.02.364
PMID: 19324376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2060. Int J Mol Sci. 2008 May;9(5):789-806. doi: 10.3390/ijms9050789. Epub 2008 May 
20.

Sublethal RNA oxidation as a mechanism for neurodegenerative disease.

Castellani RJ(1), Nunomura A(2), Rolston RK(3), Moreira PI(3), Takeda A(4), 
Perry G(3)(5), Smith MA(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine 
and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.
(3)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio, 
USA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(5)College of Sciences, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas, 
USA.

Although cellular RNA is subjected to the same oxidative insults as DNA and 
other cellular macromolecules, oxidative damage to RNA has not been a major 
focus in investigations of the biological consequences of free radical damage. 
In fact, because it is largely single-stranded and its bases lack the protection 
of hydrogen bonding and binding by specific proteins, RNA may be more 
susceptible to oxidative insults than is DNA. Oxidative damage to protein-coding 
RNA or non-coding RNA will, in turn, potentially cause errors in proteins and/or 
dysregulation of gene expression. While less lethal than mutations in the 
genome, such sublethal insults to cells might be associated with underlying 
mechanisms of several chronic diseases, including neurodegenerative disease. 
Recently, oxidative RNA damage has been described in several neurodegenerative 
diseases including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, and prion diseases. Of particular interest, oxidative RNA damage can be 
demonstrated in vulnerable neurons early in disease, suggesting that RNA 
oxidation may actively contribute to the onset of the disease. An increasing 
body of evidence suggests that, mechanistically speaking, the detrimental 
effects of oxidative RNA damage to protein synthesis are attenuated, at least in 
part, by the existence of protective mechanisms that prevent the incorporation 
of the damaged ribonucleotides into the translational machinery. Further 
investigations aimed at understanding the processing mechanisms related to 
oxidative RNA damage and its consequences may provide significant insights into 
the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative and other degenerative diseases and lead 
to better therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms9050789
PMCID: PMC2635712
PMID: 19325784


2061. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2009 Nov;15(9):640-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.03.004. Epub 2009 Mar 28.

Performance on an Alzheimer-selective odor identification test in patients with 
Parkinson's disease and its relationship with cerebral dopamine transporter 
activity.

Chou KL(1), Bohnen NI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
klchou@med.umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown selective deficits of odor 
identification in both Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Brief, selective AD smell screening tests have been developed to identify 
subjects at risk of AD. The disease specificity of such screening tests has not 
been formally evaluated.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the performance of an Alzheimer-selective odor 
identification test in patients with PD and its relationship with cerebral 
dopamine transporter (DAT) activity.
METHODS: PD patients (n=44; Hoehn and Yahr stages I-III; 13f/31m; mean age 
59.3+/-10.1) and 44 controls matched for gender and age completed the University 
of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT). All patients had PD duration 
> 1 year and none had evidence of dementia. Using the UPSIT, we calculated 
performance on the 10 odors previously reported to be selective for AD risk 
(UPSIT-AD10). A subset of 29 PD patients also underwent brain DAT 
[(11)C]beta-CFT (2-beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-fluorophenyl) tropane) PET 
imaging. DAT binding was assessed in the hippocampus, amygdala, ventral and 
dorsal striatum.
RESULTS: UPSIT-AD10 scores were significantly lower in the patient (5.8+/-2.1) 
compared to the control group (8.6+/-2.4) (t=5.8, P<0.0001). However, UPSIT-AD10 
performance in the PD patients did not correlate with striatal or mesolimbic DAT 
activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Hyposmia in PD and AD overlap and supposed Alzheimer-selective 
smell screening tests may not be specific for AD. However, the supposed 
AD-selective hyposmia scores in PD did not correlate with cerebral DAT binding 
and may reflect a non-dopaminergic olfactory mechanism.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.03.004
PMCID: PMC2783495
PMID: 19329351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2062. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2008 Dec;4(6):1267-71. doi: 10.2147/ndt.s4288.

Progression to vascular dementia of patients with mild cognitive impairment: 
relevance of mild parkinsonian signs.

Mauri M(1), Corbetta S, Pianezzola C, Ambrosoni E, Riboldazzi G, Bono G.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Neurology, Dept of Clinical Medicine, Ospedale di Circolo - 
University of Insubria, Varese, Italy.

Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) may be found among patients presenting with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), but few data are available about the relation of 
these signs with the prospective risk for dementia. Our retrospective 
investigation considered a case-series of 119 MCI subjects followed over a 
three-year period: their baseline clinical picture has been analyzed in search 
of correlation between the cognito-motor profile and the final diagnosis. The 
population included 66 patients with amnesic MCI and 53 with an involvement of 
other cognitive areas (nonamnesic MCI). MPS were detected in 22 subjects 
(18.5%). At the first observation, MPS cases showed an higher frequency of 
nonamnesic MCI and more pronounced deficits at the Trail Making Test (p < 0.05). 
After a three-year follow-up, 48 patients had converted to dementia. The 
presence of MPS at the baseline evaluation was significantly related to the 
development of a vascular-type dementia. The study investigates the association 
between MPS and MCI and might indicate for these cases a greater risk for an 
involvement of executive functions and the subsequent development of vascular 
dementia.

DOI: 10.2147/ndt.s4288
PMCID: PMC2646656
PMID: 19337467


2063. Aquat Toxicol. 2009 May 17;92(4):258-63. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2009.02.011. 
Epub 2009 Feb 27.

The association of metal ion exposure with alpha-synuclein-like immunoreactivity 
in the central nervous system of fish, Catostomus commersoni.

Boudreau HS(1), Krol KM, Eibl JK, Williams LD, Rossiter JP, Palace VP, Ross GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Alpha-synuclein protein aggregates are a major component of Lewy bodies, the 
intracytoplasmic inclusions found in dopaminergic neurons that are a defining 
characteristic of Parkinson's disease. Other "synucleopathies" include dementia 
with Lewy bodies and multisystem atrophy. In vitro, the formation of these 
deposits can be induced by a number of substances, including metal ions. Fish 
provide a useful model to study the long-term biological effects of metal ion 
exposure, but to date no studies have been reported concerning such exposures 
with respect to alpha-synuclein aggregation. Mature white sucker fish 
(Catostomus commersoni; aged 5-8 years) were sampled from two sites within the 
Red Lake area of Northwestern Ontario, a region highly contaminated by metal 
ions due to mining activity. Individual fish were characterized with respect to 
liver metal ion uptake and metallothionein levels. Central nervous system (CNS) 
tissues of fish from test sites representing high and low metal ion 
contamination were examined immunohistochemically using a polyclonal antibody 
recognising alpha-synuclein protein. We demonstrate here that the CNS of fish 
exposed to elevated metal ion environments had increased alpha-synuclein-like 
immunoreactive aggregates, potentially reflecting metal ion exposure leading to 
CNS toxicity. These findings demonstrate that fish may be an important new model 
for studying environmental risk factors and the pathology associated with 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2009.02.011
PMID: 19342108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2064. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2009 Jun;30(6):1222-6. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A1556. Epub 2009 
Apr 2.

White matter involvement in idiopathic Parkinson disease: a diffusion tensor 
imaging study.

Gattellaro G(1), Minati L, Grisoli M, Mariani C, Carella F, Osio M, Ciceri E, 
Albanese A, Bruzzone MG.

Author information:
(1)Neuroradiology Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Nazionale Neurologico Carlo 
Besta, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) offers a unique window on 
the connectivity changes, extending beyond the basal ganglia, which accompany 
the cognitive symptoms of Parkinson disease (PD). The primary purpose of this 
study was to assess the microstructural damage to cerebral white matter 
occurring in idiopathic PD.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Our sample included patients with PD without dementia (n 
= 10; Hoehn and Yahr stages I and II; Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale, 
20.5 +/- 8.3; and Mini-Mental State Examination, 28.3 +/- 1.5) and age-matched 
healthy control subjects (n = 10). DTI was performed on a 1.5T scanner, and mean 
diffusivity (MD) and fractional anisotropy (FA) maps were obtained. Regions of 
interest (ROIs) were drawn on the major fiber bundles as well as on gray matter 
nuclei.
RESULTS: In patients, the MD was increased at borderline significance in the 
substantia nigra but was unaltered in the thalamus, globus pallidus, putamen, 
and in the head of the caudate nucleus. The FA and MD were unaltered in the 
corticospinal tract in the midbrain and at the level of the internal capsule, 
and in the splenium of the corpus callosum. By contrast, the MD was increased 
and the FA was decreased in the genu of the corpus callosum and in the superior 
longitudinal fasciculus; in the cingulum, only the MD was altered. The observed 
changes were not significantly lateralized.
CONCLUSIONS: Widespread microstructural damage to frontal and parietal white 
matter occurs already in the early stages of PD.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A1556
PMCID: PMC7051338
PMID: 19342541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2065. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2009 Aug;15(7):521-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.01.003. Epub 2009 Apr 5.

Hippocampal atrophy predicts conversion to dementia after STN-DBS in Parkinson's 
disease.

Aybek S(1), Lazeyras F, Gronchi-Perrin A, Burkhard PR, Villemure JG, Vingerhoets 
FJ.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie Lausanne, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: Hippocampal atrophy (HA) is a known predictor of dementia in 
Alzheimer's disease. HA has been found in advanced Parkinson's disease (PD), but 
no predicting value has been demonstrated yet. The identification of such a 
predictor in candidates for subthalamic deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) would 
be of value. Our objective was to compare preoperative hippocampal volumes (HV) 
between PD patients who subsequently converted to dementia (PDD) after STN-DBS 
and those who did not (PDnD).
METHODS: From a cohort of 70 consecutive STN-DBS treated PD patients, 14 
converted to dementia over 25.6+/-20.2 months (PDD). They were compared to 14 
matched controls (PDnD) who did not convert to dementia after 43.9+/-11.7 
months. On the preoperative 3D MPRAGE MRI images, HV and total brain volumes 
(TBV) were measured by a blinded investigator using manual and automatic 
segmentation respectively.
RESULTS: PDD had smaller preoperative HV than PDnD (1.95+/-0.29 ml; 2.28+/-0.33 
ml; p<0.01). This difference reinforced after normalization for TBV 
(3.28+/-0.48, 3.93+/-0.60; p<0.01). Every 0.1 ml decrease of HV increased the 
likelihood to develop dementia by 24.6%. A large overlap was found between PD 
and PDnD HVs, precluding the identification of a cut-off score.
CONCLUSIONS: As in Alzheimer's disease, HA may be a predictor of the conversion 
to dementia in PD. This preoperative predictor suggests that the development of 
dementia after STN-DBS is related to the disease progression, rather then the 
procedure. Further studies are needed to define a cut-off score for HA, in order 
to affine its predictive value for an individual patient.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.01.003
PMID: 19349206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2066. Neuroreport. 2009 May 27;20(8):741-4. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328329370b.

Structural brain correlates of verbal fluency in Parkinson's disease.

Pereira JB(1), Junqué C, Martí MJ, Ramirez-Ruiz B, Bartrés-Faz D, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Clinical Psychobiology, University of Barcelona, 
Spain.

Verbal fluency tests are often used to assess cognitive dysfunction in 
Parkinson's disease. These tests have been found to be impaired even in initial 
stages of this illness. We applied voxel-based morphometry to investigate the 
neuroanatomic substrates of semantic and phonemic fluency impairment. 
Correlations between gray matter density and semantic as well as phonemic 
fluency performance were performed in 32 nondemented Parkinson's disease 
patients. We found that gray matter of temporal, frontal and cerebellar areas 
correlated with semantic fluency scores. In contrast, no gray matter 
correlations were found for phonemic fluency or for general cognitive functions. 
These results suggest that semantic fluency impairment is reflecting structural 
gray matter changes in regions involved in language networks.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328329370b
PMID: 19349926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2067. Mov Disord. 2009 May 15;24(7):1028-33. doi: 10.1002/mds.22511.

Hyperhomocysteinemia in levodopa-treated patients with Parkinson's disease 
dementia.

Zoccolella S(1), dell'Aquila C, Abruzzese G, Antonini A, Bonuccelli U, Canesi M, 
Cristina S, Marchese R, Pacchetti C, Zagaglia R, Logroscino G, Defazio G, 
Lamberti P, Livrea P.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Nervous System Diseases, Medical and Neurological Sciences, Azienda 
Ospedaliero-Universitaria Ospedali Riuniti, University of Foggia, Italy.

Dementia is a frequent non-motor feature of Parkinson's disease (PD). Elevated 
plasma homocysteine (Hcy) levels have been associated with both cognitive 
impairment and dementia. Increased Hcy levels have been observed in 
levodopa-treated patients with PD. The objective of our study was to evaluate 
the association between plasma Hcy levels and dementia in PD. We performed a 
multicenter cross-sectional study on patients with PD with (PDD) and without 
(PDnD) dementia and age- and sex-matched healthy controls. We compared Hcy 
levels in patients with PDD and PDnD and healthy controls, and we performed 
logistic regression analysis to search for an association between the presence 
of dementia and increased Hcy levels in PD. Patients with PD (121), PDD (42), 
and PDnD (79), and age- and sex-matched controls (154) were enrolled. Hcy levels 
were higher in patients with PD compared to controls (17.5 micromol/L +/- 10.2 
vs. 11 +/- 4.1; P < 0.00001). Among patients with PD, Hcy levels were higher in 
the PDD group compared to the PDnD group (20.7 micromol/L +/- 12.1 vs. 15.8 +/- 
8.5; P = 0.002). In a multivariate logistic regression model, higher Hcy levels 
[Odds ratios comparing the top (>18.9 micromol/L) with the bottom tertile (<12.4 
micromol/L): 3.68; 95% CI: 1.14-11.83] were significantly associated with 
dementia. These data support the association between elevated Hcy levels and the 
presence of dementia in PD.

(c) 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22511
PMID: 19353704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2068. Mini Rev Med Chem. 2009 Apr;9(4):448-62. doi: 10.2174/138955709787847921.

Endocannabinoid system: emerging role from neurodevelopment to 
neurodegeneration.

Basavarajappa BS(1), Nixon RA, Arancio O.

Author information:
(1)Center for Dementia Research, Nathan Kline Institute for Psychiatric 
Research, 140 Old Orangeburg Rd, Orangeburg, NY 10962, USA. 
Basavaraj@nki.rfmh.org

The endocannabinoid system, including endogenous ligands ('endocannabinoids' 
ECs), their receptors, synthesizing and degrading enzymes, as well as 
transporter molecules, has been detected from the earliest stages of embryonic 
development and throughout pre- and postnatal development. ECs are bioactive 
lipids, which comprise amides, esters and ethers of long chain polyunsaturated 
fatty acids. Anandamide (N-arachidonoylethanolamine; AEA) and 
2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) are the best studied ECs, and act as agonists of 
cannabinoid receptors. Thus, AEA and 2-AG mimic several pharmacological effects 
of the exogenous cannabinoid delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (Delta(9)-THC), the 
psychoactive principle of cannabis sativa preparations like hashish and 
marijuana. Recently, however, several lines of evidence have suggested that the 
EC system may play an important role in early neuronal development as well as a 
widespread role in neurodegeneration disorders. Many of the effects of 
cannabinoids and ECs are mediated by two G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs), 
CB1 and CB2, although additional receptors may be implicated. Both CB1 and CB2 
couple primarily to inhibitory G proteins and are subject to the same 
pharmacological influences as other GPCRs. This new system is briefly presented 
in this review, in order to put in a better perspective the role of the EC 
pathway from neurodevelopment to neurodegenerative disorders, like Alzheimer's 
disease, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and multiple sclerosis. In 
addition, the potential exploitation of antagonists of CB1 receptors, or of 
inhibitors of EC metabolism, as next-generation therapeutics is discussed.

DOI: 10.2174/138955709787847921
PMCID: PMC4739730
PMID: 19356123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2069. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;17(3):519-29. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1070.

Epidemilogical trends strongly suggest exposures as etiologic agents in the 
pathogenesis of sporadic Alzheimer's disease, diabetes mellitus, and 
non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.

de la Monte SM(1), Neusner A, Chu J, Lawton M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School 
of Brown University, Providence, RI 02903, USA. Suzanne_DeLaMonte_MD@brown.edu

Comment in
    J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;21(1):67-70; discussion 71-3.

Nitrosamines mediate their mutagenic effects by causing DNA damage, oxidative 
stress, lipid peroxidation, and pro-inflammatory cytokine activation, which lead 
to increased cellular degeneration and death. However, the very same 
pathophysiological processes comprise the "unbuilding" blocks of aging and 
insulin-resistance diseases including, neurodegeneration, diabetes mellitus 
(DM), and non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). Previous studies demonstrated 
that experimental exposure to streptozotocin, a nitrosamine-related compound, 
causes NASH, and diabetes mellitus Types 1, 2 and 3 (Alzheimer (AD)-type 
neurodegeneration). Herein, we review evidence that the upwardly spiraling 
trends in mortality rates due to DM, AD, and Parkinson's disease typify exposure 
rather than genetic-based disease models, and parallel the progressive increases 
in human exposure to nitrates, nitrites, and nitrosamines via 
processed/preserved foods. We propose that such chronic exposures have critical 
roles in the pathogenesis of our insulin resistance disease pandemic. Potential 
solutions include: 1) eliminating the use of nitrites in food; 2) reducing 
nitrate levels in fertilizer and water used to irrigate crops; and 3) employing 
safe and effective measures to detoxify food and water prior to human 
consumption. Future research efforts should focus on refining our ability to 
detect and monitor human exposures to nitrosamines and assess early evidence of 
nitrosamine-mediated tissue injury and insulin resistance.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1070
PMCID: PMC4551511
PMID: 19363256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2070. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2009 May;11(3):179-85. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-009-0021-9.

Corticobasal degeneration.

Reich SG(1), Grill SE.

Author information:
(1)Stephen G. Reich, MD Department of Neurology, The University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, 22 South Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. 
sreich@som.umaryland.edu.

Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized 
clinically by a combination of cortical and basal ganglia signs. Pathologically, 
it is classified as a tauopathy. The most distinctive clinical feature is its 
unilateral or markedly asymmetric presentation; among parkinsonian syndromes, 
with rare exceptions, only Parkinson's disease presents with such asymmetry. The 
most common presenting cortical features include apraxia (patients often 
complain of a "useless" limb), aphasia (usually nonfluent), parietal lobe 
sensory signs (agraphesthesia, extinction, astereognosis), frontal dementia, or 
myoclonus. Basal ganglia signs include rigidity, akinesia, limb dystonia, and 
postural instability. The diagnosis is often challenging for three reasons: 1) 
The full complement of findings are rarely seen at presentation; 2) If CBD is 
not suspected, subtle but relevant findings (eg, extinction, language 
impairment, myoclonus, or apraxia) may not be searched for or appreciated; 3) 
The clinical picture of CBD has substantial overlap with a variety of other 
parkinsonian and dementing illnesses. The differential diagnosis includes 
Parkinson's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, frontotemporal dementia, 
primary progressive aphasia, and Alzheimer's disease. The clinical diagnosis is 
not confirmed pathologically in up to half of cases, so the term corticobasal 
syndrome is often preferred during life, reserving the term corticobasal 
degeneration for pathologically verified cases. Treatment of CBD is primarily 
supportive, and most patients die within 10 years of onset. Parkinsonian signs 
may improve to a modest degree with levodopa, clonazepam can suppress myoclonus, 
and botulinum toxin can relieve dystonia. Early speech therapy, physical 
therapy, and occupational therapy, as well as assist devices such as a rolling 
walker may improve functioning and reduce complications such as aspiration 
pneumonia and falls. With time, however, most patients lose their independence 
and mobility. Throughout the course of the illness (particularly when it is 
advanced), caring for the caregiver is as important as caring for the patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-009-0021-9
PMID: 19364452


2071. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2009 May;11(3):186-90. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-009-0022-8.

Fatigue in Parkinson's disease patients.

Friedman JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Joseph H. Friedman, MD Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, 
NeuroHealth, 227 Centerville Road, Warwick, RI 02886, USA. 
joseph_friedman@brown.edu.

Nonmotor features of Parkinson's disease (PD) have only recently been getting 
the attention they deserve. Dementia, depression, and psychosis are often more 
devastating than motor dysfunction. Fatigue affects about half of all PD 
patients and has a major impact on quality of life. Fatigue is the single most 
important reason cited for medical disability insurance claims by PD patients in 
the United States. PD patients suffer from both physical and mental fatigue, 
described as both qualitatively and quantitatively different from the fatigue 
experienced prior to disease onset. Although fatigue is an early symptom and may 
be associated with depression, most PD patients with fatigue are not depressed. 
It is not associated with motor dysfunction but seems to worsen with disease 
progression. No physiologic differences have been found between fatigued and 
nonfatigued PD patients. The mechanism of fatigue in PD is unknown. It does not 
respond to treatment of the motor symptoms. Unlike physical fatigue in normal 
patients, PD patients often report that their fatigue improves with exercise. No 
treatment is known to be effective. Methylphenidate was reported to be 
beneficial in one study, whereas modafinil was not. My own approach to treating 
fatigue is to look first for other causes that may be treatable, such as sleep 
dysfunction, depression, or medical disorders. If one is not found, or if it is 
not treatable, I then institute a course of a low-dose stimulant if there is no 
cardiac or psychiatric contraindication. I use either amphetamine salts 
(starting at 10 mg), or methylphenidate (5 mg) taken in the morning and early 
afternoon, and increased weekly by one dose in the morning or afternoon. Some 
patients may take their doses unevenly, with more or less for the morning dose. 
Patients who tend to go to bed late at night may take their doses three times 
daily.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-009-0022-8
PMID: 19364453


2072. Neuroepidemiology. 2009;33(1):41-6. doi: 10.1159/000211952. Epub 2009 Apr 8.

Factor analysis of motor and nonmotor signs in essential tremor: are these signs 
all part of the same underlying pathogenic process?

Louis ED(1).

Author information:
(1)GH Sergievsky Center, Department of Neurology, Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

Essential tremor (ET) has traditionally been viewed as monosymptomatic. However, 
there is an emerging appreciation of an expanded number of motor manifestations 
as well as a new awareness of nonmotor manifestations. The current goal, through 
factor analyses, was to determine how these diverse signs relate to one another 
and shed light on their pathogenic bases. One hundred and thirty-eight ET 
patients had detailed neurological examinations. In these analyses, three 
separate factors emerged, explaining 58.7% of the variance. Factor I was 
comprised of the hallmark feature of ET, action tremor. It also included 
intention tremor, which is generally viewed as a sign of cerebellar dysfunction, 
and tremor duration. Factor II was comprised of cognitive test scores and age, 
and factor III, of rest tremor. Cognitive test scores did not fall into the same 
domain as motor features or tremor duration. These results suggest that: (1) the 
process that underlies cognitive dysfunction in ET is distinct from that which 
is responsible for action and intention tremors and their progression over time, 
and (2) cognitive dysfunction in ET is not likely due to cerebellar 
degeneration. Age loaded with cognitive test scores, further raising the 
possibility that age-related processes (e.g. Alzheimer-type changes) could 
underlie cognitive changes in ET.

(c) 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000211952
PMCID: PMC2684569
PMID: 19365141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2073. Int Psychogeriatr. 2009 Jun;21(3):440-53. doi: 10.1017/S1041610209009065. Epub 
2009 Apr 16.

Dementia and suicidal behavior: a review of the literature.

Haw C(1), Harwood D, Hawton K.

Author information:
(1)St Andrew's Hospital, Northampton, UK. chaw@standrew.co.uk

BACKGROUND: While dementia is more common in older people and suicide rates in 
many countries are higher among the elderly, there is some doubt about the 
association between these two phenomena.
METHODS: A search of the major relevant databases was carried out to examine the 
evidence for this possible association.
RESULTS: The association between dementia and suicide and also non-fatal 
self-harm did not appear strong but many studies have significant methodological 
limitations and there are few studies of suicide or self-harm in vascular, 
frontotemporal, Lewy body and HIV dementia where such behavior might be expected 
to be more common. Rates of self-harm may be increased in mild dementia and are 
higher before than after predictive testing for Huntington's disease. Overall, 
the risk of suicide in dementia appears to be the same or less than that of the 
age-matched general population but is increased soon after diagnosis, in 
patients diagnosed with dementia during hospitalization and in Huntington's 
disease. Putative risk factors for suicide in dementia include depression, 
hopelessness, mild cognitive impairment, preserved insight, younger age and 
failure to respond to anti-dementia drugs. Large, good quality prospective 
studies are needed to confirm these findings.
CONCLUSIONS: Further research should be undertaken to examine how rates of 
suicide and self-harm change during the course of the illness and vary according 
to the specific sub-type of dementia.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610209009065
PMID: 19368760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2074. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 May;80(5):562-5. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.151654.

Twin pairs discordant for neuropathologically confirmed Lewy body dementia.

Wang CS(1), Burke JR, Steffens DC, Hulette CM, Breitner JC, Plassman BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Tainan Hospital, Department of Health, Taiwan.

AIM: Little is known about the concordance rate in twins for dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB). The rate of agreement between clinical and pathological diagnoses 
for DLB is typically low, necessitating confirmation of the diagnosis 
neuropathologically.
METHODS: Participants were 17 twin pairs enrolled in the Duke Twins Study of 
Memory in Aging in which at least one member of the pair had an autopsy 
confirmed diagnosis of DLB, Alzheimer's disease (AD) with Lewy bodies or 
frontotemporal dementia with Lewy bodies. The characteristics of those with 
dementia were assessed and rates of concordance for pathological confirmed 
dementia were examined.
RESULTS: Four monozygotic twin pairs had a proband with neuropathologically 
confirmed pure DLB; all remained discordant for dementia for periods up to 16 
years or more. Five of 13 pairs in which the proband had AD plus DLB were 
concordant for dementia but only one pair was concordant for AD plus DLB, while 
the co-twins in the other four pairs had other types of dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study indicates that even among twins, a diagnosis of 
DLB in one twin does not predict the same diagnosis in the other twin. 
Neuropathological discordance in type of dementia among monozygotic pairs hints 
at environmental or epigenetic factors playing a role in Lewy body pathology.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.151654
PMCID: PMC2758029
PMID: 19372291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors have any conflicts of 
interest to report.


2075. Brain Nerve. 2009 Apr;61(4):464-72.

[Pharmacologic treatment of Parkinson disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Murata M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Center Hospital of Neurology & Psychiatry, 
4-1-1 Ogawahigashi-machi, Kodaira-shi, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.

In this paper, I have discussed a modification in the current treatment strategy 
for Parkinson disease (PD) and the application of a new drug, zonisamide, for 
the treatment of PD. At the beginning of the 21st century, the following views 
were held strongly regarding the treatment of PD (1) L-dopa may be toxic, (2) 
dopamine agonist may exert neuroprotective effects, (3) dopamine agonists should 
be used as the initial treatment for parkinsonian patients without dementia or 
psychosis. However, the paradigm has now been modified to state (1) L-dopa does 
not accelerate disease progression, (2) no treatment modality exerts 
neuroprotective effects, (3) L-dopa is more effective than dopamine agonists in 
alleviating motor symptoms and improving the activities of daily living (ADL) 
score, in parkinsonian patients. Treatment with dopamine agonist is associated 
with fewer motor complications than L-dopa. Dopamine agonist therapy is 
associated with more frequent adverse events than L-dopa therapy, such as 
hallucinations and somnolence. There is no evidence of a long-term benefit with 
initial dopamine agonist therapy. Therefore, the treatment should be determined 
on a case-by-case basis. Furthermore, some clinical trials have indicated that 
early dopaminergic support for the degenerating dopaminergic system offers 
significant long-term clinical benefits for parkinsoninan patients. Zonisamide 
(25-50mg/day) improves motor functions and wearing-off without worsening 
dyskinesia in advanced cases of Parkinson disease. Furthermore, zonisamide 
affects an increases in the levels of glutathione and manganese superoxide 
dismutase expression and, it ameliorates reduction in the number of dopaminergic 
neurons in mice treated with 6hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA). Zonisamide may exert 
neuroprotective effects in parkinsonian patients.

PMID: 19378816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2076. Biogerontology. 2009 Aug;10(4):377-413. doi: 10.1007/s10522-009-9226-2. Epub 
2009 Apr 21.

A metabolic and functional overview of brain aging linked to neurological 
disorders.

Baquer NZ(1), Taha A, Kumar P, McLean P, Cowsik SM, Kale RK, Singh R, Sharma D.

Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Jawaharlal Nehru University, New Delhi, India. 
nzbaquer@gmail.com

Close correlations have recently been shown among the late onset complications 
encountered in diabetes and aging linked to neurobiological disorders. Aging in 
females and males is considered as the end of natural protection against age 
related diseases like osteoporosis, coronary heart disease, diabetes, 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, dementia, cognitive dysfunction and 
hypernatremia. Beside the sex hormones other hormonal changes are also known to 
occur during aging and many common problems encountered in the aging process can 
be related to neuroendocrine phenomena. Diabetes mellitus is associated with 
moderate cognitive deficits and neurophysiologic and structural changes in the 
brain, a condition that may be referred to as diabetes encephalopathy; diabetes 
increases the risk of dementia especially in the elderly. The current view is 
that the diabetic brain features many symptoms that are best described as 
accelerated brain aging. This review presents and compares biochemical, 
physiological, electrophysiological, molecular, and pathological data from 
neuronal tissue of aging and hormone treated control and diabetic animals to 
arrive at the similarities among the two naturally occuring physiological 
conditions. Animal models can make a substantial contribution to understanding 
of the pathogenesis, which share many features with mechanism underlying brain 
aging. By studying the pathogenesis, targets for pharmacology can be identified, 
finally leading to delay or prevention of these complications. Antiaging 
strategies using hormone therapy, chemical and herbal compounds were carried out 
for reversal of aging effects. Neuronal markers have been presented in this 
review and similarities in changes were seen among the aging, diabetes and 
hormone treated (estrogen, DHEA and insulin) brains from these animals. A close 
correlation was observed in parameters like oxidative stress, enzyme changes, 
and pathological changes like lipofuscin accumulation in aging and diabetic 
brain.

DOI: 10.1007/s10522-009-9226-2
PMID: 19381858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2077. Gerontologist. 2009 Jun;49(3):378-87. doi: 10.1093/geront/gnp046. Epub 2009 Apr 
22.

Optimism, pessimism, mutuality, and gender: predicting 10-year role strain in 
Parkinson's disease spouses.

Lyons KS(1), Stewart BJ, Archbold PG, Carter JH.

Author information:
(1)Oregon Health & Science University, SN-ORD, Portland, OR 97239-2941, USA. 
lyonsk@ohsu.edu

PURPOSE: There is wide variability in how spouses providing care respond to 
their care situations. Few studies focus on the roles of both intra- and 
interpersonal factors in long-term spousal care, particularly in the context of 
Parkinson's disease (PD). The current study uses longitudinal data over a 
10-year period to examine the roles of optimism, pessimism, mutuality, and 
spouse gender in predicting role strain in PD spouses.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A longitudinal design was used to study 255 spouses of 
persons with PD over a 10-year period, with data points at baseline (Year 0), 
Year 2, and Year 10. A series of multilevel models were used to examine four 
role strain variables -- global strain, strain from worry, strain from feelings 
of being manipulated, and strain from increased tension.
RESULTS: Female spouse gender predicted both higher Year 10 role strain and 
faster increases in role strain over the 10-year period. In addition, high 
mutuality and optimism and low pessimism at baseline played important protective 
roles against increased role strain at Year 10.
IMPLICATIONS: This study focused on early-stage spousal care in a primarily 
physical disability context. Findings suggest that gender differences place 
wives at greater risk for negative outcomes, even in the absence of dementia. 
Additionally, clinicians have opportunities to target interventions early in the 
care trajectory based on intra- and interpersonal risk factors.

DOI: 10.1093/geront/gnp046
PMID: 19386827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2078. Neuropathology. 2009 Dec;29(6):697-703. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2009.01003.x. 
Epub 2009 Mar 3.

An autopsy case of diffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcification: early 
stage pathologic findings.

Iwasaki Y(1), Ito M, Mori K, Deguchi A, Nagaoka M, Yoshida M, Hashizume Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oyamada Memorial Spa Hospital, Yokkaichi, Japan. 
iwasaki@sc4.so-net.ne.jp

A 66-year-old man with no medically remarkable past or family history gradually 
showed personality changes, memory disturbance, sleeplessness and abnormal 
behavior. Neurologic examination showed no focal signs and neither parkinsonism 
nor cerebellar ataxia was recognized. He died 4 years after the onset of 
dementia due to chronic renal failure. Neuropathologic examination revealed 
neuronal loss and gliosis in the temporal cortex, particularly in the subiculum, 
parahippocampal gyrus and entorhinal cortex, and insular cortex. NFTs were 
observed to be widespread in the cerebral cortex, especially the temporal cortex 
and brainstem, while senile plaques were not observed. Gallyas-Braak silver 
staining revealed the presence of numerous NFTs, glial inclusions and neuropil 
threads throughout the cerebral neocortex, limbic system, hippocampus and 
brainstem. The subiculum showed the most severe involvement; severe atrophy, 
severe neuron loss, and numerous ghost tangles (extracellular NFTs) were 
apparent. Although NFTs contained both monoclonal anti-3repeat-tau antibody 
(RD3) and RD4 immunoreactivity, this differed between the intracellular NFTs and 
ghost tangles. RD3 immunoreactivity was mainly observed in ghost tangles and 
neuropil threads, whereas RD4 immunoreactivity was mainly observed in 
intracellular NFTs and glial inclusions. Calcification was also found to be 
widespread in the cerebral cortex and white matter, basal ganglia, thalamus, 
cerebellar cortex, white matter and dentate nucleus. These characteristic 
neuropathologic findings lead to the pathologic diagnosis of diffuse 
neurofibrillary tangles with calcification (DNTC). It is argued that this 
patient showed early stage pathologic signs of DNTC due to a short disease 
duration, which may provide clues regarding the progression of this rare 
disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2009.01003.x
PMID: 19389080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2079. Int J Mol Sci. 2009 Mar;10(3):1226-60. doi: 10.3390/ijms10031226. Epub 2009 Mar 
17.

Physiological and pathological role of alpha-synuclein in Parkinson's disease 
through iron mediated oxidative stress; the role of a putative iron-responsive 
element.

Olivares D(1), Huang X, Branden L, Greig NH, Rogers JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry-Neuroscience, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Charlestown, 02129, USA. david2177@hotmail.com 
<david2177@hotmail.com>

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common progressive neurodegenerative 
disorder after Alzheimer's disease (AD) and represents a large health burden to 
society. Genetic and oxidative risk factors have been proposed as possible 
causes, but their relative contribution remains unclear. Dysfunction of 
alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) has been associated with PD due to its increased 
presence, together with iron, in Lewy bodies. Brain oxidative damage caused by 
iron may be partly mediated by alpha-syn oligomerization during PD pathology. 
Also, alpha-syn gene dosage can cause familial PD and inhibition of its gene 
expression by blocking translation via a newly identified Iron Responsive 
Element-like RNA sequence in its 5'-untranslated region may provide a new PD 
drug target.

DOI: 10.3390/ijms10031226
PMCID: PMC2672027
PMID: 19399246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2080. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2009 May;15(3):426-37. doi: 10.1017/S1355617709090614.

Cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease: a prospective longitudinal study.

Muslimović D(1), Post B, Speelman JD, De Haan RJ, Schmand B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Centre, University of Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. dinomuslimovic@hotmail.com

This controlled prospective study examined the evolution and predictors of 
cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease (PD). Consecutive patients diagnosed at 
baseline with PD (n = 89), established PD (EPD) patients (n = 52) with a mean 
disease duration of 6.5 years, and healthy control subjects (n = 64) underwent 
extensive neuropsychological assessment twice, approximately 3 years apart. A 
standardized regression-based method, normative data, and multivariate normative 
comparisons were used to assess the cognitive course of PD. Cognitive 
performance of newly diagnosed patients decreased significantly over time, 
particularly on measures of psychomotor speed and attention and to a lesser 
extent on tests of memory, visuospatial skills, and executive functions. About 
50% of the patients showed cognitive decline and 9% developed dementia. Similar 
results were observed in EPD patients. None of the baseline features predicted 
cognitive change in newly diagnosed patients, whereas age at disease onset and 
axial impairment (postural and gait disorders) contributed to decline in 
established patients. We conclude that within few years after diagnosis, PD 
patients show faster rate of cognitive decline than matched healthy subjects, 
particularly in domains of attention and psychomotor speed. Selection bias 
probably led to underestimation of the true extent of cognitive decline in 
established patients.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617709090614
PMID: 19402929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2081. Expert Rev Clin Pharmacol. 2009 May;2(3):231-8. doi: 10.1586/ecp.09.7.

Neramexane: a moderate-affinity NMDA receptor channel blocker: new prospects and 
indications.

Rammes G(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Clinical Neuropharmacology, 
Kraepelinstraße 2, 80804 München, Germany and Klinik rechts der Isar, Department 
of Anaesthesiology, Technische Universität, 81675 Munich, Germany. 
rammes@mpipsykl.mpg.de.

N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists have a potentially wide range 
of therapeutic applications. Unfortunately, potent NMDA receptor channel 
blockers produce phencyclidine-like psychotropic symptoms in humans and rodents, 
and thereby produce numerous side effects. However, recent data indicate that 
moderate-affinity, voltage-dependent, open-channel blockers, such as memantine 
and neramexane (MRZ 2/579) are useful therapeutics as they prevent the 
pathological activation of NMDA receptors but allow their physiological activity 
and should prove to be useful therapeutics in a wide range of CNS disorders. 
Indeed, memantine was recently registered in both Europe and the USA for the 
treatment of moderate-to-severe Alzheimer's disease (AD). Neramexane is under 
development as a potential neuroprotectant against various CNS disorders. 
Although the predicted therapeutic doses of neramexane were very well tolerated 
in male volunteers, unfortunately, recent Phase II/III clinical trials for 
moderate-to-severe AD delivered contradictory results. Neramexane also failed in 
a recent randomized controlled Phase II trial against drug abuse and depression. 
Although Phase Ib clinical trials for the indications of chronic pain showed 
positive results, Phase II results indicate no superiority to existing 
treatments. However, positive study results have been presented recently in a 
Phase IIb study on the treatment of tinnitus. A Phase III study for this 
indication is presently ongoing. Another promising application for neramexane as 
a neuroprotectant might be chronic neurodegeneration, such as Parkinson's 
disease, Huntington's disease, vascular dementia, frontal lobe dementia, Down's 
syndrome and AD.

DOI: 10.1586/ecp.09.7
PMID: 24410702


2082. Neurologia. 2009 Apr;24(3):170-6.

[Diagnostic value of cardiac 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) 
scintigraphy in Lewy body disorders].

[Article in Spanish]

Escamilla-Sevilla F(1), Pérez-Navarro MJ, Muñoz-Pasadas M, Ortega-Léon T, 
Gallego-Peinado M, Cabello-García D, Gómez Río M, Ortega-Moreno A, Carnero-Pardo 
C, Rebollo-Aguirre AC, Mínguez-Castellanos A.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves, Granada.

INTRODUCTION: Lewy body disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD) and Lewy body 
dementia (LBD) are associated with cardiac sympathetic denervation, which can be 
visualized on 123I-MIBG scintigraphy. Our objectives were to study the 
diagnostic value of this technique in Lewy body disorders and its relationship 
with PD clinical variables.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied 90 patients: 51 with PD, 19 with LBD, 9 with 
multiple system atrophy (MSA) and 11 controls. Scintigraphy images were 
qualitatively evaluated and early and delayed heart-to-mediastinum ratios (HMR) 
were calculated. The main confounding factors (ischemic heart disease, diabetes, 
hypertension and drugs) were controlled by multivariate linear regression 
analysis. We investigated correlations between scintigraphy variables and PD 
variables.
RESULTS: The delayed HMR, which showed better discriminative ability was 2.03 
+/- 0.32 in controls, 1.37 +/- 0.30 in PD (p<0.001 vs controls), 1.47+/-0.45 in 
LBD (p=0.001 vs controls) and 1.69+/-0.28 in MSA (p=0.02 vs controls; p=0.004 vs 
PD). This ratio was influenced by PD/LBD diagnosis (beta= -0.638; p<0.001) and 
to a lesser degree, by ischemic heart disease (beta= -0.244; p=0.028). Optimal 
cut-off value between PD/LBD and controls was 1.71 (83% sensitivity and 82% 
specificity). Within the PD group, those with a family history of PD/LB showed 
higher delayed HMR values (1.65+/-0.34 vs 1.30+/-0.24 without history; p<0.001) 
and proportion with normal scintigraphy (56% vs 5%; p=0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac 123I-MIBG scintigraphy is useful in the diagnosis of Lewy 
body disorders, although its value in PD is conditioned by having a family 
history of PD.

PMID: 19418293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2083. J Neurosci. 2009 May 6;29(18):5758-67. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0780-09.2009.

Axonal stress kinase activation and tau misbehavior induced by kinesin-1 
transport defects.

Falzone TL(1), Stokin GB, Lillo C, Rodrigues EM, Westerman EL, Williams DS, 
Goldstein LS.

Author information:
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Cellular and Molecular 
Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Many neurodegenerative diseases exhibit axonal pathology, transport defects, and 
aberrant phosphorylation and aggregation of the microtubule binding protein tau. 
While mutant tau protein in frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP17) causes aberrant microtubule binding and assembly of tau 
into filaments, the pathways leading to tau-mediated neurotoxicity in 
Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders in which tau protein 
is not genetically modified remain unknown. To test the hypothesis that axonal 
transport defects alone can cause pathological abnormalities in tau protein and 
neurodegeneration in the absence of mutant tau or amyloid beta deposits, we 
induced transport defects by deletion of the kinesin light chain 1 (KLC1) 
subunit of the anterograde motor kinesin-1. We found that upon aging, early 
selective axonal transport defects in mice lacking the KLC1 protein (KLC1-/-) 
led to axonopathies with cytoskeletal disorganization and abnormal cargo 
accumulation. In addition, increased c-jun N-terminal stress kinase activation 
colocalized with aberrant tau in dystrophic axons. Surprisingly, swollen 
dystrophic axons exhibited abnormal tau hyperphosphorylation and accumulation. 
Thus, directly interfering with axonal transport is sufficient to activate 
stress kinase pathways initiating a biochemical cascade that drives normal tau 
protein into a pathological state found in a variety of neurodegenerative 
disorders including Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0780-09.2009
PMCID: PMC3849468
PMID: 19420244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2084. Mov Disord. 2009 Aug 15;24(11):1571-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.22538.

The association between mutations in the lysosomal protein glucocerebrosidase 
and parkinsonism.

DePaolo J(1), Goker-Alpan O, Samaddar T, Lopez G, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, NHGRI, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-3708, USA.

A body of work has emerged over the past decade demonstrating a relationship 
between mutations in glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA), the gene implicated in 
Gaucher disease (GD), and the development of parkinsonism. Several different 
lines of research support this relationship. First, patients with GD who are 
homozygous for mutations in GBA have a higher than expected propensity to 
develop Parkinson's disease (PD). Furthermore, carriers of GBA mutations, 
particularly family members of patients with GD, have displayed an increased 
rate of parkinsonism. Subsequently, investigators from centers around the world 
screened cohorts of patients with parkinsonism for GBA mutations and found that 
overall, subjects with PD, as well as other Lewy body disorders, have at least a 
fivefold increase in the number of carriers of GBA mutations as compared to 
age-matched controls. In addition, neuropathologic studies of subjects with 
parkinsonism carrying GBA mutations demonstrate Lewy bodies, depletion of 
neurons of the substantia nigra, and involvement of hippocampal layers CA2-4. 
Although the basis for this association has yet to be elucidated, evidence 
continues to support the role of GBA as a PD risk factor across different 
centers, synucleinopathies, and ethnicities. Further studies of the association 
between GD and parkinsonism will stimulate new insights into the pathophysiology 
of the two disorders and will prove crucial for both genetic counseling of 
patients and family members and the design of relevant therapeutic strategies 
for specific patients with parkinsonism.

2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22538
PMCID: PMC2736332
PMID: 19425057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2085. Neuropsychologia. 2009 Jul;47(8-9):1901-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.034. Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Decision making under risk and under ambiguity in Parkinson's disease.

Delazer M(1), Sinz H, Zamarian L, Stockner H, Seppi K, Wenning GK, Benke T, 
Poewe W.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, 
Austria. margarete.delazer@i-med.ac.at

In the present study we investigate decision making under ambiguity and decision 
making under risk in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients without cognitive 
impairment and in patients affected by Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). In 
decisions under ambiguity, participants are not aware of the rules for gains and 
losses and have to learn about the utility of their selections through feedback. 
The two patient groups showed significant deficits and did not differ in the 
frequency of advantageous choices, though they had a markedly different 
cognitive profile. In decisions under risk, explicit information on the options' 
probabilities as well as on the associated gains and losses is given. PD 
patients and healthy controls performed at the same level, whereas PDD patients 
made significantly more risky and disadvantageous decisions. Results of the 
study suggest that both patient groups are impaired in decision making when 
learning by feedback and emotional processing is required, while only the PDD 
group shows difficulties when decision making is based on cognitive reasoning 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2009.02.034
PMID: 19428422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2086. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Mar 27;453(1):36-40. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.02.003. Epub 
2009 Feb 7.

Peripheral blood mononuclear cells from mild cognitive impairment patients show 
deregulation of Bax and Sod1 mRNAs.

Gatta L(1), Cardinale A, Wannenes F, Consoli C, Armani A, Molinari F, Mammi C, 
Stocchi F, Torti M, Rosano GM, Fini M.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Via dei Bonacolsi 81, Rome, Italy. 
lucia.gatta@sanraffaele.it

Elevated oxidative stress-induced apoptosis has been found in peripheral cells 
from patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). Furthermore, treatment of 
lymphocytes from AD patients, with Abeta(1-42) and H(2)O(2) results in enhanced 
apoptosis. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a clinical condition between normal 
aging and AD, shares with AD a similar pattern of peripheral markers of 
oxidative stress. In this study we investigated spontaneous and H(2)O(2)-induced 
oxidative stress and apoptosis levels in peripheral blood mononuclear cells 
(PBMCs) from MCI and AD patients, as well as from Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients without cognitive impairment or age-matched healthy control. Sod1 mRNA 
levels were studied to analyse the anti-oxidative pathway, while Bax and Bcl-2 
mRNAs levels and PARP protein cleavage were monitored to study apoptosis. We 
found that the expression of Sod1 and Bax mRNAs was statistically higher in both 
MCI and AD patients compared to controls or PD subjects. Since Bcl-2 mRNA level 
was not different among groups, the Bax/Bcl-2 ratio was statistically higher in 
AD and MCI patients. PARP cleavage was also enhanced in PBMCs from MCI and AD 
individuals and this finding was associated with a higher level of spontaneous 
apoptosis. Interestingly, exposure to H(2)O(2) induced a significant decrease of 
Bcl-2 mRNA transcript, while Sod1 and Bax mRNAs levels were unchanged in PBMCs 
derived from MCI and AD patients. In conclusion, our results show that Bax and 
Sod1 mRNA levels are altered in PBMCs from both MCI and AD patients and indicate 
these changes as potential biomarkers in the early diagnosis of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2009.02.003
PMID: 19429011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2087. PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5521. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005521. Epub 2009 May 13.

Incidence and prediction of falls in dementia: a prospective study in older 
people.

Allan LM(1), Ballard CG, Rowan EN, Kenny RA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. louise.allan@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Falls are a major cause of morbidity and mortality in dementia, but 
there have been no prospective studies of risk factors for falling specific to 
this patient population, and no successful falls intervention/prevention trials. 
This prospective study aimed to identify modifiable risk factors for falling in 
older people with mild to moderate dementia.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: 179 participants aged over 65 years were recruited from 
outpatient clinics in the UK (38 Alzheimer's disease (AD), 32 Vascular dementia 
(VAD), 30 Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 40 Parkinson's disease with dementia 
(PDD), 39 healthy controls). A multifactorial assessment of baseline risk 
factors was performed and fall diaries were completed prospectively for 12 
months. Dementia participants experienced nearly 8 times more incident falls 
(9118/1000 person-years) than controls (1023/1000 person-years; incidence 
density ratio: 7.58, 3.11-18.5). In dementia, significant univariate predictors 
of sustaining at least one fall included diagnosis of Lewy body disorder 
(proportional hazard ratio (HR) adjusted for age and sex: 3.33, 2.11-5.26), and 
history of falls in the preceding 12 months (HR: 2.52, 1.52-4.17). In 
multivariate analyses, significant potentially modifiable predictors were 
symptomatic orthostatic hypotension (HR: 2.13, 1.19-3.80), autonomic symptom 
score (HR per point 0-36: 1.055, 1.012-1.099), and Cornell depression score (HR 
per point 0-40: 1.053, 1.01-1.099). Higher levels of physical activity were 
protective (HR per point 0-9: 0.827, 0.716-0.956).
CONCLUSIONS: The management of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension, autonomic 
symptoms and depression, and the encouragement of physical activity may provide 
the core elements for the most fruitful strategy to reduce falls in people with 
dementia. Randomised controlled trials to assess such a strategy are a priority.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005521
PMCID: PMC2677107
PMID: 19436724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2088. PLoS One. 2009;4(5):e5566. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005566. Epub 2009 May 15.

The role of intrinsically unstructured proteins in neurodegenerative diseases.

Raychaudhuri S(1), Dey S, Bhattacharyya NP, Mukhopadhyay D.

Author information:
(1)Structural Genomics Section, Saha Institute of Nuclear Physics, Kolkata, 
India.

The number and importance of intrinsically disordered proteins (IUP), known to 
be involved in various human disorders, are growing rapidly. To test for the 
generalized implications of intrinsic disorders in proteins involved in 
Neurodegenerative diseases, disorder prediction tools have been applied to three 
datasets comprising of proteins involved in Huntington Disease (HD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD). Results show, in general, proteins in 
disease datasets possess significantly enhanced intrinsic unstructuredness. Most 
of these disordered proteins in the disease datasets are found to be involved in 
neuronal activities, signal transduction, apoptosis, intracellular traffic, cell 
differentiation etc. Also these proteins are found to have more number of 
interactors and hence as the proportion of disorderedness (i.e., the length of 
the unfolded stretch) increased, the size of the interaction network 
simultaneously increased. All these observations reflect that, "Moonlighting" 
i.e. the contextual acquisition of different structural conformations 
(transient), eventually may allow these disordered proteins to act as network 
"hubs" and thus they may have crucial influences in the pathogenecity of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0005566
PMCID: PMC2679209
PMID: 19440375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2089. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Jun;80(6):667-70. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.155895.

Olfactory impairment is more marked in patients with mild dementia with Lewy 
bodies than those with mild Alzheimer disease.

Williams SS(1), Williams J, Combrinck M, Christie S, Smith AD, McShane R.

Author information:
(1)Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire Mental Health Foundation NHS Trust, Dementia 
Programme, Level 4, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Dementia patients with anosmia are more likely to have Lewy body 
pathology at postmortem, but clinicopathological studies have only assessed 
olfaction in moderate dementia or an average of 5 years before death. It is not 
known whether, in patients with mild dementia (MMSE score over 20), olfactory 
function is more impaired in Alzheimer disease (AD) than dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB).
METHODS: Patients with mild DLB (n = 21), mild AD (n = 27), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) (n = 21) and controls (n = 47) were assessed using a 16-item 
olfactory identification test and an olfactory threshold test which used sticks 
impregnated with differing concentrations of butanol.
RESULTS: Patients with mild DLB had impaired olfactory identification ability 
compared with those with mild AD or MCI, independent of age, cognitive function 
and sex. The sensitivity of a cutoff score of seven correct responses out of 16 
was 0.81 for distinguishing mild DLB from mild AD (AUC 0.682). The specificity, 
positive predictive value and negative predictive value for the same cut-off 
score were 0.41, 0.48 and 0.73, respectively. The olfactory threshold was not 
different in the AD and DLB groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Simple bedside tests of olfactory identification merit further 
examination for their potential to improve the identification of patients with 
DLB when used alongside existing criteria. They are insufficiently specific for 
use in screening.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.155895
PMID: 19448090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2090. Mov Disord. 2009 Jul 30;24(10):1437-44. doi: 10.1002/mds.22522.

Homocysteine and cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: a biochemical, 
neuroimaging, and genetic study.

Rodriguez-Oroz MC(1), Lage PM, Sanchez-Mut J, Lamet I, Pagonabarraga J, Toledo 
JB, García-Garcia D, Clavero P, Samaranch L, Irurzun C, Matsubara JM, Irigoien 
J, Bescos E, Kulisevsky J, Pérez-Tur J, Obeso JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Clinic and Medical School of Navarra, 
Pamplona, Spain. mcroroz@unav.es

The role of the plasma level of homocysteine (Hcy), as a primary outcome, and 
the effect of silent cerebrovascular lesions and genetic variants related to Hcy 
metabolism, as secondary outcomes, in the cognitive decline and dementia in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) were studied. This case-control study focused on 89 PD 
patients of minimum 10 years of evolution and older than 60 years, who were 
neuropsychologically classified either as cognitively normal (n = 37), having 
mild cognitive impairment (Petersen criteria) (n = 22), or suffering from 
dementia (DSM-IV) (n = 30), compared with cognitively normal age-matched control 
subjects (n = 30). Plasma levels of Hcy, vitamins B12 and B6, folic acid, 
polymorphisms in genes related to Hcy metabolism (MTHFR, MTR, MTRR, and CBS) and 
silent cerebrovascular events were analyzed. Plasma levels of Hcy were increased 
in PD patients (P = 0.0001). There were no differences between the groups of 
patients. The brain vascular burden was similar among PD groups. There was no 
association between polymorphisms in the studied genes and the Hcy plasma levels 
or cognitive status in PD patients. We found no evidence for a direct 
relationship between Hcy plasma levels and cognitive impairment and dementia in 
PD. No indirect effect through cerebrovascular disease or genetic background was 
found either.

Copyright 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22522
PMID: 19452554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2091. J Neurol. 2009 Oct;256(10):1655-62. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5174-7. Epub 2009 
May 27.

How do cognitive and axial motor signs correlate in Parkinson's disease? A 
6-year prospective study.

Gago MF(1), Garrett MC, Fonseca MR, Rosas MJ, Simões MF, Vieira S, Botelho F.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Faculdade de Medicina da 
Universidade do Porto, Hospital de São João E.P.E, Porto, Portugal. 
miguelfgago@yahoo.com

Impairment of Parkinson's disease (PD) axial motor signs (AMS) has been 
described as a risk factor for dementia. Executive dysfunction is an important 
feature in recently proposed clinical diagnostic criteria for PD dementia. To 
clarify the relationship between AMS progression and executive cognitive 
performance, we conducted a 6-year prospective study in PD patients without AMS 
impairment at baseline. A hospital-based cohort of PD patients (n = 24) without 
dementia, in the initial motor stage (Hoehn-Yahr < or = 2), and matched controls 
(n = 20) were followed prospectively over a 6-year period. Neuropsychological 
tests were performed in both groups, and motor function (including AMS: speech, 
gait, postural instability) was evaluated in the PD group. The PD group had a 
significantly higher decline in neuropsychological test scores than did the 
controls. Most of the neuropsychological and motor decline occurred in the last 
4 years. In UPDRS III, progression of AMS and especially speech were the most 
important motor variables related to dementia. There was a correlation between 
speech impairment progression and declines in MMSE (r = -0.598, p = 0.002), 
Clock Drawing (r = -0.671, p < 0.001), Semantic Verbal Fluency (r = -0.435, p = 
0.034), Alternating Sequences (r = 0.497, p = 0.014), and Raven's Coloured 
Progressive Matrices (r = -0.735, p < 0.001). PD patients with higher speech 
impairment progression showed more rapid declines in some neuropsychological 
tests. Further studies are needed to clarify the different roles of speech, gait 
and postural instability on the initial phases of cognitive dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5174-7
PMID: 19471849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2092. Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr. 2009 Apr;40(2):54-71.

[Category fluency (animals, professions) in normal cognitive ageing and 
dementia].

[Article in Dutch]

Diesfeldt HF(1), van der Elst W, Jolles J.

Author information:
(1)De Stichtse Hof, Vivium zorggroep, Laren NH. h.diesfeldt@vivium.nl

Regression-based normative data for commonly used semantic verbal fluency test 
(VFT) scores were derived from data of the Maastricht Aging Study (N=1,825; age 
range 24-81). Animal naming, profession naming, and the summed score (animal + 
profession naming) were shown to be profoundly affected by demographical 
variables, especially age and educational level. The clinical utility of the 
newly established regression-based VFT norms was evaluated in a large sample of 
psychogeriatric patients (N=1,063, of which n=890 met the criteria for 
Alzheimer's or vascular dementia). Results showed that the animal naming VFT 
score was the most sensitive measure to distinguish normal aging from dementia 
(when the specificities of the various VFT measures were equated). Fifty 
patients were found to commit stuck-in-set perseverations, i.e. they generated 
animal names during test administration of the profession naming VFT. The 
prevalence of stuck-in-set perseveration was 11.3% in Parkinson dementia and 
frontal variant frontotemporal dementia, versus 4.6% and 5.3% in dementia of the 
Alzheimer type and vascular dementia, respectively. Bivariate analyses revealed 
that people who committed stuck-in-set perseverations were more deficient on a 
measure of free recall and on several tests of executive control, such as the 
Expanded Mental Control Test, the Behavioral Dyscontrol Scale and the 
Alternating Graphical Sequences Test as a measure of response inhibition. Using 
multivariate logistic regression analysis, only the Alternating Graphical 
Sequences Test retained an independent effect in the association with 
stuck-in-set perseveration.

PMID: 19472572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2093. Neurology. 2009 Jul 28;73(4):273-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ab2b58. Epub 2009 
May 27.

Mapping of brain acetylcholinesterase alterations in Lewy body disease by PET.

Shimada H(1), Hirano S, Shinotoh H, Aotsuka A, Sato K, Tanaka N, Ota T, Asahina 
M, Fukushi K, Kuwabara S, Hattori T, Suhara T, Irie T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroimaging Group, Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of 
Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1 Anagawa, Inage-ku, Chiba-shi, Chiba 260-8555, 
Japan. BQV10131@nifty.ne.jp

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Jul 28;73(4):256-7.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize brain cholinergic deficits in Parkinson disease (PD), 
PD with dementia (PDD), and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: Participants included 18 patients with PD, 21 patients with PDD/DLB, 
and 26 healthy controls. The PD group consisted of nine patients with early PD, 
each with a disease duration of less than 3 years, five of whom were de novo PD 
patients, and nine patients with advanced PD, each with a disease duration 
greater than or equal to 3 years. The PDD/DLB group consisted of 10 patients 
with PDD and 11 patients with DLB. All subjects underwent PET scans with 
N-[11C]-methyl-4-piperidyl acetate to measure brain acetylcholinesterase (AChE) 
activity. Brain AChE activity levels were estimated voxel-by-voxel in a 
three-compartment analysis using the arterial input function, and compared among 
our subject groups through both voxel-based analysis using the statistical 
parametric mapping software SPM5 and volume-of-interest analysis.
RESULTS: Among patients with PD, AChE activity was significantly decreased in 
the cerebral cortex and especially in the medial occipital cortex (% reduction 
compared with the normal mean = -12%) (false discovery rate-corrected p value 
<0.01). Patients with PDD/DLB, however, had even lower AChE activity in the 
cerebral cortex (% reduction = -27%) (p < 0.01). There was no significant 
difference between early PD and advanced PD groups or between DLB and PDD groups 
in the amount by which regional AChE activity in the brain was reduced.
CONCLUSIONS: Brain cholinergic dysfunction occurs in the cerebral cortex, 
especially in the medial occipital cortex. It begins in early Parkinson disease, 
and is more widespread and profound in both Parkinson disease with dementia and 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ab2b58
PMID: 19474411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2094. Stroke. 2009 Aug;40(8):2709-14. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.542308. Epub 2009 May 
28.

Prevalence and causes of early-onset dementia in Japan: a population-based 
study.

Ikejima C(1), Yasuno F, Mizukami K, Sasaki M, Tanimukai S, Asada T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennoudai, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Few studies are available that have addressed the 
prevalence of early-onset dementia (EOD), including early-onset Alzheimer 
disease and other forms of dementia in Japan.
METHODS: A 2-step postal survey was sent to all of the 2475 institutions 
providing medical or care services for individuals with dementia in Japan's 
Ibaraki prefecture (population, 2 966 000) requesting information on EOD cases. 
Data were then reviewed and collated.
RESULTS: We identified 617 subjects with EOD. The estimated prevalence of EOD in 
the target population was 42.3 per 100 000 (95% CI, 39.4 to 45.4). Of the 
illnesses that cause EOD, vascular dementia was the most frequent (42.5%) 
followed by Alzheimer disease (25.6%), head trauma (7.1%), dementia with Lewy 
bodies/Parkinson disease with dementia (6.2%), frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(2.6%), and other causes (16.0%).
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of EOD in Japan appeared to be similar to that in 
Western countries with the notable exception that vascular dementia was the most 
frequent cause of EOD in Japan.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.108.542308
PMID: 19478230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2095. J Neurodev Disord. 2009 Jun;1(2):114-32. doi: 10.1007/s11689-009-9019-6. Epub 
2009 Jun 16.

The pathophysiology of restricted repetitive behavior.

Lewis M(1), Kim SJ.

Author information:
(1)University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA, marklewis@ufl.edu.

Restricted, repetitive behaviors (RRBs) are heterogeneous ranging from 
stereotypic body movements to rituals to restricted interests. RRBs are most 
strongly associated with autism but occur in a number of other clinical 
disorders as well as in typical development. There does not seem to be a 
category of RRB that is unique or specific to autism and RRB does not seem to be 
robustly correlated with specific cognitive, sensory or motor abnormalities in 
autism. Despite its clinical significance, little is known about the 
pathophysiology of RRB. Both clinical and animal models studies link repetitive 
behaviors to genetic mutations and a number of specific genetic syndromes have 
RRBs as part of the clinical phenotype. Genetic risk factors may interact with 
experiential factors resulting in the extremes in repetitive behavior phenotypic 
expression that characterize autism. Few studies of individuals with autism have 
correlated MRI findings and RRBs and no attempt has been made to associate RRB 
and post-mortem tissue findings. Available clinical and animal models data 
indicate functional and structural alterations in cortical-basal ganglia 
circuitry in the expression of RRB, however. Our own studies point to reduced 
activity of the indirect basal ganglia pathway being associated with high levels 
of repetitive behavior in an animal model. These findings, if generalizable, 
suggest specific therapeutic targets. These, and perhaps other, perturbations to 
cortical basal ganglia circuitry are mediated by specific molecular mechanisms 
(e.g., altered gene expression) that result in long-term, experience-dependent 
neuroadaptations that initiate and maintain repetitive behavior. A great deal 
more research is needed to uncover such mechanisms. Work in areas such as 
substance abuse, OCD, Tourette syndrome, Parkinson's disease, and dementias 
promise to provide findings critical for identifying neurobiological mechanisms 
relevant to RRB in autism. Moreover, basic research in areas such as birdsong, 
habit formation, and procedural learning may provide additional, much needed 
clues. Understanding the pathophysioloy of repetitive behavior will be critical 
to identifying novel therapeutic targets and strategies for individuals with 
autism.

DOI: 10.1007/s11689-009-9019-6
PMCID: PMC3090677
PMID: 21547711


2096. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Aug;35(2):296-301. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.05.014. Epub 2009 
May 27.

No differences of butyrylcholinesterase protein activity and allele frequency in 
Lewy body diseases.

Maetzler W(1), Keller S, Michelis J, Koehler N, Stransky E, Becker C, Schulte C, 
Melms A, Gasser T, Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Center of Neurology, Department of Neurodegeneration and Hertie Institute for 
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tuebingen, Otfried-Müller-Strasse 27, 
Tuebingen D-72076, Germany. walter.maetzler@uni-tuebingen.de

Butyrylcholinesterase (BChE) genotypes and protein (BuChE) activity, especially 
in combination with Apolipoprotein E4 (ApoE4), have been investigated as risk 
factors for developing Alzheimer disease (AD) and may be associated with the 
rate of progression of cognitive decline. Despite similar pathologic (e.g. 
amyloid deposition) and neurochemical (e.g. cholinergic deficits) aspects 
between AD and Lewy body diseases (LBD), scarce data is obtainable about BChE 
genotypes and BuChE activity in LBD. We measured BuChE activity levels in serum 
and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 114 LBD subjects (59 of them were demented) and 
31 elderly controls. We found higher CSF BuChE activity in males compared to 
females, and a negative correlation of serum BuChE activity with age and 
cognitive function. Demented LBD patients, non-demented LBD patients and 
controls did not differ significantly with regard to serum and CSF BuChE 
activity. Furthermore, BChE K variant and ApoE4 allele frequencies were 
determined. The BChE K variant was significantly associated with lower serum 
activity; the same trend was observable in CSF. The subgroups did not differ 
significantly with regard to BChE K/ApoE4 occurrence. These data confirm and 
extend previous results on the relationship between BChE gene and BuChE 
activity, and argue rather against a major impact of BuChE on LBD-associated 
pathologies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.05.014
PMID: 19481150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2097. Prog Neurobiol. 2009 Jun;88(2):89-103. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.02.004. 
Epub 2009 Mar 9.

Early involvement of the cerebral cortex in Parkinson's disease: convergence of 
multiple metabolic defects.

Ferrer I(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei Anatomia Patològica, IDIBELL-Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge, Universitat de Barcelona, Carrer Feixa LLarga sn, 
Hospitalet de LLobregat, CIBERNED, Spain. IsidreFerrer.8082ifa@gmail.com

Parkinson's disease (PD) has been considered a paradigm of degenerative diseases 
of the nervous system characterized by motor impairment (parkinsonism) due to 
malfunction and loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars 
compacta. However, PD is a systemic disease of the nervous system with 
variegated clinical symptoms appearing before parkinsonism and due to the 
involvement of selected nuclei of the medulla oblongata, pons, autonomic nervous 
system and olfactory structures, among others. Furthermore, recent clinical data 
have shown modifications in behavior, personality changes and cognitive 
impairment leading to dementia. Lewy pathology, hallmark of PD, in the cerebral 
cortex does not correlate with cognitive impairment. However, recent studies 
have shown abnormal mitochondria content and function, and increased oxidative 
stress and oxidative responses in the cerebral cortex in PD. Furthermore, 
several key PD-related proteins are oxidatively damaged, including 
alpha-synuclein, beta-synuclein, superoxide dismutases, parkin, DJ1, UCHL1 and 
enzymes involved in glycolysis and energy metabolism. DNA and RNA are also 
targets of oxidative damage. Furthermore, abnormal phosphorylation of 
alpha-synuclein and tau occurs at the cortical synapses. Finally, abnormal 
cortical metabolism has been revealed with neuroimaging methods. These data 
demonstrate early involvement of the cerebral cortex in PD due to the 
convergence of multiple metabolic defects. Lewy pathology is a relative late 
event, geared to isolate unremoved damaged protein, with little significance on 
cortical neurological deficits.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2009.02.004
PMID: 19482226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2098. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Sep 1;18(17):3206-16. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp258. Epub 2009 May 
29.

Parkin promotes intracellular Abeta1-42 clearance.

Burns MP(1), Zhang L, Rebeck GW, Querfurth HW, Moussa CE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Georgetown University School of Medicine, 
Washington, DC 20057, USA.

Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease are common neurodegenerative 
diseases that may share some underlying mechanisms of pathogenesis. Abeta(1-42) 
fragments are found intracellularly, and extracellularly as amyloid plaques, in 
Alzheimer's disease and in dementia with Lewy Bodies. Parkin is an E3-ubiquitin 
ligase involved in proteasomal degradation of intracellular proteins. Mutations 
in parkin, which result in loss of parkin function, lead to early onset 
Parkinsonism. Here we tested whether the ubiquitin ligase activity of parkin 
could lead to reduction in intracellular human Abeta(1-42). Lentiviral 
constructs encoding either human parkin or human Abeta(1-42) were used to infect 
M17 neuroblastoma cells. Parkin expression resulted in reduction of 
intracellular human Abeta(1-42) levels and protected against its toxicity in M17 
cells. Co-injection of lentiviral constructs into control rat primary motor 
cortex demonstrated that parkin co-expression reduced human Abeta(1-42) levels 
and Abeta(1-42)-induced neuronal degeneration in vivo. Parkin increased 
proteasomal activity, and proteasomal inhibition blocked the effects of parkin 
on reducing Abeta(1-42) levels. Incubation of Abeta(1-42) cell lysates with 
ubiquitin, in the presence of parkin, demonstrated the generation of 
Abeta-ubiquitin complexes. These data indicate that parkin promotes 
ubiquitination and proteasomal degradation of intracellular Abeta(1-42) and 
demonstrate a protective effect in neurodegenerative diseases with Abeta 
deposits.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddp258
PMCID: PMC2733820
PMID: 19483198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2099. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 31;284(31):20909-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014472. Epub 
2009 Jun 2.

Phosphorylated Tau interacts with c-Jun N-terminal kinase-interacting protein 1 
(JIP1) in Alzheimer disease.

Ittner LM(1), Ke YD, Götz J.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Camperdown, New South Wales 2050, 
Australia.

In Alzheimer disease (AD) and frontotemporal dementia the microtubule-associated 
protein Tau becomes progressively hyperphosphorylated, eventually forming 
aggregates. However, how Tau dysfunction is associated with functional 
impairment is only partly understood, especially at early stages when Tau is 
mislocalized but has not yet formed aggregates. Impaired axonal transport has 
been proposed as a potential pathomechanism, based on cellular Tau models and 
Tau transgenic mice. We recently reported K369I mutant Tau transgenic K3 mice 
with axonal transport defects that suggested a cargo-selective impairment of 
kinesin-driven anterograde transport by Tau. Here, we show that kinesin motor 
complex formation is disturbed in the K3 mice. We show that under pathological 
conditions hyperphosphorylated Tau interacts with c-Jun N-terminal kinase- 
interacting protein 1 (JIP1), which is associated with the kinesin motor protein 
complex. As a result, transport of JIP1 into the axon is impaired, causing JIP1 
to accumulate in the cell body. Because we found trapping of JIP1 and a 
pathological Tau/JIP1 interaction also in AD brain, this may have 
pathomechanistic implications in diseases with a Tau pathology. This is 
supported by JIP1 sequestration in the cell body of Tau-transfected primary 
neuronal cultures. The pathological Tau/JIP1 interaction requires 
phosphorylation of Tau, and Tau competes with the physiological binding of JIP1 
to kinesin light chain. Because JIP1 is involved in regulating cargo binding to 
kinesin motors, our findings may, at least in part, explain how 
hyperphosphorylated Tau mediates impaired axonal transport in AD and 
frontotemporal dementia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M109.014472
PMCID: PMC2742856
PMID: 19491104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2100. Brain Res. 2009 Aug 25;1286:165-73. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.05.083. Epub 
2009 Jun 6.

Dorsal motor nucleus of vagus protein aggregates in Lewy body disease with 
autonomic dysfunction.

Miller VM(1), Kenny RA, Oakley AE, Hall R, Kalaria RN, Allan LM.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 5PL, UK. vmiller@wadsworth.org

The Dorsal Motor Nucleus of Vagus (DMV) is degenerated in many patients with 
early stage Lewy Body Diseases (LBD). Many patients with LBD also develop 
symptomatic autonomic dysfunction prior to motor and cognitive symptoms. The 
DMV, along with the Nucleus Ambiguous (NA) and Raphe Obscurus (RO) regulates a 
variety of autonomic reflexes, suggesting that there may be an association 
between the degree of neurodegenerative protein aggregation in the DMV and 
symptomatic autonomic dysfunction in patients with LBD. Using digital in vivo 
pathology, we quantified alphasynuclein, tau, ubiquitin and Heat Shock Protein 
27 (HSP27) containing neurons in the DMV, NA, RO, in addition to the hypoglossal 
nucleus in 12 LBD patients. alphaSynuclein, ubiquitin and tau aggregates most 
greatly affected the DMV followed by the NA, RO, but never the hypoglossal 
nucleus. There was a positive correlation between DMV alphasynuclein and tau 
aggregation (p<0.05) and between DMV alphasynuclein and the patients' UPDRS 
scores (p<0.05) suggesting incremental DMV degeneration with disease 
progression. However, there was no correlation between DMV alphasynuclein, tau, 
ubiquitin or HSP27 density and the patient's autonomic dysfunction scores. The 
specific incremental nature of degeneration in the DMV, suggests that by 
characterizing region specific molecular mechanisms underpinning DMV as opposed 
to NA degeneration in LBD, the pathogenesis of the disorder may be better 
understood. Whether DMV degeneration is causative of symptomatic autonomic 
dysfunction in LBD remains to be determined.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.05.083
PMID: 19501577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]