2301. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010 Mar;58(3):480-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02733.x.

Frequency and correlates of caregiver-reported sleep disturbances in a sample of 
persons with early dementia.

Rongve A(1), Boeve BF, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Research Department, Psychiatric Clinic, Helse-Fonna HF Haugesund Hospital, 
Haugesund, Norway. arvid.rongve@gmail.com

OBJECTIVES: To identify sleep disturbances in participants with subtypes of 
dementia and explore clinical correlates.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional.
SETTING: Outpatient clinics in western Norway and the Mayo Clinic Study of 
Aging, Olmsted County, Minnesota.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred fifty-one community-dwelling western Norway residents 
referred for geriatric medicine, geriatric psychiatry or neurology evaluation 
and 420 participants without dementia from the Mayo Clinic Study of Aging.
MEASUREMENTS: Dementia was diagnosed according to Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition, criteria. The Mayo Sleep 
Questionnaire, an interview to detect sleep disturbances, was administered to 
diagnose probable rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder, probable 
periodic leg movements during sleep, probable restless legs syndrome, probable 
sleepwalking, probable sleep-related leg cramps, probable obstructive sleep 
apnea, and excessive daytime sleepiness. Insomnia was assessed using the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory, an interview to detect neuropsychiatric symptoms in 
dementia.
RESULTS: Seventy-one percent of the participants with dementia and 55.7% of 
control participants had sleep disturbances (P=.001). Most frequently reported 
in the mild dementia participants were insomnia (29.9%), probable sleep-related 
leg cramps (24.1%), excessive daytime sleepiness (22.6%), probable restless legs 
syndrome (20.7%), and probable REM sleep behavior disorder (18.5%). There were 
more sleep-related problems reported in participants with Lewy body dementias 
(LBD) (dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease dementia) than in those 
with Alzheimer's disease (P=.008). Having any sleep disorder correlated with 
depression (P=.03) and anxiety (P=.02).
CONCLUSION: Sleep problems are common in dementia, particularly in subjects with 
LBD, and are associated with psychiatric symptoms. Further research is needed to 
understand these associations and identify treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02733.x
PMID: 20398116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2302. Brain. 2010 Jun;133(Pt 6):1747-54. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq079. Epub 2010 Apr 22.

Olfactory dysfunction, central cholinergic integrity and cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease.

Bohnen NI(1), Müller ML, Kotagal V, Koeppe RA, Kilbourn MA, Albin RL, Frey KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. nbohnen@umich.edu

Comment in
    Brain. 2010 Dec;133(Pt 12):e160; author reply e161.

Olfactory dysfunction is common in subjects with Parkinson's disease. The 
pathophysiology of such dysfunction, however, remains poorly understood. 
Neurodegeneration within central regions involved in odour perception may 
contribute to olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease. Central cholinergic 
deficits occur in Parkinson's disease and cholinergic neurons innervate regions, 
such as the limbic archicortex, involved in odour perception. We investigated 
the relationship between performance on an odour identification task and 
forebrain cholinergic denervation in Parkinson's disease subjects without 
dementia. Fifty-eight patients with Parkinson's disease (mean Hoehn and Yahr 
stage 2.5 + or - 0.5) without dementia (mean Mini-Mental State Examination, 29.0 
+ or - 1.4) underwent a clinical assessment, [(11)C]methyl-4-piperidinyl 
propionate acetylcholinesterase brain positron emission tomography and olfactory 
testing with the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test. The 
diagnosis of Parkinson's disease was confirmed by [(11)C]dihydrotetrabenazine 
vesicular monoamine transporter type 2 positron emission tomography. We found 
that odour identification test scores correlated positively with 
acetylcholinesterase activity in the hippocampal formation (r = 0.56, P < 
0.0001), amygdala (r = 0.50, P < 0.0001) and neocortex (r = 0.46, P = 0.0003). 
Striatal monoaminergic activity correlated positively with odour identification 
scores (r = 0.30, P < 0.05). Multiple regression analysis including limbic 
(hippocampal and amygdala) and neocortical acetylcholinesterase activity as well 
as striatal monoaminergic activity, using odour identification scores as the 
dependent variable, demonstrated a significant regressor effect for limbic 
acetylcholinesterase activity (F = 10.1, P < 0.0001), borderline for striatal 
monoaminergic activity (F = 1.6, P = 0.13), but not significant for cortical 
acetylcholinesterase activity (F = 0.3, P = 0.75). Odour identification scores 
correlated positively with scores on cognitive measures of episodic verbal 
learning (r = 0.30, P < 0.05). These findings indicate that cholinergic 
denervation of the limbic archicortex is a more robust determinant of hyposmia 
than nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation in subjects with moderately severe 
Parkinson's disease. Greater deficits in odour identification may identify 
patients with Parkinson's disease at risk for clinically significant cognitive 
impairment.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq079
PMCID: PMC2877903
PMID: 20413575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2303. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2010 May;78(5):279-87. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1245307. 
Epub 2010 Apr 26.

[Treatment of mental disorders in patients with Parkinson's disease].

[Article in German]

Meincke U(1), Kosinski CM.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie Klinikum Niederberg, 
Lehrkrankenhaus der Universität Duisburg-Essen, Robert-Koch-Strasse 2, Velbert. 
Meincke@Klinikum-Niederberg.de

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) have a high risk of psychiatric 
complications, like depressive or psychotic syndromes, dementia and sleep 
disorders. Although these disorders may even precede the onset of motor 
symptoms, they are often not recognized and therefore not adequately treated. 
This article provides a comprehensive overview of the therapeutic options of the 
most commonly observed psychopathological syndromes in PD. In the case of 
depressive syndromes medication could be optimized by making use of dopamine 
agonists that have been proven to have antidepressant properties. In recent 
studies tricyclic antidepressants showed stronger effects than SSRI. Psychotic 
symptoms are most often evoked by dopaminergic therapy or are seen in the course 
of cognitive decline. The therapeutic regimen should be built mainly on L-Dopa 
medication in the lowest tolerated dose, if required in combinations with 
COMT-Inhibitors. When antipsychotic medication is indicated, clozapine is the 
first choice. Quetiapine might also be useful in many patients. Psychotic 
symptoms in demented patients may respond to cholinesterase-inhibitors, that 
also delay cognitive decline. Patients with PD require an individually optimized 
therapeutic regimen not only for motor symptoms, but also for frequently 
occurring psychiatric syndromes since these strongly influence the patients' and 
their caregivers' quality of life, are predictors for hospitalization and 
therefore have great economic importance for health care systems.

(c) Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart-New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1245307
PMID: 20422492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2304. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2010 May;10(3):190-8. doi: 10.1007/s11910-010-0102-x.

The role of glucocerebrosidase mutations in Parkinson disease and Lewy body 
disorders.

Velayati A(1), Yu WH, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human Genome 
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, Building 35, 35 Convent 
Drive, MSC 3708, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding glucocerebrosidase (GBA), the enzyme deficient in 
the lysosomal storage disorder Gaucher disease, are associated with the 
development of Parkinson disease and other Lewy body disorders. In fact, GBA 
variants are currently the most common genetic risk factor associated with 
parkinsonism, and identified subjects with Parkinson disease are more than five 
times more likely to carry mutations in GBA. The mechanisms underlying this 
association are not known, but proposed theories include enhanced protein 
aggregation, alterations in lipid levels, and autophagy-lysosomal dysfunction 
promoting the retention of undegraded proteins. We review the genetic studies 
linking GBA to parkinsonism, as well as several of the mechanisms postulated to 
explain the association of GBA mutations and the synucleinopathies, which 
demonstrate how studies of a rare mendelian disease may provide insights into 
our understanding of a common complex disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-010-0102-x
PMCID: PMC3529411
PMID: 20425034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2305. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Jun 25;477(3):121-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.04.046. Epub 
2010 Apr 27.

Different implication of NEDD9 genetic variant in early and late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease.

Tedde A(1), Bagnoli S, Piaceri I, Lucenteforte E, Bessi V, Bracco L, Mugelli A, 
Sorbi S, Nacmias B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological and Psychiatric Sciences, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy. andrea.tedde@unifi.it

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a complex and multifactorial progressive 
neurodegenerative disease. Recently, two studies reported inconsistent results 
on a possible involvement of the NEDD9 (neural precursor cell expressed, 
developmentally down-regulated 9, 6p25-p24) as a candidate gene for the risk of 
developing AD and/or Parkinson's disease (PD). We analyzed the distribution of 
the rs760678 SNP polymorphism in 735 Italian subjects: 214 unrelated sporadic 
late-onset AD patients (LOAD, 64.5% females, mean age-at-onset 71.8+/-5.2 
years), 135 early-onset AD patients (EOAD, 57.3% females, mean age-at-onset 
57.5+/-5.5 years) and 386 healthy controls (68.9% females, mean age 83.4+/-17.9 
years; SD). We observed a statistically significant difference between LOAD 
patients and controls according to genotypes (P=0.016) and allele frequency 
(P=0.007); CC genotype was more frequent in LOAD cases (44.4%) than controls 
(36.0%). No difference after stratification of the data in terms of gender and 
status of the APOE epsilon4 allele was observed. In conclusion, our data do 
support an implication of the NEDD9 allelic variant in late-onset AD, with an 
independent effect of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon4 allele in the risk of 
developing AD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.04.046
PMID: 20430066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2306. J Mov Disord. 2010 May;3(1):6-10. doi: 10.14802/jmd.10002. Epub 2010 Apr 30.

Comparing Cerebral White Matter Lesion Burdens between Parkinson's Disease with 
and without Dementia.

Choi SA(1), Evidente VG(2), Caviness JN(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Health Insurance Corporation Ilsan 
Hospital, Goyang, Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Cerebral white matter lesions (CWMLs) have been suggested to be associated with 
an increased risk of dementia, disability, and death. CWMLs are more common in 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) than in normal elderly individuals of 
comparable age. Only a few studies have been done to determine whether CWMLs may 
influence cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease (PD). Fully developed PD with 
concurrent AD was reported to likely cause impaired cognition in spite of 
accumulating evidence suggesting that PD with dementia (PDD) is more closely 
associated with Lewy body (LB) pathology. Currently, contradictory data on the 
neuropathology of dementia in PD require further prospective clinicopathological 
studies in larger cohorts to elucidate the impact of AD and α-synuclein (SCNA) 
pathologies on the cognitive status in these disorders. Previous reports did not 
suggest CWMLs to be associated with an increased risk of PDD. After adjusting 
for age at death, age at onset of PD, and duration of PD, our recent study 
investigating CWMLs in PDD via autopsy has shown a positive correlation between 
the burden of CWMLs and PDD. The frequent co-existence of both LB and AD lesions 
suggests that both pathologies independently or synergistically contribute to 
both movement disorders and cognitive impairment. The individual and cumulative 
burden of CWMLs, LB lesions, and AD lesions may synergistically contribute to 
cognitive decline in LB disorders such as PDD.

DOI: 10.14802/jmd.10002
PMCID: PMC4027655
PMID: 24868371


2307. Gait Posture. 2010 May;32(1):87-91. doi: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2010.03.013.

Relationship between mild cognitive impairment and falls in older people with 
and without Parkinson's disease: 1-Year Prospective Cohort Study.

Camicioli R(1), Majumdar SR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, E223 Glenrose Rehabilitation 
Hospital, 10230 111th Avenue, Edmonton, AB, Canada T5G 0B7. rcamicio@ualberta.ca

We conducted a 12-month longitudinal cohort study of 102 older people without 
dementia (52 Parkinson's Disease [PD]; 50 age- and sex-matched controls) to 
determine (1) if mild cognitive impairment predicts falls in older people with 
or without PD and (2) how baseline falls, a history of freezing and Hoehn and 
Yahr stage affected the association between cognitive impairment and multiple 
falls in PD patients. Cognitive impairment was defined as the sum of impairments 
on the caregiver-rated Clinical Dementia Rating Scale (CCDRSum>0). Overall the 
mean age (SD) was 71.5 (4.7) years, 42% were women, 26% had fallen and 14% had 
cognitive impairment at baseline. Thirty-one percent (15/52) of PD patients vs 
12% (6/50) of controls fell more than once during 12-month follow-up, p=0.04. 
When combined in a 2-predictor model for the entire cohort, the adjusted odds 
ratios [aOR] for falling were significantly increased for cognitive impairment 
at baseline (aOR: 4.8, 95% CI: 1.3-18.2) and prior falls (aOR: 7.4, 95% CI: 
2.4-22.3). The overall accuracy of the model was 82%, with low sensitivity of 
19% but high specificity of 99%. In the PD subgroup, the overall accuracy of the 
same prediction model was 79%, with much better sensitivity of 73% but a lower 
specificity of 81%. We conclude that mild cognitive impairment might contribute 
to falls risk beyond conventional risk factors in older people with and without 
PD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gaitpost.2010.03.013
PMID: 20434917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2308. Ann Neurol. 2010 Apr;67(4):462-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.21910.

Olfactory epithelium amyloid-beta and paired helical filament-tau pathology in 
Alzheimer disease.

Arnold SE(1), Lee EB, Moberg PJ, Stutzbach L, Kazi H, Han LY, Lee VM, 
Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. steven.arnold@uphs.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVE: Olfactory dysfunction is common in Alzheimer disease (AD) and other 
neurodegenerative diseases. Paired helical filament (PHF)-tau, alpha-synuclein, 
and amyloid-beta lesions occur early and severely in cerebral regions of the 
olfactory system, and they have also been observed in olfactory epithelium (OE). 
However, their frequency, abundance, and disease specificity, and the 
relationships of OE pathology to brain pathology have not been established.
METHODS: We investigated the pathological expression of amyloid-beta, PHFtau, 
alpha-synuclein, and TDP-43 in postmortem OE of 79 cases with AD, 63 cases with 
various other neurodegenerative diseases, and 45 neuropathologically normal 
cases.
RESULTS: Amyloid-beta was present as punctate and small patchy aggregates in 71% 
of AD cases, compared with 22% of normal cases and 14% of cases with other 
diseases, and in greater amounts in AD than in either of the other 2 diagnostic 
categories. PHFtau was evident in dystrophic neurites in 55% of cases with AD, 
34% with normal brains, and 39% with other neurodegenerative diseases, also at 
higher densities in AD. alpha-Synuclein was present in dystrophic neurites in 7 
cases, 6 of which also had cerebral Lewy bodies. Pathological TDP-43 inclusions 
were not observed in the OE in any cases. Amyloid-beta and to a lesser degree, 
PHFtau ratings in OE significantly correlated with cortical Abeta and PHFtau 
lesion ratings in the brain.
INTERPRETATION: These data demonstrate that AD pathology in the OE is present in 
the majority of cases with pathologically verified AD and correlates with brain 
pathology. Future work may assess the utility of amyloid-beta and PHFtau 
measurement in OE as a biomarker for AD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21910
PMCID: PMC2864948
PMID: 20437581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2309. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2010 Jul;16(4):679-86. doi: 10.1017/S1355617710000470. 
Epub 2010 May 5.

Prediction of driving ability with neuropsychological tests: demographic 
adjustments diminish accuracy.

Barrash J(1), Stillman A, Anderson SW, Uc EY, Dawson JD, Rizzo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa, USA. joseph-barrash@uiowa.edu

Demographically adjusted norms generally enhance accuracy of inferences based on 
neuropsychological assessment. However, we hypothesized that demographic 
corrections diminish predictive accuracy for real-world activities with absolute 
cognitive demands. Driving ability was assessed with a 45-minute drive along a 
standardized on-road route in participants aged 65+ (24 healthy elderly, 26 
probable Alzheimer's disease, 33 Parkinson's disease). Neuropsychological 
measures included: Trail-Making A and B, Complex Figure, Benton Visual 
Retention, and Block Design tests. A multiple regression model with raw 
neuropsychological scores was significantly predictive of driving errors (R2 = 
.199, p = .005); a model with demographically adjusted scores was not (R2 = 
.113, p = .107). Raw scores were more highly correlated with driving errors than 
were adjusted scores for each neuropsychological measure, and among healthy 
elderly and Parkinson's patients. When predicting real-world activities that 
depend on absolute levels of cognitive abilities regardless of demographic 
considerations, predictive accuracy is diminished by demographic corrections.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617710000470
PMCID: PMC3152745
PMID: 20441682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2310. Ann Pharmacother. 2010 Jun;44(6):1080-9. doi: 10.1345/aph.1M582. Epub 2010 May 
4.

Role of tetrabenazine for Huntington's disease-associated chorea.

Poon LH(1), Kang GA, Lee AJ.

Author information:
(1)University of California at San Francisco, CA, USA. Linda.poon@va.gov

OBJECTIVE: To review the pharmacology, pharmacokinetics, efficacy, and safety of 
tetrabenazine for the treatment of Huntington's disease (HD)-associated chorea.
DATA SOURCES: Primary literature and review articles were obtained through a 
PubMed search (1959-November 2009) using the terms tetrabenazine, HD, chorea, 
and hyperkinetic movement disorders. A bibliographic search was performed on 
selected articles.
STUDY SELECTION AND DATA EXTRACTION: All English-language articles identified 
from the data sources were reviewed. Studies including greater than 10 patients 
and a direct comparative study with primarily HD-associated chorea were included 
in the review.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Tetrabenazine is the first drug approved by the Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) for the management of HD-associated chorea. Tetrabenazine 
binds reversibly to the type 2 vesicular monoamine transporters and has been 
shown to inhibit monoamine uptake in presynaptic vesicles, resulting in 
monoamine depletion. The duration of the antichorea effect of tetrabenazine has 
been reported to be approximately 5.5 hours. Tetrabenazine is extensively 
metabolized hepatically by the CYP2D6 enzyme to its primary active metabolite, 
alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine. The half-life of alpha-dihydrotetrabenazine is 4-8 
hours. Clinical trials demonstrated that tetrabenazine reduces chorea, on 
average, by 5 units based upon the chorea score from the Unified Huntington's 
Disease Rating Scale. The most common adverse effects reported include sedation, 
drowsiness, parkinsonism, and depression. Rarely, corrected QT interval 
prolongation, orthostatic hypotension, and hyperprolactinemia have been 
reported. Tetrabenazine also has a black box warning for increasing the risk of 
depression and suicidality.
CONCLUSIONS: Tetrabenazine can provide significant benefit in the treatment of 
chorea associated with HD. Given the potential adverse effects of tetrabenazine, 
health-care providers need to screen patients carefully prior to initiating 
treatment with this medication. In the future, additional long-term and 
comparative studies would be useful for further clarification of the role of 
tetrabenazine in the treatment of HD-associated chorea.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.1M582
PMID: 20442355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2311. Alzheimers Dement. 2010 Jul;6(4):326-33. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2009.09.005. Epub 
2010 May 6.

Fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography of mild cognitive impairment 
with clinical follow-up at 3 years.

Pardo JV(1), Lee JT, Kuskowski MA, Munch KR, Carlis JV, Sheikh SA, Surerus C, 
Lewis SM, McCarten JR, Fink H, McPherson S, Shah HH, Rottunda S, Dysken MW.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroimaging Unit, Minneapolis Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. jvpardo@umn.edu

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common dementing illness. 
Development of effective treatments directed at AD requires an early diagnosis. 
Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) often heralds AD. Thus, characterizing MCI is 
fundamental to the early diagnosis of AD.
METHODS: 19 MCI patients referred from a memory loss clinic and 27 healthy 
subjects, all followed up for 3 years. Metabolism scans (MCI minus controls) 
were compared voxel-wise after anatomic normalization and were examined both 
visually and with a computerized classifier.
RESULTS: Agreement between raters as to whether the individual scans were normal 
or abnormal was high. Agreement between raters of the eventual clinical 
diagnosis and baseline metabolic pattern was poor. A computerized classifier was 
unsuccessful at classifying MCI from normal; however, its performance improved 
when using only prototypic AD-like MCI scans, indicating the classifier worked 
well when shared patterns existed in the data. Outcomes on follow-up were nine 
of 19 AD, five of 19 remained MCI, and five of 19 developed dementias other than 
AD. Both MCI cases of early Lewy body dementia (LBD) showed an AD-like metabolic 
pattern.
CONCLUSIONS: Visual inspection proved reliable in determining normal from 
abnormal scans, but it proved unreliable at predicting diagnosis on follow-up. 
Computerized classification of MCI by using an AD-like metabolic template (such 
as derived from the averaged MCI images) showed potential to identify patients 
who will develop AD. However, the metabolic pattern in early LBD did not differ 
from that in AD.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2009.09.005
PMCID: PMC2918397
PMID: 20447873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflicts of interest.


2312. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jul;16(6):404-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.04.004. Epub 2010 May 10.

In vivo detection of neuropathologic changes in presymptomatic MAPT mutation 
carriers: a PET and MRI study.

Miyoshi M(1), Shinotoh H, Wszolek ZK, Strongosky AJ, Shimada H, Arakawa R, 
Higuchi M, Ikoma Y, Yasuno F, Fukushi K, Irie T, Ito H, Suhara T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuroimaging Group, Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of 
Radiological Sciences, Inage-ku, Chiba, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Microglial activation and disrupted neurotransmissions may herald 
symptomatic manifestations in neurodegenerative tauopathies.
METHODS: We investigated microglial activation with [(11)C]DAA1106 positron 
emission tomography (PET), striatal dopaminergic function with 
l-[beta-(11)C]dopa PET, acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity with 
[(11)C]N-methylpiperidin-4-yl acetate PET, and morphologic brain changes with 
MRI in three persons (aged 38-41 years) with frontotemporal dementia with 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), who were presymptomatic gene 
carriers (PGCs) from an American kindred with pallidopontonigral degeneration. 
The results from these 3 PGCs were compared with [(11)C]DAA1106 PET results from 
age-matched 9 healthy volunteers (HV), and with l-[beta-(11)C]dopa and 
[(11)C]MP4A PET results from 10 HV. Values considered significant were more than 
2 SDs greater or less than the normal control mean, as the number of subjects 
was small for group comparisons.
RESULTS: Glial activities were increased in the frontal cortex of one PGC, the 
occipital cortex of two PGCs, and the posterior cingulate cortex of one PGC, 
although none of the PGCs showed overt glial activation in the brain. Only one 
of the PGCs showed reduced AChE activity in the temporo-parietal cortex. Three 
PGCs showed low dopamine synthesis rates in the putamen. Hippocampal atrophy was 
observed in two PGCs.
CONCLUSIONS: Hippocampal atrophy and striatal dopaminergic dysfunction may be 
early disease processes in the pathogenesis of FTDP-17. Neuroinflammation may 
also be an in vivo signature of tau pathology at a prodromal stage, although 
current PET techniques may not constantly reveal it as the earliest neuroimaging 
abnormality.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.04.004
PMID: 20452812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2313. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2010 Jun;27(3):193-7. doi: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e3181dd4fdb.

Quantitative EEG analysis of executive dysfunction in Parkinson disease.

Kamei S(1), Morita A, Serizawa K, Mizutani T, Hirayanagi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. skamei@med.nihon-u.ac.jp

Quantitative EEG evaluation in Parkinson disease (PD) reveals diffuse slowing. 
This is the first quantitative EEG evaluation of the differences between PD with 
and without executive dysfunction (ExD). The subjects were 32 PD patients 
without remarkable dementia. The lack of ischemic lesions was confirmed by 
magnetic resonance imaging. ExD was defined as <70 points on the age-controlled 
standardized score of the Behavioral Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome. 
Absolute power was measured for four frequency bands from delta to beta. 
Electrodes were placed at frontal pole, frontal, central, parietal, occipital, 
and temporal locations. Spectral ratio was calculated as the sum of power values 
for alpha and beta waves divided by the sum of values for the slow waves. In 
multiple logistic regression analysis of each electrode location, the dependent 
variable was ExD or not, and the independent variables were spectral ratio, age, 
and Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale. The only significant predictor of 
ExD was spectral ratio at the frontal pole (P = 0.031) and frontal (P = 0.048) 
locations. PD with ExD exhibited an increase in slow wave activity and a 
decrease in alpha and fast wave activities in these locations. These findings 
indicated that the ExD in PD was caused by frontal dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e3181dd4fdb
PMID: 20461018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2314. Sleep Med. 2010 Jun;11(6):534-9. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.03.006. Epub 2010 May 
11.

Electroencephalographic slowing heralds mild cognitive impairment in idiopathic 
REM sleep behavior disorder.

Iranzo A(1), Isetta V, Molinuevo JL, Serradell M, Navajas D, Farre R, Santamaria 
J.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Multidisciplinary Sleep Unit, Hospital Clínic de 
Barcelona, Institut D'Investigació Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, CIBERNED, 
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with idiopathic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior 
disorder (IRBD) may show electroencephalographic (EEG) slowing reflecting 
cortical dysfunction and are at risk for developing neurological conditions 
characterized by cognitive dysfunction including mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI), dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease with associated 
dementia. We hypothesized that those IRBD patients who later developed MCI had 
pronounced cortical EEG slowing at presentation.
METHODS: Power EEG spectral analysis was blindly quantified from the 
polysomnographic studies of 23 IRBD patients without cognitive complaints and 10 
healthy controls without RBD. After a mean clinical follow-up of 2.40+/-1.55 
years, 10 patients developed MCI (RBD+MCI) and the remaining 13 remained 
idiopathic.
RESULTS: Patients with RBD+MCI had marked EEG slowing (increased delta and theta 
activity) in central and occipital regions during wakefulness and REM sleep, 
particularly in the right hemisphere, when compared with controls and, to a 
lesser extent, with IRBD subjects who remained idiopathic. The EEG spectral 
pattern of the RBD+MCI group was similar to that seen in patients with dementia 
with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease associated with dementia.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that the presence of marked EEG slowing on 
spectral analysis might be indicative of the short-term development of MCI in 
patients initially diagnosed with IRBD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2010.03.006
PMID: 20462792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2315. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2010 Apr;68(2):252-7. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2010000200019.

Olfactory function and Parkinson's disease in Southern Brazil.

Santin R(1), Fonseca VF, Bleil CB, Rieder CR, Hilbig A.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Outpatient Clinics, Santa Casa de Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.

The idiopathic Parkinson disease (IPD) is traditionally diagnosed by motor 
signs, but non-motor symptoms and signs are frequent and may help in the 
clinical diagnosis.
PURPOSE: To evaluate the olfactory function in Brazilian healthy subjects, 
patients with early-onset PD (EOPD) and late-onset PD (LOPD) using the Sniffin' 
Sticks odor-identification test (SST).
METHOD: We studied 70 patients with IPD (19 EOPD and 51 LOPD) and 70 controls 
matched for gender, age and years of schooling. Subjects with dementia and loss 
of smell for other reasons were excluded.
RESULTS: The SST showed a significant difference (p<0.001) between groups: 
control groups (12.0 + or - 0.3), EOPD (8.3 + or - 0.7), and LOPD (6.7 + or - 
0.4) when the groups were adjusted for gender, age, disease duration, and years 
of schooling.
CONCLUSION: Both groups of IPD patients presented olfactory impairments, but 
those whose symptoms started before 45 years-old (EOPD) had better sense of 
smell than the LOPD patients.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2010000200019
PMID: 20464295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2316. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2010 Jul-Sep;24(3):227-33. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181d71a13.

Influence of white matter hyperintensities on the cognition of patients with 
Parkinson disease.

Lee SJ(1), Kim JS, Yoo JY, Song IU, Kim BS, Jung SL, Yang DW, Kim YI, Jeong DS, 
Lee KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: White matter hyperintensities (WMH) have been associated with 
cognitive impairment in elderly persons and in patients with Alzheimer disease. 
However, the role of WMH in Parkinson disease (PD) dementia remains to be 
elucidated.
METHODS: The cohort for this study comprised 71 consecutive patients with PD, 
all of whom completed a clinical assessment, neuropsychologic investigation, and 
magnetic resonance imaging of brain. WMH were rated using the semiquantitative 
visual rating system proposed by Scheltens et al.
RESULTS: The PD dementia group had significantly more WMH than the PD without 
dementia group in the evaluated brain regions except for the infratentorial 
area. The WMH showed a significant correlation with age, Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale, Mini-Mental State Examination, sum of the box of Clinical 
Dementia Rating, and many of the cognitive domains. The linear regression model 
showed that the WMH was independently associated with cognitive impairment in 
patients with PD, regardless of age, sex, duration or severity of PD symptoms, 
and vascular risk factors.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings confirm that WMH might be associated with cognitive 
decline in patients with PD, regardless of age, sex, education status, duration 
or severity of PD symptoms, and vascular risk factors. This result suggests that 
other nonvascular factors contribute to the progression of dementia in patients 
with PD.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181d71a13
PMID: 20473133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2317. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2010;29(5):388-96. doi: 10.1159/000305095. Epub 2010 
May 20.

Psychomotor slowing in mild cognitive impairment, Alzheimer's disease and lewy 
body dementia: mechanisms and diagnostic value.

Bailon O(1), Roussel M, Boucart M, Krystkowiak P, Godefroy O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and the Laboratoire de Neurosciences Fonctionnelles 
et Pathologies (UMR CNRS 8160), University Hospital of Lille, Lille, and 
University Hospital of Amiens, Amiens, France.

BACKGROUND: Although psychomotor slowing is frequent in Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and Lewy body dementia (LBD), its mechanism and diagnostic value have not been 
examined.
OBJECTIVE: To (i) assess psychomotor speed in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), AD and LBD, (ii) determine the underlying mechanisms, and 
(iii) examine whether psychomotor slowing constitutes a useful diagnostic 
marker.
METHODS: Psychomotor speed was assessed in MCI (n = 11) and mild dementia due to 
AD (n = 23) or LBD (n = 18) and controls (n = 52) with visual inspection time 
(VIT), digital tapping, simple reaction time (SRT) and choice reaction time 
(CRT) tests.
RESULTS: MCI did not differ from controls. Both dementia groups showed different 
patterns. In AD, VIT (p = 0.0001), tapping (p = 0.021), SRT (p = 0.0001) and 
decision time (p = 0.0001) were impaired as compared to controls. In LBD, VIT (p 
= 0.0001) was very impaired and correlated with visual hallucinations (p = 
0.001); SRT lengthening (p = 0.0001) was related to attentional disorders (p = 
0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Psychomotor slowing of AD is due to slower perceptuomotor and 
decision processes. In LBD, psychomotor slowing is due to visual and attention 
disorders, and subtle visual disorders contribute to hallucinations. VIT and CRT 
are useful diagnostic markers.

DOI: 10.1159/000305095
PMID: 20484908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2318. BMJ. 2010 May 20;340:c2197. doi: 10.1136/bmj.c2197.

Unintended effects of statins in men and women in England and Wales: population 
based cohort study using the QResearch database.

Hippisley-Cox J(1), Coupland C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Primary Care, University Park, Nottingham NG2 7RD. 
julia.hippisley-cox@ntlworld.com

Comment in
    BMJ. 2010;340:c2240.
    Evid Based Med. 2010 Dec;15(6):187-8.
    BMJ. 2010;341:c3697.

OBJECTIVE: To quantify the unintended effects of statins according to type, 
dose, and duration of use.
DESIGN: Prospective open cohort study using routinely collected data.
SETTING: 368 general practices in England and Wales supplying data to the 
QResearch database.
PARTICIPANTS: 2 004 692 patients aged 30-84 years of whom 225 922 (10.7%) were 
new users of statins: 159 790 (70.7%) were prescribed simvastatin, 50 328 
(22.3%) atorvastatin, 8103 (3.6%) pravastatin, 4497 (1.9%) rosuvastatin, and 
3204 (1.4%) fluvastatin.
METHODS: Cox proportional hazards models were used to estimate effects of statin 
type, dose, and duration of use. The number needed to treat (NNT) or number 
needed to harm (NNH) was calculated and numbers of additional or fewer cases 
estimated for 10 000 treated patients.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: First recorded occurrence of cardiovascular disease, 
moderate or serious myopathic events, moderate or serious liver dysfunction, 
acute renal failure, venous thromboembolism, Parkinson's disease, dementia, 
rheumatoid arthritis, cataract, osteoporotic fracture, gastric cancer, 
oesophageal cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, melanoma, renal cancer, breast 
cancer, or prostate cancer.
RESULTS: Individual statins were not significantly associated with risk of 
Parkinson's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, venous thromboembolism, dementia, 
osteoporotic fracture, gastric cancer, colon cancer, lung cancer, melanoma, 
renal cancer, breast cancer, or prostate cancer. Statin use was associated with 
decreased risks of oesophageal cancer but increased risks of moderate or serious 
liver dysfunction, acute renal failure, moderate or serious myopathy, and 
cataract. Adverse effects were similar across statin types for each outcome 
except liver dysfunction where risks were highest for fluvastatin. A 
dose-response effect was apparent for acute renal failure and liver dysfunction. 
All increased risks persisted during treatment and were highest in the first 
year. After stopping treatment the risk of cataract returned to normal within a 
year in men and women. Risk of oesophageal cancer returned to normal within a 
year in women and within 1-3 years in men. Risk of acute renal failure returned 
to normal within 1-3 years in men and women, and liver dysfunction within 1-3 
years in women and from three years in men. Based on the 20% threshold for 
cardiovascular risk, for women the NNT with any statin to prevent one case of 
cardiovascular disease over five years was 37 (95% confidence interval 27 to 64) 
and for oesophageal cancer was 1266 (850 to 3460) and for men the respective 
values were 33 (24 to 57) and 1082 (711 to 2807). In women the NNH for an 
additional case of acute renal failure over five years was 434 (284 to 783), of 
moderate or severe myopathy was 259 (186 to 375), of moderate or severe liver 
dysfunction was 136 (109 to 175), and of cataract was 33 (28 to 38). Overall, 
the NNHs and NNTs for men were similar to those for women, except for myopathy 
where the NNH was 91 (74 to 112).
CONCLUSIONS: Claims of unintended benefits of statins, except for oesophageal 
cancer, remain unsubstantiated, although potential adverse effects at population 
level were confirmed and quantified. Further studies are needed to develop 
utilities to individualise the risks so that patients at highest risk of adverse 
events can be monitored closely.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.c2197
PMCID: PMC2874131
PMID: 20488911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: JH-C is codirector of 
QResearch (a not for profit organisation that is a joint partnership between the 
University of Nottingham and EMIS, the leading commercial supplier of IT for 60% 
of general practices in the United Kingdom) and director of ClinRisk, which 
produces software to ensure the reliable and updatable implementation of 
clinical risk algorithms within clinical computer systems to improve patient 
care. CC is a consultant statistician for ClinRisk. This work and any views 
expressed within it are solely those of the authors and not of any affiliated 
bodies or organisations.


2319. Eur J Neurol. 2011 Jan;18(1):78-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03064.x.

Previous adult attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder symptoms and risk of 
dementia with Lewy bodies: a case-control study.

Golimstok A(1), Rojas JI, Romano M, Zurru MC, Doctorovich D, Cristiano E.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Hospital Italiano Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
angel.golimstok@hospitalita.org.ar

Comment in
    Eur J Neurol. 2016 Aug;23(8):e54.
    Eur J Neurol. 2016 Sep;23(9):e62.

INTRODUCTION: previous reports have shown that in Dementia with Lewy body (DLB) 
and attention-deficit and hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) a hypodopaminergic and 
noradrenergic substrate seems to play a central role in developing the diseases. 
We investigated the hypothesis that attention deficit may precede DLB expressed 
as adult ADHD symptoms long before the clinical onset of dementia.
METHODS: patients with DLB, Alzheimer disease type (ADT) and controls were 
recruited from the membership of the Italian Hospital Medical Care Program in 
Argentina from 2000 to 2005. The DSM-IV criteria adapted for the identification 
of adult patients with ADHD and validated to Spanish Wender Utah Rating Scale 
were used to identify individuals with preceding ADHD symptoms during their 
adult life. Analysis of categorical variables was carried out using chi-square. 
Mann-Whitney test was used for continuous variables. Statistical significance 
was P < 0.05.
RESULTS: a total of 109 patients with DLB and 251 patients with ADT were matched 
by age, sex and year of education with 149 controls. The frequency of preceding 
ADHD symptoms in DLB cases was 47.8% in ADT 15.2% and 15.1% in the control 
group. The prevalence of ADHD symptoms in DLB cases was significantly higher 
compared with the control group (P ≤ 0.001, OR 5.1 95%CI 2.7-9.6) and also 
higher when compared with ADT (P ≤ 0.001, OR 4.9, 95%CI 2.8-8.4).
CONCLUSION: we found a higher risk of DLB in patients with preceding adult ADHD 
symptoms. To date, there is no clear explanation for the association found; 
however, further investigation will widen our understanding about both 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.03064.x
PMID: 20491888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2320. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2010 Mar-Apr;44(2):139-47. doi: 
10.1016/s0028-3843(14)60005-0.

The influence of vascular risk factors on the survival rate of patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer disease.

Magierski R(1), Kłoszewska I, Sobów TM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Old Age Psychiatry and Psychotic Disorders, Medical University 
of Lodz, Poland. r.magierski@csk.umed.lodz.pl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The aim of this study was to determine whether dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) progres-ses more rapidly than Alzheimer disease (AD) and 
to compare survival after dementia onset and mortality in both dementia groups.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A medical records analysis of AD (n = 183) and DLB (n = 
51) patients was performed to determine age at onset of symptoms, the date of 
first presentation to the psychiatric services, dementia severity at diagnosis 
(MMSE score), and mean disease duration before diagnosis. Categorical data 
regarding vascular risk factors were collected. Projected decline rate 
(MMSE/year), survival rate after the diagnosis of dementia, mean survival time 
after diagnosis and mortality rate were calculated and compared between DLB and 
AD groups.
RESULTS: The comparison of clinical and demographic parameters revealed no 
significant differences between groups, apart from a more pronounced decline 
rate in the DLB group. Diabetes, and to a lesser extent hypertension, influenced 
survival in AD, but not in DLB subjects. Overall, however, the difference in 
mortality rates and survival time between DLB and AD subjects cannot be 
attributed to the presence of any vascular risk factor analysed. DLB, 
independently of the presence of vascular risk factors, seems to be a more 
aggressive disorder than AD, when mortality and survival time are taken into 
account.
CONCLUSIONS: More rapid progression of cognitive decline and shorter duration of 
dementia were found in DLB in this naturalistic study. The findings may have 
important implications for the management and treatment of DLB and should be 
confirmed in prospective studies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3843(14)60005-0
PMID: 20496284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2321. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2010 Apr-Jun;24(2):209-11. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181b7642b.

Donepezil-associated bradyarrhythmia in a patient with dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB).

Rosenbloom MH(1), Finley R, Scheinman MM, Feldman MD, Miller BL, Rabinovici GD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco Memory and 
Aging Center, San Francisco, CA, USA. mrosenbloom@memory.ucsf.edu

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a neurodegenerative condition that results in 
loss of mesopontine cholinergic neurons and sympathetic deinnervation. Although 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have been shown to improve cognitive and 
behavioral deficits in DLB, these patients may be more susceptible to 
bradyarrhythmic side effects from this class of drugs due to the autonomic 
insufficiency associated with the disease. We present a patient who experienced 
a dose-dependent, symptomatic sinus bradyarrhythmia with donepezil doses at and 
greater than 5 mg. Owing to underlying autonomic dysfunction, patients with DLB 
may be at increased risk of bradyarrhythmia resulting from treatment with 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181b7642b
PMCID: PMC2879079
PMID: 20505440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2322. EPMA J. 2010 Jun;1(2):211-5. doi: 10.1007/s13167-010-0030-5. Epub 2010 Jun 29.

Neurodegeneration: accelerated ageing or inadequate healthcare?

Golubnitschaja O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Rheinische Friedrich-Wilhelms-University of Bonn, 
Sigmund-Freud-Str. 25, 53105 Bonn, Germany ; European Association for 
Predictive, Preventive & Personalised Medicine, Brussels, Belgium.

Current figures: About 300 million Diabetics frequently affected by 
Poly-Neuropathy as secondary complication, 18 million patients with Alzheimer's 
disease also diagnosed as Diabetes Type 3, neurodegenerative eye diseases with 
leading causes of blindness-diabetic retinopathy and estimated 67 million 
glaucoma patients worldwide, millions of patients with Parkinson's disease, 
Multiple Sclerosis, Epilepsy, Cerebral Palsy and Dementia in the 
elderly-altogether dramatically affect life quality, social and economical 
indexes of populations around the globe. Optimistic versus Pessimistic Prognosis 
depends much on diagnostic, preventive and treatment approaches which healthcare 
will preferably adopt in the near future. Without innovation in healthcare, 
neurodegenerative disorders can reach more than 30% of global disease burden 
till 2020. In contrast, effective utilisation of advanced early/predictive 
diagnostics, preventive and personalised medical approaches could enable a 
significant portion of population to reach the 100-year age limit remaining 
vibrant in excellent physical and mental health as actively contributing members 
of society.

DOI: 10.1007/s13167-010-0030-5
PMCID: PMC3405328
PMID: 23199059


2323. Medicina (Kaunas). 2010;46(3):169-75.

[Postoperative cognitive dysfunction of older surgical patients].

[Article in Lithuanian]

Damuleviciene G(1), Lesauskaite V, Macijauskiene J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Kaunas University of Medicine, Lithuania. 
gytedamu@gmail.com

Light changes in mental function after operation occur in patients of all ages, 
but more frequent they are observed in older patients. The incidence of early 
postoperative cognitive dysfunction varies depending on surgical procedure and 
may be as high as 20-90% in aged patients, and occurs most often in patients 
undergoing cardiovascular surgery. Early postoperative cognitive dysfunction is 
a predictor of late postoperative cognitive dysfunction. Delirium develops in at 
least 50% of older surgical patients and even more frequently after cardiac 
surgeries (72%). Postoperative delirium, like delirium manifesting with 
co-existing disease, and late postoperative cognitive dysfunction are strong 
predictors of functional and cognitive decline in one-year period after 
discharge and are associated with higher morbidity and mortality, longer 
hospital stay, and a higher rate of institutionalization. The reasons of 
postoperative cognitive dysfunction and delirium are not well understood. An 
assessment of cognitive function should be completed as a routine in older 
patients, and effective prevention requires the identification of risk factors 
for delirium: advanced age, preexisting dementia and depression, visual and 
hearing impairment, Parkinson disease, emergency operation, anticholinergic 
drugs, and others. After operation, elderly patients must be carefully monitored 
for probable postoperative delirium. It is important to deepen health care 
professionals' knowledge of postoperative cognitive complications in older 
surgical patients.

PMID: 20516755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2324. Duke Med Health News. 2010 May;16(5):4-5.

First signs of glaucoma injury occur in the brain. What has generally been 
considered an eye disease is actually related to conditions such as Alzheimer's 
and Parkinson's diseases.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 20518132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2325. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2010 Aug;9(4):455-70. doi: 
10.2174/187152710791556186.

Transgenic mouse models of Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease.

Skaper SD(1), Giusti P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Anesthesiology, University of Padova, Italy. 
Stephen.skaper@unipd.it

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic progressive neurodegenerative movement 
disorder characterized by a profound and selective loss of nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic neurons. Another neurodegenerative disorder, Huntington's disease 
(HD), is characterized by striking movement abnormalities and the loss of 
medium-sized spiny neurons in the striatum. Current medications only provide 
symptomatic relief and fail to halt the death of neurons in these disorders. A 
major hurdle in the development of neuroprotective therapies is due to limited 
understanding of disease processes leading to the death of neurons. The etiology 
of dopaminergic neuronal demise in PD is elusive, but a combination of genetic 
and environmental factors seems to play a critical role. The majority of PD 
cases are sporadic; however, the discovery of genes linked to rare familial 
forms of disease and studies from experimental animal models has provided 
crucial insights into molecular mechanisms of disease pathogenesis. HD, on the 
other hand, is one of the few neurodegenerative diseases with a known genetic 
cause, namely an expanded CAG repeat mutation, extending a polyglutamine tract 
in the huntingtin protein. One of the most important advances in HD research has 
been the generation of various mouse models that enable the exploration of early 
pathological, molecular, and cellular abnormalities produced by the mutation. In 
addition, these models for both HD and PD have made possible the testing of 
different pharmacological approaches to delay the onset or slow the progression 
of disease. This article will provide an overview of the genetics underlying PD 
and HD, the animal models developed, and their potential utility to the study of 
disease pathophysiology.

DOI: 10.2174/187152710791556186
PMID: 20522011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2326. Brain Pathol. 2010 May;20(3):633-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00369.x.

The epidemiology of dementia associated with Parkinson's disease.

Aarsland D(1), Kurz MW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Stavanger University Hospital, Postboks 8100, 4068 
Stavanger, Norway. daarsland@gmail.com

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative illness 
after Alzheimer's disease (AD). Cognitive impairment and dementia are common 
features in PD and characterized by a wide range of cognitive deficits distinct 
from those seen in AD. Mild cognitive impairment occurs even early in PD and is 
associated with shorter time to dementia. The purpose of this review is to 
present recent findings on clinical aspects of dementia in PD and to elucidate 
underlying clinical and neurobiological risk factors.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00369.x
PMCID: PMC8094858
PMID: 20522088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2327. Brain Pathol. 2010 May;20(3):640-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2010.00373.x.

Profile of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Watson GS(1), Leverenz JB.

Author information:
(1)Mental Illness, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle Division, Seattle, 
WA 98108, USA.

Cognitive impairment (CI) is a common nonmotor complication of Parkinson's 
disease (PD), and is associated with significant disability for patients and 
burden for caregivers. Similar to motor symptoms, the characteristics of CI in 
PD can be quite variable, both in terms of what cognitive domains are impaired, 
and the timing of onset and rate of progression. This review will examine the 
profile of cognitive domain impairments observed in PD, with a focus on early CI 
(without dementia). We will also discuss possible relationships between specific 
cognitive domain impairments in PD and pathological processes such as 
Lewy-related pathology and Alzheimer's disease. It is our hypothesis that the 
specific characteristics of CI observed in individual PD patients provide clues 
to the underlying pathological processes, and that understanding the biological 
basis of this clinical phenomenon will assist in directing disease-specific 
treatments. Given the high lifetime risk for CI in PD, it is imperative that we 
improve our understanding and treatments for this common and disabling problem 
in PD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2010.00373.x
PMCID: PMC3049172
PMID: 20522089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2328. Brain Pathol. 2010 May;20(3):646-53. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00368.x.

Neuroimaging and cognition in Parkinson's disease dementia.

Silbert LC(1), Kaye J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR 
97239, USA. silbertl@ohsu.edu

The prevalence of cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) 
is high and can potentially occur as the result of multiple differing 
pathologies. Neuroimaging has provided evidence of decreased cortical volume, 
increased white matter diffusion changes, and decreased resting metabolic 
activity that appears to begin prior to the onset of dementia in PD patients. 
Cognitive impairment has been found to be associated with multiple 
neurotransmitter transmission deficiencies, including dopamine and 
acetylcholine, indicating a widespread neurotransmitter dysfunction in 
PD-related dementia. Findings of increased Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB) binding 
in subjects with Lewy Body Disease (LBD) compared with Parkinson's disease and 
dementia (PDD) may explain phenotype differences in the spectrum of Dementia 
with Lewy Bodies (DLB), and show promise in guiding future therapeutic trials 
aimed at this disease. Advances in neuroimaging now allow for the detection of 
volumetric, pharmacologic, and pathological changes that may assist in the 
diagnosis and prediction of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's patients so that 
better evaluation of disease progression and treatment can be obtained.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00368.x
PMCID: PMC3327506
PMID: 20522090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2329. Brain Pathol. 2010 May;20(3):660-71. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00370.x.

Biomarkers for cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease.

Shi M(1), Huber BR, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

Cognitive impairment, including dementia, is commonly seen in those afflicted 
with Parkinson disease (PD), particularly at advanced disease stages. 
Pathologically, PD with dementia (PD-D) is most often associated with the 
presence of cortical Lewy bodies, as is the closely related dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB). Both PD-D and DLB are also frequently complicated by the presence 
of neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid plaques, features most often attributed 
to Alzheimer disease. Biomarkers are urgently needed to differentiate among 
these disease processes and predict dementia in PD as well as monitor responses 
of patients to new therapies. A few clinical assessments, along with structural 
and functional neuroimaging, have been utilized in the last few years with some 
success in this area. Additionally, a number of other strategies have been 
employed to identify biochemical/molecular biomarkers associated with cognitive 
impairment and dementia in PD, e.g. targeted analysis of candidate proteins 
known to be important to PD pathogenesis and progression in cerebrospinal fluid 
or blood. Finally, interesting results are emerging from preliminary studies 
with unbiased and high throughput genomic, proteomic and metabolomic techniques. 
The current findings and perspectives of applying these strategies and 
techniques are reviewed in this article, together with potential areas of 
advancement.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00370.x
PMCID: PMC2881485
PMID: 20522092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2330. Brain Pathol. 2010 May;20(3):672-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00367.x.

The treatment of cognitive impairment associated with Parkinson's disease.

Burn DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK. d.j.burn@ncl.ac.uk

Cognitive impairment and dementia associated with Parkinson's disease (PD) are 
common and often have devastating effects upon the patient and their family. 
Early cognitive impairment in PD is frequent, and the functional impact may be 
underestimated. Optimal management will rely upon better identification of the 
predominant symptoms and greater knowledge of their pathophysiological basis. 
The management of dementia in PD (PD-D) also has to consider the significant 
neuropsychiatric burden that frequently accompanies the cognitive decline, as 
well as fluctuations in attention. Atypical anti-psychotics have a limited role 
at present in treating PD-D, although new drugs are under development. The 
mainstay of drug management for people with PD-D is cholinesterase inhibitors, 
although recent trials have suggested that the N-methyl-D aspartate antagonist 
memantine may also have some benefit. Disease modification remains the ultimate 
goal for preventing the inexorable decline in PD-D, although effective 
interventions are still some way off. Limited benefit may, however, be possible 
through exercise programmes and so-called "medical foods", although randomised 
trials are required to confirm largely anecdotal observations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00367.x
PMCID: PMC8094648
PMID: 20522093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2331. Neurocase. 2010 Dec;16(6):466-87. doi: 10.1080/13554791003730600. Epub 2010 Jun 
2.

Visual spatial cognition in neurodegenerative disease.

Possin KL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. 
kpossin@memory.ucsf.edu

Visual spatial impairment is often an early symptom of neurodegenerative 
disease; however, this multi-faceted domain of cognition is not well-assessed by 
most typical dementia evaluations. Neurodegenerative diseases cause 
circumscribed atrophy in distinct neural networks, and accordingly, they impact 
visual spatial cognition in different and characteristic ways. 
Anatomically-focused visual spatial assessment can assist the clinician in 
making an early and accurate diagnosis. This article will review the literature 
on visual spatial cognition in neurodegenerative disease clinical syndromes, and 
where research is available, by neuropathologic diagnoses. Visual spatial 
cognition will be organized primarily according to the following schemes: 
bottom-up/top-down processing, dorsal/ventral stream processing, and 
egocentric/allocentric frames of reference.

DOI: 10.1080/13554791003730600
PMCID: PMC3028935
PMID: 20526954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2332. Drugs Aging. 2010 Jun 1;27(6):457-70. doi: 10.2165/11536260-000000000-00000.

REM sleep behaviour disorder in older individuals: epidemiology, pathophysiology 
and management.

Trotti LM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) is a sleep disorder in 
which patients appear to be enacting their dreams while in REM sleep. The 
behaviours are typically violent, in association with violent dream content, so 
serious harm can be done to the patient or the bed partner. The disorder 
predominantly affects older adults, and has an estimated prevalence in adults of 
0.4-0.5%. However, the frequency is much higher in certain neurodegenerative 
diseases, especially Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple 
systems atrophy. RBD can occur in the absence of diagnosed neurological diseases 
(the 'idiopathic' form), although patients with this form of RBD may have subtle 
neurological abnormalities and often ultimately develop a neurodegenerative 
disorder. Data from animal models and cases of RBD developing after brainstem 
(pontine tegmentum, medulla) lesions have led to the understanding that RBD is 
caused by a lack of normal REM muscle atonia and a lack of normal suppression of 
locomotor generators during REM sleep. Clonazepam is used as first-line therapy 
for RBD and melatonin as second-line therapy, although evidence for both of 
these interventions comes from uncontrolled case series. Because the risk of 
injury to the patient or the bed partner is high, interventions to improve the 
safety of the sleep environment are also often necessary. This review describes 
the epidemiology, pathophysiology and treatment of RBD.

DOI: 10.2165/11536260-000000000-00000
PMCID: PMC2954417
PMID: 20524706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2333. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2010 Aug;25(5):396-409. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acq038. Epub 
2010 Jun 8.

Episodic memory in dementia: Characteristics of new learning that differentiate 
Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's diseases.

Aretouli E(1), Brandt J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287-7218, USA. earetou1@jhmi.edu

Differences in the memory characteristics of patients with Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), Huntington's disease (HD), and Parkinson's disease (PD) were investigated 
with tests that assess learning and retention of words, line-drawn objects, and 
locations. Large groups of AD, HD, and PD patients were administered the Hopkins 
Verbal Learning Test-Revised (HVLT-R) and the Hopkins Board (HB). Eight learning 
and memory measures were subjected to discriminant function analysis. A 91% 
classification accuracy was achieved for the separation of cortical and 
subcortical dementias and 79% accuracy for the discrimination of the three 
groups. The delayed recall of items was the best discriminator. 
Receiver-operating curve analysis indicated up to 90% sensitivity and 90% 
specificity in differentiating the three diseases using the discriminant scores. 
Individual learning and memory measures of the HVLT-R and the HB provided very 
high sensitivity and specificity in distinguishing cortical versus subcortical 
dementias and modest accuracy in separating the two subcortical diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acq038
PMCID: PMC2904670
PMID: 20530592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2334. Brain. 2010 Jul;133(Pt 7):2032-44. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq132. Epub 2010 Jun 9.

SNARE protein redistribution and synaptic failure in a transgenic mouse model of 
Parkinson's disease.

Garcia-Reitböck P(1), Anichtchik O, Bellucci A, Iovino M, Ballini C, Fineberg E, 
Ghetti B, Della Corte L, Spano P, Tofaris GK, Goedert M, Spillantini MG.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0PY, UK.

The pre-synaptic protein alpha-synuclein is the main component of Lewy bodies 
and Lewy neurites, the defining neuropathological characteristics of Parkinson's 
disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Mutations in the alpha-synuclein gene 
cause familial forms of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. We 
previously described a transgenic mouse line expressing truncated human 
alpha-synuclein(1-120) that develops alpha-synuclein aggregates, striatal 
dopamine deficiency and reduced locomotion, similar to Parkinson's disease. We 
now show that in the striatum of these mice, as in Parkinson's disease, synaptic 
accumulation of alpha-synuclein is accompanied by an age-dependent 
redistribution of the synaptic SNARE proteins SNAP-25, syntaxin-1 and 
synaptobrevin-2, as well as by an age-dependent reduction in dopamine release. 
Furthermore, the release of FM1-43 dye from PC12 cells expressing either human 
full-length alpha-synuclein(1-140) or truncated alpha-synuclein(1-120) was 
reduced. These findings reveal a novel gain of toxic function of alpha-synuclein 
at the synapse, which may be an early event in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq132
PMCID: PMC2892942
PMID: 20534649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2335. Psychiatry Res. 2011 Jan 30;185(1-2):211-4. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2009.06.012.

Validation of Addenbrooke's cognitive examination for detecting early dementia 
in a Japanese population.

Yoshida H(1), Terada S, Honda H, Ata T, Takeda N, Kishimoto Y, Oshima E, 
Ishihara T, Kuroda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 
700-8558, Japan.

There is a clear need for brief, but sensitive and specific, cognitive screening 
instruments for dementia. We assessed the diagnostic accuracy of the Japanese 
version of Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE) in identifying early 
dementia in comparison with the conventional Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE). Standard tests for evaluating dementia screening tests were applied. A 
total of 201 subjects (Alzheimer's disease (AD)=65, frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD)=24, vascular dementia=26, dementia with Lewy bodies=11, mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI)=13, and controls=62) participated in this study. The 
reliability of the ACE was very good (alpha coefficient=0.82). In our patient 
series, the sensitivity for diagnosing dementia with an ACE score of ≤74 was 
0.889 with a specificity of 0.987, and the sensitivity of an ACE score of ≤80 
was 0.984 with a specificity of 0.867. The Japanese version of the ACE is a very 
accurate instrument for the detection of early dementia, and should be widely 
used in clinical practice.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2009.06.012
PMID: 20537725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2336. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Nov;16(9):553-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.05.004. Epub 2010 Jun 9.

Parkinson's disease psychosis 2010: a review article.

Friedman JH(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept of Neurology, Alpert Medical School of Brown University, Butler 
Hospital, 345 Blackstone Blvd, Providence, RI 02906, USA. 
Joseph_Friedman@brown.edu

Psychotic symptoms are common in Parkinson's disease (PD), generally associated 
with the medications used to treat the motor symptoms. On rare occasion they 
occur in patients not taking medication for PD. Psychotic symptoms are usually 
hallucinations, typically visual, less commonly auditory, and rarely in other 
domains. Hallucinations are generally stereotyped and without emotional content. 
Initially patients usually have insight so that the hallucinations are benign in 
terms of their immediate impact but have poor prognostic implications, with 
increased risk of dementia, worsened psychotic symptoms and mortality. Delusions 
occur in about 5-10% of drug treated patients and are considerably more 
disruptive, being paranoid in nature, often of spousal infidelity or abandonment 
by family. Treatment of Parkinson's disease psychosis (PDP) focuses on reducing 
the psychiatric symptom load while balancing the competing problem of mobility. 
Contributors to the psychotic symptoms should be searched for, such as systemic 
illness and other psycho-active medications. If none are identified or can be 
eliminated then the PD medications should be reduced to the lowest levels that 
allow tolerable motor function. Once this level has been reached there are two 
schools of thought on treatment, using either acetylcholinesterase inhibitors or 
atypical anti-psychotics. Only clozapine has level I evidence to support its 
use. Quetiapine is the only other anti-psychotic free of motor side effects, but 
it has failed double blind placebo controlled trials to demonstrate efficacy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.05.004
PMID: 20538500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2337. Mov Disord. 2010 Jul 30;25(10):1343-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.22692.

Abnormal explicit but normal implicit sequence learning in premanifest and early 
Huntington's disease.

Schneider SA(1), Wilkinson L, Bhatia KP, Henley SM, Rothwell JC, Tabrizi SJ, 
Jahanshahi M.

Author information:
(1)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL, 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square,London, United Kingdom.

Learning may occur with or without awareness, as explicit (intentional) or 
implicit (incidental) learning. The caudate nucleus and the putamen, which are 
affected early in Huntington's disease (HD), are thought to be essential for 
motor sequence learning. However, the results of existing studies are 
inconsistent concerning presence/absence of deficits in implicit and explicit 
motor sequence learning in HD. We assessed implicit and explicit motor sequence 
learning using sequences of equivalent structure in 15 individuals with a 
positive HD genetic test (7 premanifest; 8 early stage disease) and 11 matched 
controls. The HD group showed evidence of normal implicit motor sequence 
learning, whereas explicit motor sequence learning was impaired in manifest and 
premanifest HD gene carriers, with progressive decline with progressive disease. 
Explicit sequence learning may be a useful cognitive biomarker for HD 
progression.

(c) 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22692
PMCID: PMC2997693
PMID: 20544716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2338. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010 Oct;81(10):1080-6. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2009.199950. Epub 2010 Jun 14.

CSF amyloid-beta and tau proteins, and cognitive performance, in early and 
untreated Parkinson's disease: the Norwegian ParkWest study.

Alves G(1), Brønnick K, Aarsland D, Blennow K, Zetterberg H, Ballard C, Kurz MW, 
Andreasson U, Tysnes OB, Larsen JP, Mulugeta E.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Stavanger, Norway. algu@sus.no

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology is found in a considerable 
portion of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), particularly those with early 
dementia (PDD). Altered cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of amyloid-β (Aβ) and 
tau proteins have been found in PDD, with intermediate changes for Aβ42 in 
non-demented PD. The authors investigated whether AD-related CSF protein levels 
are altered and relate to neuropsychological performance in early, untreated PD.
METHODS: CSF concentrations of Aβ42, Aβ40 and Aβ38 were measured by 
electrochemiluminiscene and levels of total tau (T-tau) and phosphorylated tau 
(P-tau) by ELISA in 109 newly diagnosed, unmedicated, non-demented, 
community-based PD patients who had undergone comprehensive neuropsychological 
testing, and were compared with those of 36 age-matched normal controls and 20 
subjects with mild AD.
RESULTS: PD patients displayed significant reductions in Aβ42 (19%; p=0.009), 
Aβ40 (15.5%; p=0.008) and Aβ38 (23%; p=0.004) but not T-tau (p=0.816) or P-tau 
(p=0.531) compared with controls. CSF Aβ42 reductions in PD were less marked 
than in AD (53%; p=0.002). Sequential regression analyses demonstrated 
significant associations between CSF levels of Aβ42 (β=0.205; p=0.019), Aβ40 
(β=0.378; p<0.001) and Aβ38 (β=0.288; p=0.001) and memory impairment, but not 
executive-attentional or visuospatial dysfunction. Tau protein levels did not 
correlate with cognitive measures.
CONCLUSION: CSF Aβ levels are altered in a subset of patients with early PD and 
relate to memory impairment. Our study suggests that alterations in Aβ protein 
metabolism may contribute to the heterogeneity in pattern and course of 
cognitive decline associated with PD. Longitudinal studies are needed to clarify 
the clinical significance of CSF Aβ peptides as prognostic biomarkers in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.199950
PMID: 20547614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2339. Neurodegener Dis. 2010;7(4):243-50. doi: 10.1159/000287952. Epub 2010 May 5.

Caspase-cleaved transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43 in Parkinson's 
disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Kokoulina P(1), Rohn TT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boise State University, Boise, Idaho, USA.

BACKGROUND: Transactivation response DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43) 
proteinopathies are classified based upon the extent of modified TDP-43 and 
include a growing number of neurodegenerative diseases such as amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with 
ubiquitin-immunoreactive, tau-negative inclusions and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration with motor neuron disease.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of the study was to examine whether proteolytic 
modifications of TDP-43 are a relevant finding in Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: A novel site-directed caspase cleavage antibody, termed TDP caspase 
cleavage product antibody (TDPccp), was utilized based upon a known caspase 3 
cleavage consensus site within TDP-43 at position 219.
RESULTS: Application of this antibody to postmortem brain sections from PD and 
DLB patients revealed the presence of caspase-cleaved TDP-43 in Lewy bodies and 
Hirano bodies in all cases examined. Colocalization of TDPccp with an antibody 
to alpha-synuclein (alpha-Syn), which served as a general marker for Lewy 
bodies, was evident within the substantia nigra in both alpha-synucleinopathies. 
Interestingly, the TDPccp antibody detected a greater number of Lewy bodies in 
PD and DLB compared to the alpha-Syn antibody. In addition, a semiquantitative 
analysis in both diseases confirmed this finding by indicating that the 
percentage of caspase-cleaved TDP-43 single-labeled Lewy bodies was 
approximately twice that of alpha-Syn labeling (in DLB 13.4 vs. 5.5%, while in 
PD 34.6 vs. 17.6%).
CONCLUSION: Collectively, these data have identified caspase-cleaved TDP-43 as a 
primary component of Lewy and Hirano bodies in PD and DLB, and suggest that the 
TDPccp antibody is an effective marker for the detection of Lewy bodies in these 
neurodegenerative diseases.

2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000287952
PMCID: PMC2895743
PMID: 20551689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2340. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 11;5(6):e11070. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011070.

Neuronal microRNA deregulation in response to Alzheimer's disease amyloid-beta.

Schonrock N(1), Ke YD, Humphreys D, Staufenbiel M, Ittner LM, Preiss T, Götz J.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia. 
nschonrock@med.usyd.edu.au

Normal brain development and function depends on microRNA (miRNA) networks to 
fine tune the balance between the transcriptome and proteome of the cell. These 
small non-coding RNA regulators are highly enriched in brain where they play key 
roles in neuronal development, plasticity and disease. In neurodegenerative 
disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), brain miRNA profiles are altered; 
thus miRNA dysfunction could be both a cause and a consequence of disease. Our 
study dissects the complexity of human AD pathology, and addresses the 
hypothesis that amyloid-beta (Abeta) itself, a known causative factor of AD, 
causes neuronal miRNA deregulation, which could contribute to the 
pathomechanisms of AD. We used sensitive TaqMan low density miRNA arrays (TLDA) 
on murine primary hippocampal cultures to show that about half of all miRNAs 
tested were down-regulated in response to Abeta peptides. Time-course assays of 
neuronal Abeta treatments show that Abeta is in fact a powerful regulator of 
miRNA levels as the response of certain mature miRNAs is extremely rapid. 
Bioinformatic analysis predicts that the deregulated miRNAs are likely to affect 
target genes present in prominent neuronal pathways known to be disrupted in AD. 
Remarkably, we also found that the miRNA deregulation in hippocampal cultures 
was paralleled in vivo by a deregulation in the hippocampus of 
Abeta42-depositing APP23 mice, at the onset of Abeta plaque formation. In 
addition, the miRNA deregulation in hippocampal cultures and APP23 hippocampus 
overlaps with those obtained in human AD studies. Taken together, our findings 
suggest that neuronal miRNA deregulation in response to an insult by Abeta may 
be an important factor contributing to the cascade of events leading to AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011070
PMCID: PMC2884018
PMID: 20552018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have a purely 
academic collaboration with Matthias Staufenbiel of Novartis. There is no 
commercial interest attached to this work with him. All PLoS ONE policies 
regarding the sharing of data and materials will be adhered to.


2341. Radiologe. 2010 Sep;50(9):791-8. doi: 10.1007/s00117-009-1947-3.

[MR spectroscopy in dementia].

[Article in German]

Hauser T(1), Gerigk L, Giesel F, Schuster L, Essig M.

Author information:
(1)Abteilung E010, Radiologie, Deutsches Krebsforschungszentrum (DKFZ) 
Heidelberg , Im Neuenheimer Feld 280, 69120, Heidelberg, Deutschland. 
t.hauser@dkfz.de

With an increasingly aging population we are faced with the problem of an 
increasing number of dementia patients. In addition to clinical, 
neuropsychological and laboratory procedures, MRI plays an important role in the 
early diagnosis of dementia. In addition to various morphological changes 
functional changes can also help in the diagnosis and differential diagnosis of 
dementia. Overall the diagnosis of dementia can be improved by using parameters 
from MR spectroscopy. This article focuses on MR spectroscopic changes in the 
physiological aging process as well as on changes in mild cognitive impairment a 
precursor of Alzheimer's dementia, in Alzheimer's dementia, frontotemporal 
dementia, vascular dementia and Lewy body dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00117-009-1947-3
PMID: 20552158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2342. Neurotox Res. 2011 Feb;19(2):253-65. doi: 10.1007/s12640-010-9203-1. Epub 2010 
Jun 15.

Diabetes type II: a risk factor for depression-Parkinson-Alzheimer?

Riederer P(1), Bartl J, Laux G, Grünblatt E.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurochemistry, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry, Psychosomatic 
and Psychotherapy, National Parkinson Foundation Centre of Excellence 
Laboratories, University of Würzburg, Füchsleinstr. 15, 97080 Würzburg, Germany.

There is ample evidence that impairments in the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
(HPA) axis are of etiopathobiochemical importance in a subgroup of patients with 
"depression", causing hypercortisolaemia as major metabolic effect. Chronic 
hypercortisolaemia causes insulin resistance. Therefore, it is not surprising 
that epidemiological studies demonstrate an association of "depression" with 
diabetes type II and vice versa. Chronic stress and hypercortisolaemia are 
conditions, which have been suggested to be causal for Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
as brain insulin resistance is associated with β-Amyloid-accumulation and 
hyperphosphorylation of tau-protein. Depression is one of the significant 
symptomatology preceding AD. It is however, not known whether "depression" 
associated with hypercortisolaemia is the subgroup at risk for AD. In contrast 
to a subgroup of "depression" and to AD, in Parkinson's disease (PD) there is 
only weak evidence for an association with diabetes type II and insulin 
resistance. As "depression" is preceding PD in up to half of such patients, it 
remains to be elucidated whether this is a subgroup of depressed patients, which 
is not associated with disturbances of the HPA axis and hypercortisolaemia. 
Improved clinical and biochemical/molecular knowledge about "depression" 
associated with AD and PD in comparison to "pure" depression might lead to 
improved therapeutic strategies and even drug development focusing subtypes of 
"depression".

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-010-9203-1
PMID: 20552313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2343. Front Aging Neurosci. 2010 May 18;2:16. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2010.00016. 
eCollection 2010.

Presenilin/gamma-Secretase and Inflammation.

Saura CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neurociències, Departament Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
(CIBERNED), Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona Bellaterra, Spain.

Presenilins (PS) are the catalytic components of gamma-secretase, an aspartyl 
protease that regulates through proteolytic processing the function of multiple 
signaling proteins. Specially relevant is the gamma-secretase-dependent cleavage 
of the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) since generates the beta-amyloid 
(Abeta) peptides that aggregate and accumulate in the brain of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) patients. Abnormal processing and/or accumulation of Abeta disrupt 
synaptic and metabolic processes leading to neuron dysfunction and 
neurodegeneration. Studies in presenilin conditional knockout mice have revealed 
that presenilin-1 is essential for age-dependent Abeta accumulation and 
inflammation. By contrast, mutations in the presenilin genes responsible for 
early onset familial AD cause rapid disease progression and accentuate clinical 
and pathological features including inflammation. In addition, a number of loss 
of function mutations in presenilin-1 have been recently associated to 
non-Alzheimer's dementias including frontotemporal dementia and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. In agreement, total loss of presenilin function in the brain 
results in striking neurodegeneration and inflammation, which includes 
activation of glial cells and induction of proinflammatory genes, besides 
altered inflammatory responses in the periphery. Interestingly, some 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs that slow cognitive decline and reduce the 
risk of AD, decrease amyloidogenic Abeta42 levels by modulating allosterically 
PS/gamma-secretase. In this review, I present current evidence supporting a role 
of presenilin/gamma-secretase signaling on gliogenesis and gliosis in normal and 
pathological conditions. Understanding the cellular mechanisms regulated by 
presenilin/gamma-secretase during chronic inflammatory processes may provide new 
approaches for the development of effective therapeutic strategies for AD.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2010.00016
PMCID: PMC2887037
PMID: 20559464


2344. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010 Sep;81(9):1008-13. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2009.174748. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Clinical prediction of Parkinson's disease: planning for the age of 
neuroprotection.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Montreal General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada. 
ronald.postuma@mcgill.ca

As a chronic progressive disease, Parkinson's disease (PD) has a presymptomatic 
interval; that is, a period during which the pathological process has begun, but 
motor signs required for the clinical diagnosis are absent. The ability to 
identify this preclinical stage may be critical in the development and eventual 
use of neuroprotective therapy. Recently proposed staging systems of PD have 
suggested that degeneration may occur initially in areas outside the substantia 
nigra, suggesting that non-motor manifestations may be markers of presymptomatic 
PD. Decreased olfaction has recently been demonstrated to predict PD in 
prospective pathological studies, although the lead time may be relatively 
short, and the positive predictive value is low. Idiopathic RBD has a very high 
predictive value, with approximately 50% of affected individuals developing PD 
or dementia within 10 years. This implies that idiopathic RBD patients are ideal 
candidates to test potential preclinical markers. However, the specificity of 
symptom screens for RBD is not established, not all persons with PD develop RBD, 
and there are only limited ways to predict which RBD patients will develop PD. 
Other simple screens based upon autonomic symptoms, depression and personality 
changes, quantitative motor testing and other sleep disorders may also be useful 
markers, but have not been extensively tested. Other more expensive measures 
such as detailed autonomic testing, cardiac MIBG-scintigraphy, dopaminergic 
imaging and transcranial ultrasound may be especially useful in defining disease 
risk in those identified through primary screening.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.174748
PMID: 20562452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2345. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Feb;82(2):196-203. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2009.204081. Epub 2010 Jun 20.

Clinical, neuroimaging and neuropathological features of a new chromosome 
9p-linked FTD-ALS family.

Boxer AL(1), Mackenzie IR, Boeve BF, Baker M, Seeley WW, Crook R, Feldman H, 
Hsiung GY, Rutherford N, Laluz V, Whitwell J, Foti D, McDade E, Molano J, 
Karydas A, Wojtas A, Goldman J, Mirsky J, Sengdy P, Dearmond S, Miller BL, 
Rademakers R.

Author information:
(1)UCSF Memory and Aging Center, University of California-San Francisco, CA 
94143, USA. aboxer@memory.ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS) is a 
heritable form of FTD, but the gene(s) responsible for the majority of autosomal 
dominant FTD-ALS cases have yet to be found. Previous studies have identified a 
region on chromosome 9p that is associated with FTD and ALS.
METHODS: The authors report the clinical, volumetric MRI, neuropathological and 
genetic features of a new chromosome 9p-linked FTD-ALS family, VSM-20.
RESULTS: Ten members of family VSM-20 displayed heterogeneous clinical 
phenotypes of isolated behavioural-variant FTD (bvFTD), ALS or a combination of 
the two. Parkinsonism was common, with one individual presenting with a 
corticobasal syndrome. Analysis of structural MRI scans from five affected 
family members revealed grey- and white-matter loss that was most prominent in 
the frontal lobes, with mild parietal and occipital lobe atrophy, but less 
temporal lobe atrophy than in 10 severity-matched sporadic bvFTD cases. Autopsy 
in three family members showed a consistent and unique subtype of FTLD-TDP 
pathology. Genome-wide linkage analysis conclusively linked family VSM-20 to a 
28.3 cM region between D9S1808 and D9S251 on chromosome 9p, reducing the 
published minimal linked region to a 3.7 Mb interval. Genomic sequencing and 
expression analysis failed to identify mutations in the 10 known and predicted 
genes within this candidate region, suggesting that next-generation sequencing 
may be needed to determine the mutational mechanism associated with chromosome 
9p-linked FTD-ALS.
CONCLUSIONS: Family VSM-20 significantly reduces the region linked to FTD-ALS on 
chromosome 9p. A distinct pattern of brain atrophy and neuropathological 
findings may help to identify other families with FTD-ALS caused by this genetic 
abnormality.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.204081
PMCID: PMC3017222
PMID: 20562461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests None.


2346. J Neurol. 2010 Nov;257(11):1875-81. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5630-4. Epub 2010 
Jun 20.

Association between male gender and cortical Lewy body pathology in large 
autopsy series.

Nelson PT(1), Schmitt FA, Jicha GA, Kryscio RJ, Abner EL, Smith CD, Van Eldik 
LJ, Markesbery WR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Sanders-Brown Center on 
Aging, University of Kentucky, Rm 311, Sanders-Brown Building, 800 S. Limestone, 
Lexington, KY 40536-0230, USA. pnels2@email.uky.edu

Sex-linked factors may alter risk for neurodegenerative diseases. Definitive 
diagnoses are not established until autopsy, so neuropathological studies are 
critical. There have not been reported gender-related differences in neocortical 
Lewy bodies (LBs) using large multi-center autopsy series. We evaluated the 
associations between gender and pathologically characterized neurodegenerative 
diseases. Cases with Alzheimer's disease (AD), neocortical LBs, AD + neocortical 
LBs, or neither pathology were evaluated as separate groups. Results were 
corrected for possible confounders including age at death, smoking history, and 
education. The settings were the University of Kentucky Alzheimer's Disease 
Center and the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) Registry autopsy 
series; 3,830 subjects met inclusion criteria. Patients with neocortical 
("diffuse") or intermediate ("limbic") LB pathologies tended to be male 
(male:female odds ratios ~2.9 with 95% CI 2.02-4.18). The preponderance of males 
dying with neocortical LB pathology was seen consistently across age groups and 
was not due to the potential confounders evaluated. By contrast, individuals 
dying with AD pathology were more likely to be female if dying over 80 
(male:female odds ratio 0.66, 95% CI 0.50-0.88), but that tendency was not seen 
in individuals dying with AD pathology prior to age 80. Increased understanding 
of the male predominance in neocortical LB pathology may help guide clinicians, 
because males are more likely to be "undercalled" for neocortical LBs 
clinically, and females are more likely to be "overcalled" (P < 0.05 for both). 
Males are far more likely than females to die with neocortical LB pathology. 
This phenomenon may help guide medical practice including clinical trial study 
design.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-010-5630-4
PMCID: PMC3040648
PMID: 20563821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2347. Brain. 2010 Aug;133(Pt 8):2382-93. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq158. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Cognitive impairment in patients with multiple system atrophy and progressive 
supranuclear palsy.

Brown RG(1), Lacomblez L, Landwehrmeyer BG, Bak T, Uttner I, Dubois B, Agid Y, 
Ludolph A, Bensimon G, Payan C, Leigh NP; NNIPPS Study Group.

Collaborators: Leigh PN, Bensimon G, Ludolph AC, Agid Y, Dib M, Lacomblez L, 
Vidailhet M, Landwehrmeyer B, Ludolph AC, Asselain B, Allain H, Chadwick D, 
Perret JE, Warlow C, Burn D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Bonnet AM, Fermanian J, Payan M, 
Verny M, Vidailhet M, Moore P, Tranchant C, Payan C, Borg M, McCrone P, Durif F, 
Evans A, Fermanian J, Vaillet F, Hauw JJ, Duyckaerts C, Seilhean D, Al-Sarraj S, 
Revesz T, Landwehrmeyer B, Kretzschmar HA, Brown RG, Bak T, Danek A, Dubois B, 
Lacomblez L, Marié RM, Uttner I, Bensimon G, Graf M, Payan C, Paillasseur P, 
Payan C, Pham HP, Fermanian J, Brown RG, McCrone P, Dedise N, Hermine C, Sagnes 
S, Poître B, Foucart C, Dougherty A, Murphy C, Mason H, Hermann T, Klempp K, 
Niess A, Stange V, Ouslimani A, Agid Y, Viallet F, Couratier C, Arguillère S, 
Henon S, Gimeno S, Dubas F, Fressinaud C, Legall D, Rumbach L, Vidry E, Chopard 
G, LeDoze F, Defer G, Viader F, Daniel F, Lalevée C, Durif F, Debilly B, Derost 
PH, Tilignac C, Crégu DL, Rosiére C, Besson G, Mallaret C, Klinger H, Funkiewiez 
A, Destée A, Defebvre L, Dujardin K, Couratier P, Chazot-Balcon M, Broussole E, 
Mollion H, Bouvard M, Azulay JP, Witjas T, Delfini M, Camu W, Portet F, Khoris 
J, Pageot N, Garrigues G, Martin K, Bernard J, Borg M, Bailet B, Vidailhet M, 
Sangla S, Ranoux D, Brandel JP, De Broucker T, Agid Y, Dubois B, Meininger V, 
Verny M, Cesaro P, Fenelon G, Bloch F, Bonnet AM, Lacomblez L, Maltête D, Memin 
A, Torni F, Welter ML, Worbe J, Pillon B, Czernecki V, Czernecki V, Picard A, 
Passaquet B, Caparros-Lefebvre D, Lannuzel A, Verlut F, Gil R, Bailbé M, Venisse 
S, Moumy H, Mesnage V, Houeto JL, Petit F, Bonnaud V, Ornon C, Verin M, Trébon 
P, Salicé G, Rascol O, Galitzky M, Thalamas C, Lemoal S, Deneuville MC, 
Delabaere H, Prunier C, Autret A, Corsia P, Beauchamp D, Ludolph A, Noth J, 
Kosinski C, Geyer C, Kronenbürger M, Schlangen C, Einhaeupl K, Arnold PD, 
Hauptmann B, Lipp A, Fassdorf K, Przuntek H, Müller T, Gagel-Schweibold G, 
Siepmann M, Benz S, Finger M, Klotz P, Reichmann H, Herting B, Reissner E, 
Lücking CH, Bötefúr I, Braune S, Magerkurth C, Mylius V, Magerkurth C, Zierz S, 
Kornhuber M, Mueller T, Neudecker S, Seifert U, Rockahr A, Dengler R, Hauswedell 
A, Kolbe H, Peschel T, Schrader C, Siggelkow S, Stewen J, Kapels H-, Winkler C, 
Schrader C, Wallesch CW, Bartels C, Fork M, Brandt T, Asmus F, Bauer M, Gasser 
T, Maass S, Velden J, Viehöver A, Wassilowsky D, Bötzel K, Baur B, von 
Schlippenbach C, Stenglein-Krapf G, Bogdahn U, Klucken J, Kohl Z, Lange M, Thun 
C, Winkler J, Winner B, Lange M, Benecke R, Dressler D, Wolters A, Zegowitz G, 
Fister A, Dichgans J, Eberhardt O, Gröschel K, Hauser TK, Schulz JB, Ludolph AC, 
Ecker D, Jung A, Kramer B, Landwehrmeyer GB, Storch A, Sussmuth SD, Uttner I, 
Leigh PN, Gibson M, Forbes R, Dick A, Clarke C, Dhariwal S, Hornabrook R, 
Colhoun S, Barnfield V, Pall H, Nicholl D, Hodges J, Bak T, Hearn V, Donald L, 
Moore P, Baker G, Owen L, O'Brien I, Leigh PN, Chaudhuri KR, Heaney D, Blain C, 
Azam S, Williams V, Issacs J, Smallman C, Stanton B, Dittner A, Donnellan C, 
Secker D, Langman A, Lomax C, Simeon C, Lees A, Quinn N, Evans A, Scaravilli T, 
Russo N, Trikouli E, Paviour D, Massey L, Jahanshahi M, Winterburn D, Newman P, 
Bathgate D, Cowen Z, Burn D, Zermansky A, Warren N, Welch J, Welch P, Summers B, 
Silver L, Counsell C, Gordon J, Harris C, Perkins K, Bhaumick S, Evans S, Turner 
G, Adam S, Weiser R, Lawthom C, Lowman A, Forwood G, Moran M, Bastin L.

Author information:
(1)King's College London, MRC Centre of Neurodegeneration Research, Institute of 
Psychiatry, Department of Psychology, PO77, London SE5 8AF, UK. 
richard.g.brown@kcl.ac.uk

This article reports the severity and profile of neuropsychological impairment 
on a prevalent cohort of patients with a clinical diagnosis of either multiple 
system atrophy (n=372) or progressive supranuclear palsy (n=311) from the 
Neuroprotection and Natural History in Parkinson Plus Syndromes cohort. The 
Dementia Rating Scale and Frontal Assessment Battery were used to assess global 
cognition and executive dysfunction. For the Dementia Rating Scale impairment 
was observed in approximately 57% of the progressive supranuclear palsy group 
and 20% of the multiple system atrophy group. In the former, impairment in a 
single cognitive domain was observed in 40%, with the same number showing 
impairment in multiple domains, while in the latter the figures were 28.6 and 
13.5%, respectively. On the Frontal Assessment Battery, impairment was observed 
in 62.0% of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and 31.8% of those with 
multiple system atrophy. Although the progressive supranuclear palsy group 
performed worse overall, the cognitive profiles of the two groups on the 
Dementia Rating Scale subscales were identical, with the main impairment of the 
Initiation and Perseveration subscale. The impaired patients in the two groups 
were largely indistinguishable, qualitatively and quantitatively. Impairment was 
associated with greater age and clinical disability in both groups and was 
evident even in the early stages (22% in multiple system atrophy and 50% in 
progressive supranuclear palsy). Where a pathological diagnosis was available, 
the original clinical diagnosis was confirmed in the majority of cases, 
including those with significant cognitive impairment. The rate of impairment in 
those with a confirmed pathological diagnosis was comparable to that of the 
sample as a whole. These results demonstrate, in the largest prospectively 
recruited cohort of patients with progressive supranuclear palsy and multiple 
system atrophy studied to date, the existence of a cognitive profile similar to 
that previously reported in idiopathic Parkinson's disease. The results indicate 
a high level of cognitive impairment associated with progressive supranuclear 
palsy, but also point to comparable dysfunction in a substantial proportion of 
the patients with multiple system atrophy. Significant cognitive impairment 
appears consistent with a diagnosis of multiple system atrophy, even early in 
the disease, with important implications for diagnosis, research and management.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq158
PMID: 20576697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2348. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Sep;16(8):503-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.06.002. Epub 2010 Jun 26.

Risk of pneumonia onset and discontinuation of oral intake following 
videofluorography in patients with Lewy body disease.

Yamamoto T(1), Kobayashi Y, Murata M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, National Center Hospital of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, 4-1-1 Ogawahigashi-cho, Kodaira City, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the time course of pneumonia onset and duration of 
continued oral intake following videofluorography (VFG) in patients with Lewy 
body disease.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Subjects were 90 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (IPD) and 45 with Lewy body dementia (LBD). We performed a follow-up 
study of the time from VFG until onset of pneumonia or discontinuation of oral 
intake, up to a maximum of 24 months, and determined the associated risk 
factors. We evaluated the cumulative rates of pneumonia onset and continued oral 
intake over 24 months for each disease.
RESULTS: Among patients with Lewy body disease, 53 developed pneumonia and 21 
discontinued oral intake; patients with aspiration fared significantly worse 
[hazard ratio (HR) = 26.62, 3.21, p < 0.01, = 0.05]. Hoehn-Yahr (HY) stage 
during VFG was also a risk factor for discontinuation of oral intake. The 
cumulative rate of pneumonia onset was significantly higher in the aspiration 
group for both IPD and LBD (p < 0.01, <0.01). The cumulative rate of continued 
oral intake tended to be lower in the aspiration group for IPD, and was 
significantly lower for LBD (p = 0.07, <0.01).
CONCLUSION: Aspiration during VFG was a risk factor for pneumonia onset in 
patients with Lewy body disease. Aspiration and HY stage during VFG were risk 
factors for discontinuing oral intake. The cumulative rate of continued oral 
intake up to 24 months after VFG was poorest for LBD patients with aspiration.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.06.002
PMID: 20584622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2349. Sci China Life Sci. 2010 Mar;53(3):348-355. doi: 10.1007/s11427-010-0061-0. Epub 
2010 Apr 29.

Recent progress in neurodegenerative disorder research in China.

Zhou J(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 200031, China. jwzhou@ion.ac.cn.

Neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD), are common disorders of the central nervous system among aging 
populations. In the last 10 years insights concerning the etiology, diagnosis 
and pathogenesis of these diseases have come from research carried out by 
Chinese neuroscientists. Their findings include the description of Chinese 
patients with autosomal recessive early-onset PD, the function of the tau 
protein, molecular mechanisms underlying protein aggregation, and the 
identification of biomarkers for AD diagnosis and molecules/compounds with 
potential neuroprotective activities.

DOI: 10.1007/s11427-010-0061-0
PMID: 20596930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2350. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2011 Jan;33(1):51-62. doi: 
10.1080/13803395.2010.493144. Epub 2010 Jul 5.

Task-specific contribution of the human striatum to perceptual-motor skill 
learning.

Cavaco S(1), Anderson SW, Correia M, Magalhaes M, Pereira C, Tuna A, Taipa R, 
Pinto P, Pinto C, Cruz R, Lima AB, Castro-Caldas A, da Silva AM, Damasio H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. sara-cavaco@uiowa.edu

Acquisition of new perceptual-motor skills depends on multiple brain areas, 
including the striatum. However, the specific contribution of each structure to 
this type of learning is still poorly understood. Focusing on the striatum, we 
proposed (a) to replicate the finding of impaired rotary pursuit (RP) and 
preserved mirror tracing (MT) in Huntington's disease (HD); and (b) to further 
explore this putative learning dissociation with other human models of striatal 
dysfunction (i.e., Parkinson's disease and focal vascular damage) and two new 
paradigms (i.e., Geometric Figures, GF, and Control Stick, CS) of skill 
learning. Regardless of the etiology, participants with damage to the striatum 
showed impaired learning of visuomotor tracking skills (i.e., RP and GF), 
whereas the ability to learn skills that require motor adaptation (i.e., MT and 
CS) was not affected. These results suggest a task-specific involvement of the 
striatum in the early stages of skill learning.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2010.493144
PMID: 20603739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2351. Gerodontology. 2012 Mar;29(1):36-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1741-2358.2010.00396.x. Epub 
2010 Jun 30.

Dementia and oral health among subjects aged 75 years or older.

Syrjälä AM(1), Ylöstalo P, Ruoppi P, Komulainen K, Hartikainen S, Sulkava R, 
Knuuttila M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Periodontology, Institute of Dentistry, University of Oulu, 
Finland. anna-maija.syrjala@oulu.fi

OBJECTIVE:  To study the association between diagnosed dementia and oral health, 
focusing on the type of dementia, among an elderly population aged 75 years or 
older.
BACKGROUND: Elderly people with dementia are at risk from oral diseases, but to 
date, only a few studies have analysed the association between type of dementia 
and oral health, and their results are inconclusive.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This cross-sectional study is based on the Geriatric 
multi-disciplinary strategy (Gems) study that included 76 demented and 278 
non-demented subjects. The data were collected by means of an interview and an 
oral clinical examination. The type of dementia was diagnosed according to 
DSM-IV criteria. Poisson's and logistic regression models were used to determine 
relative risks (RR), odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence limits (CI).
RESULTS: Our results showed that patients with Alzheimer's disease and those 
with other types of dementia had an increased likelihood of having carious 
teeth, teeth with deep periodontal pockets, and poor oral and denture hygiene, 
compared with non-demented persons. The results showed that the type of dementia 
does not seem to be an essential determinant of oral health.
CONCLUSIONS: Among the elderly aged 75 years or older, patients with Alzheimer's 
disease or other types of dementia are at increased risk of poor oral health and 
poor oral hygiene.

© 2010 The Gerodontology Society and John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1741-2358.2010.00396.x
PMID: 20604811 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2352. Maturitas. 2010 Sep;67(1):91-3. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.04.011. Epub 2010 
Jun 3.

EMAS position statement: Managing women with premature ovarian failure.

Vujovic S(1), Brincat M, Erel T, Gambacciani M, Lambrinoudaki I, Moen MH, 
Schenck-Gustafsson K, Tremollieres F, Rozenberg S, Rees M; European Menopause 
and Andropause Society.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Endocrinology, Clinical Center of Serbia, Belgrade School of 
Medicine, Dr Subotica 13, 11000 Beograd, Serbia.vujovics@EUnet.rs

Erratum in
    Maturitas. 2011 Jun;69(2):e4.

INTRODUCTION: Premature ovarian failure (also known as premature menopause) is 
defined as menopause before the age of 40. It can be "natural" or "iatrogenic" 
such as after bilateral oophorectomy. It may be either primary or secondary. In 
the majority of cases of primary POF the cause is unknown. Chromosome 
abnormalities (especially X chromosome), follicle-stimulating hormone receptor 
gene polymorphisms, inhibin B mutations, enzyme deficiencies and autoimmune 
disease may be involved. Secondary POF is becoming more important as survival 
after treatment of malignancy through surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy 
continues to improve.
AIM: To formulate a position statement on the management of premature ovarian 
failure.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Literature review and consensus of expert opinion.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Diagnosis should be confirmed with an elevated FSH 
greater than 40 IU/L and an estradiol level below 50 pmol/L in the absence of 
bilateral oophorectomy. Further assessment should include thyroid function 
tests, autoimmune screen for polyendocrinopathy, karyotype (less than 30 years 
of age) and bone mineral density. Untreated early ovarian failure increases the 
risk of osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, dementia, cognitive decline and 
Parkinsonism. The mainstay of treatment is hormone therapy which needs to be 
continued until the average age of the natural menopause. With regard to 
fertility, while spontaneous ovulation may occur the best chance of achieving 
pregnancy is through donor oocyte in vitro fertilization. It is essential that 
women are provided with adequate information as they may find it a difficult 
diagnosis to accept. It is recommended that women with POF are seen in a 
specialist unit able to deal with their multiple needs.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2010.04.011
PMID: 20605383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2353. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Sep;16(8):522-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.06.004. Epub 2010 Jul 7.

Levodopa response in dementia with lewy bodies: a 1-year follow-up study.

Lucetti C(1), Logi C, Del Dotto P, Berti C, Ceravolo R, Baldacci F, Dolciotti C, 
Gambaccini G, Rossi G, Bonuccelli U.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Hospital of Viareggio, Italy.

PURPOSE: To evaluate levodopa responsiveness in patients with probable dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) compared to early Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
METHODS: Twenty four cases with DLB and 21 with PD underwent a baseline 
assessment with UPDRS (sub-item II and III) and an acute levodopa challenge 
test. Positive response to acute levodopa test was defined as an improvement of 
at least 15% in the tapping test, and at least 25% in the walking test and 
rigidity or tremor score. Subsequently, all patients were treated continuously 
with levodopa and evaluated after 6 and 12 months by means of UPDRS II/III.
RESULTS: Positive response to the acute levodopa test was observed in 55% of DLB 
patients (acute DLB responders), and in 90% of PD patients (acute PD 
responders). Acute DLB responders showed increased latency, and reduction of 
both duration and amplitude of response to acute levodopa in comparison with 
acute PD responders. At the 6-month follow-up visit, acute DLB responders showed 
a greater motor benefit compared with acute DLB non-responders. This improvement 
was similar to that observed in PD patients. However, at 1-year follow-up acute 
DLB responders showed a faster worsening of UPDRS III scores compared with acute 
PD responders, implying a reduction of levodopa efficacy.
CONCLUSIONS: Positive response to acute levodopa test can occur in DLB patients 
and may be predictive of long-term benefit of chronic levodopa therapy, although 
the motor improvement is less impressive than in PD patients.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.06.004
PMID: 20615745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2354. Neurodegener Dis. 2010;7(5):330-40. doi: 10.1159/000314499. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Positron emission tomography in diagnosis and differential diagnosis of 
Parkinson's disease.

Tatsch K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Municipal Hospital Karlsruhe Inc., Karlsruhe, 
Germany. Klaus.Tatsch@klinikum-karlsruhe.de

Parkinson's disease (PD) and atypical Parkinsonian syndromes (aPS) belong to the 
most common neurologic illnesses. Diagnosis and differential diagnosis of these 
syndromes is primarily based on well-defined clinical criteria, however, may be 
difficult in early and particular preclinical/premotor stages. Molecular imaging 
with PET offers here a broad variety of tools supporting the classification of 
Parkinsonian syndromes including their early and differential diagnosis, 
assessment of disease progression and evaluation of the efficacy of therapies. 
The more widely applied PET imaging techniques have focused on the assessment of 
neurotransmitter systems, here predominantly the pre- and postsynaptic 
dopaminergic functions, but also others like the serotonergic and cholinergic 
system. Beyond, refined methods depict distinct patterns of glucose metabolism 
in the various Parkinsonian syndromes, and focus on further targets such as 
neuroinflammation, load of amyloid plaques, and cardiac sympathetic denervation. 
This overview discusses the important PET applications in the field with a main 
emphasis on their clinical utilization but also highlights scientific 
applications which may grant further insights in the pathophysiology of PD and 
aPS.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000314499
PMID: 20616567 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2355. Neurodegener Dis. 2010;7(5):341-7. doi: 10.1159/000314573. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

Importance of 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy/single photon emission 
computed tomography for diagnosis and differential diagnostics of Parkinson 
syndromes.

Jost WH(1), Del Tredici K, Landvogt C, Braune S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Deutsche Klinik für Diagnostik, Wiesbaden, Germany. 
jost.neuro@dkd-wiesbaden.de

The goal of Parkinson syndrome diagnostics is twofold: early diagnosis on the 
one hand, and accurate differentiation among idiopathic and atypical Parkinson 
syndromes on the other. (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy is the only 
method that can distinguish with a high degree of sensitivity and specificity 
between atypical Parkinson syndromes and Parkinson's disease or dementia with 
Lewy bodies. Additional advantages are the method's widespread availability and 
radioactive exposure dose comparable to that for single photon emission computed 
tomography imaging with much lower costs. Only a single radiotracer study is 
necessary. (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy is an indispensable tool 
for purposes of differentiating among the various Parkinson syndromes.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000314573
PMID: 20616568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2356. J Neurol. 2010 Aug;257(8):1388-93. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5638-9. Epub 2010 Jul 
13.

Familial aggregation in atypical Parkinson's disease: a case control study in 
multiple system atrophy and progressive supranuclear palsy.

Vidal JS(1), Vidailhet M, Derkinderen P, Tzourio C, Alpérovitch A.

Author information:
(1)Intramural Research Program, Laboratory of Epidemiology, Demography and 
Biometry, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, 7201 
Wisconsin Avenue, Gateway Building, Suite 3C309, Bethesda, MD 20892-9205, USA. 
vidaljs@mail.nih.gov

Familial aggregation has been consistently found in PD, but it is unclear 
whether there is a familial aggregation in families of patients with multiple 
system atrophy (MSA) or progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). MSA and PSP cases 
were recruited from a two-arm case control study. One control was matched to 
each case for age, gender and living area. Medical history of first-degree 
relatives was obtained through a face-to-face questionnaire. Age-specific 
cumulative incidence of Parkinsonism and dementia in first-degree relatives of 
cases and controls was compared for MSA and PSP separately. Seventy-one pairs 
for MSA and their controls and 79 pairs for PSP and their controls were 
included. No significant familial aggregation was found in PSP. MSA cases 
reported Parkinsonism more often, but not dementia in their first-degree 
relatives than controls. MSA patients, but not those with PSP, have Parkinsonism 
more often in their first-degree relatives than controls.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-010-5638-9
PMID: 20625759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2357. Am J Health Syst Pharm. 2010 Aug;67(15):1274-80. doi: 10.2146/ajhp090611.

Influence of medications and diagnoses on fall risk in psychiatric inpatients.

Lavsa SM(1), Fabian TJ, Saul MI, Corman SL, Coley KC.

Author information:
(1)University Medical Center, University of Pittsburgh, 3501 Terrace Street, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

PURPOSE: The influence of medications and diagnoses on fall risk in psychiatric 
inpatients was evaluated.
METHODS: In this retrospective case-control study, psychiatric inpatients age 18 
years or older with a documented fall that was reported served as study cases. 
These patients were matched to control patients from the same hospital (1:1) by 
admission year, sex, and age. Psychiatric diagnoses evaluated included major 
depressive disorder, schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, bipolar 
disorder, Alzheimer's disease and dementia, anxiety or neurosis, delirium, 
personality disorder, and obsessive-compulsive disorder. Medications assessed as 
independent variables were conventional antipsychotics, atypical antipsychotics, 
selective serotonin-reuptake inhibitors, tricyclic antidepressants, atypical 
antidepressants, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, lithium, anticonvulsants, 
benzodiazepines, nonbenzodiazepine sleep aids, Alzheimer's disease medications, 
antihistamines, antiarrhythmics, antihypertensives, benign prostatic hyperplasia 
medications, oral hypoglycemic agents, histamine H(2)-receptor blockers, 
laxatives and stool softeners, muscle relaxants, nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs, opioids, Parkinson's disease medications, and overactive bladder 
medications. Univariate logistic regression models were developed for each risk 
factor to determine its impact on fall risk.
RESULTS: A total of 774 patient cases were matched with controls. Most falls 
occurred on the second day of hospitalization. Medications associated with a 
higher risk of falls were alpha-blockers, nonbenzodiazepine sleep aids, 
benzodiazepines, H(2)-blockers, lithium, antipsychotics, atypical 
antidepressants, anticonvulsants, and laxatives and stool softeners. Patients 
with a diagnosis of dementia and Alzheimer's disease also had an increased risk 
of falling.
CONCLUSION: Alpha-blockers, nonbenzodiazepine sleep aids, benzodiazepines, 
H(2)-blockers, lithium, atypical antipsychotics, atypical antidepressants, 
anticonvulsants and mood stabilizers, conventional anti-psychotics, laxatives 
and stool softeners, and dementia and Alzheimer's disease were significant 
predictors of inpatient falls in a psychiatric population.

DOI: 10.2146/ajhp090611
PMID: 20651318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2358. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Sep;120(3):385-99. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0723-9. Epub 
2010 Jul 22.

Biomarker discovery for Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, 
and Parkinson's disease.

Hu WT(1), Chen-Plotkin A, Arnold SE, Grossman M, Clark CM, Shaw LM, McCluskey L, 
Elman L, Karlawish J, Hurtig HI, Siderowf A, Lee VM, Soares H, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Ante-mortem diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders based on clinical features 
alone is associated with variable sensitivity and specificity, and biomarkers 
can potentially improve the accuracy of clinical diagnosis. In patients 
suspected of having Alzheimer's disease (AD), alterations in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) biomarkers that reflect the neuropathologic changes of AD strongly support 
the diagnosis, although there is a trade-off between sensitivity and specificity 
due to similar changes in cognitively healthy subjects. Here, we review the 
current approaches in using CSF AD biomarkers (total tau, p-tau(181), and 
Abeta42) to predict the presence of AD pathology, and our recent work using 
multi-analyte profiling to derive novel biomarkers for biofluid-based AD 
diagnosis. We also review our use of the multi-analyte profiling strategy to 
identify novel biomarkers that can distinguish between subtypes of 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and those at risk of developing cognitive 
impairment in Parkinson's disease. Multi-analyte profiling is a powerful tool 
for biomarker discovery in complex neurodegenerative disorders, and analytes 
associated with one or more diseases may shed light on relevant biological 
pathways and potential targets for intervention.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0723-9
PMCID: PMC2982700
PMID: 20652578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2359. Drugs Aging. 2010 Aug 1;27(8):663-75. doi: 10.2165/11538230-000000000-00000.

Discontinuation of cholinesterase inhibitor treatment and determinants thereof 
in the Netherlands: A retrospective cohort study.

Kröger E(1), van Marum R, Souverein P, Egberts T.

Author information:
(1)Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Utrecht University, the 
Netherlands. edeltraut.kroger.cha@ssss.gouv.qc.ca

BACKGROUND: The cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) rivastigmine and galantamine 
have been approved for the treatment of mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease in 
the Netherlands. Differences between ChEIs regarding persistence or the use of 
effective doses in daily clinical practice have been observed. However, most 
studies assessing ChEI discontinuation and associated determinants have been 
conducted in North America and there is a lack of knowledge about ChEI 
discontinuation and its determinants in daily clinical practice in Europe.
OBJECTIVES: To assess ChEI discontinuation in daily practice in the Netherlands 
and to seek its determinants, including suboptimal utilization.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was performed using data from the Dutch 
PHARMO Record Linkage System. Included patients were aged > or =50 years at 
first dispensing of a ChEI, had a first dispensing of a ChEI between 1998 and 
2008, had a prior medication history of 12 months and had at least one 
subsequent dispensing of any kind of medication. The proportion of patients who 
discontinued ChEIs over 3 years was determined. Cox regression was used to 
assess determinants for early (< or =6 months) discontinuation and, separately, 
for late discontinuation during a subsequent 30-month follow-up among those 
persisting with treatment for >6 months.
RESULTS: At 6 months, 30.8% of 3369 study patients had discontinued ChEIs, 
compared with 59.0% after 3 years. Thirty-five percent of patients taking 
rivastigmine reached the WHO-defined daily dose compared with 80% taking 
galantamine. At 6 months, compared with regular-dose rivastigmine, low-dose 
rivastigmine or low-dose galantamine was associated with an increased risk of 
early discontinuation, whereas regular-dose galantamine was associated with a 
decreased risk, as was concurrent use of cardiac medications, drugs for 
Parkinson's disease, propulsives, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and 
benzodiazepines. Associations of ChEI type/dose or co-medications with 
discontinuation among patients persisting for > 6 months differed somewhat from 
associations with discontinuation before 6 months.
CONCLUSIONS: Fewer patients taking rivastigmine than those taking galantamine 
reached recommended doses. Furthermore, patients taking rivastigmine had an 
increased risk of early discontinuation compared with patients taking 
galantamine. Adverse effects leading to treatment intolerance and suboptimal 
utilization may have been contributing factors to these observed differences.

DOI: 10.2165/11538230-000000000-00000
PMID: 20658794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2360. Neuropathology. 2010 Oct;30(5):495-500. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2010.01144.x.

The long journey to the discovery of PARK2: The 50th Anniversary of Japanese 
Society of Neuropathology.

Yamamura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rakuseikai Baba Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan.

Research into familial Parkinson's disease (PD) remained at a virtual standstill 
in Europe and the US for several decades until a re-challenge by Japanese 
neurologists regarding an autosomal recessive form of PD. In 1965, our research 
group at Nagoya University examined familial cases of early-onset parkinsonism 
characterized by autosomal recessive inheritance, diurnal fluctuation of 
symptoms (alleviation after sleep), foot dystonia, good response to medication, 
and benign course without dementia. An inborn error of metabolism in some 
dopamine-related pathway was suspected. The clinical study of four families with 
the disease, named as "early-onset parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation 
(EPDF)", was published in Neurology in 1973. The pathological study of a case in 
1993 revealed neuronal loss without Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra. Based 
on these clinical and pathological evidences, EPDF was defined as a distinct 
disease entity. Screening for the EPDF gene was started in 1994 in collaboration 
with Juntendo University. With the discovery of parkin gene in 1998, EPDF was 
designated as PARK2. Of our 16 families examined for gene analysis, 15 proved to 
be PARK2, and the remaining one, PARK6.

© 2010 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2010.01144.x
PMID: 20667007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2361. Mov Disord. 2010 Oct 30;25(14):2395-404. doi: 10.1002/mds.23291.

Typical cerebral metabolic patterns in neurodegenerative brain diseases.

Teune LK(1), Bartels AL, de Jong BM, Willemsen AT, Eshuis SA, de Vries JJ, van 
Oostrom JC, Leenders KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands. l.k.teune@neuro.umcg.nl

The differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative brain diseases on clinical 
grounds is difficult, especially at an early disease stage. Several studies have 
found specific regional differences of brain metabolism applying 
[(18)F]-fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET), suggesting 
that this method can assist in early differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative 
brain diseases.We have studied patients who had an FDG-PET scan on clinical 
grounds at an early disease stage and included those with a retrospectively 
confirmed diagnosis according to strictly defined clinical research criteria. 
Ninety-six patients could be included of which 20 patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), 21 multiple system atrophy (MSA), 17 progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP), 10 corticobasal degeneration (CBD), 6 dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB), 15 Alzheimer's disease (AD), and 7 frontotemporal dementia (FTD). FDG PET 
images of each patient group were analyzed and compared to18 healthy controls 
using Statistical Parametric Mapping (SPM5).Disease-specific patterns of 
relatively decreased metabolic activity were found in PD (contralateral 
parietooccipital and frontal regions), MSA (bilateral putamen and cerebellar 
hemispheres), PSP (prefrontal cortex and caudate nucleus, thalamus, and 
mesencephalon), CBD (contralateral cortical regions), DLB (occipital and 
parietotemporal regions), AD (parietotemporal regions), and FTD (frontotemporal 
regions).The integrated method addressing a spectrum of various 
neurodegenerative brain diseases provided means to discriminate patient groups 
also at early disease stages. Clinical follow-up enabled appropriate patient 
inclusion. This implies that an early diagnosis in individual patients can be 
made by comparing each subject's metabolic findings with a complete database of 
specific disease related patterns.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23291
PMID: 20669302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2362. Mov Disord. 2010 Sep 15;25(12):1868-75. doi: 10.1002/mds.23200.

Parkinsonism and motor neuron diseases: twenty-seven patients with diverse 
overlap syndromes.

Gilbert RM(1), Fahn S, Mitsumoto H, Rowland LP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, NYU Langone Medical Center, New York, New York 
10016, USA. rwolfgilbert@gmail.com

It has long been recognized that signs of motor neuron disease (MND) may 
accompany clinical evidence of parkinsonism in different neurodegenerative 
conditions. By using the Columbia University Division of Movement Disorders 
database, we reviewed data from 5,500 cases of parkinsonism and recorded the 
presence of upper motor neuron (UMN) dysfunction, lower motor neuron (LMN) 
dysfunction, or both. Among the 27 patients so identified, we counted those with 
autonomic dysfunction, cerebellar dysfunction, or dementia. Among the 27 cases, 
seven had UMN signs and LMN signs as well as parkinsonism and were diagnosed 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)-parkinsonism (Brait-Fahn disease). 
Three of the seven had dementia that was not deemed to be frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD). Six other patients had no LMN signs but had UMN signs and 
parkinsonism and were classified as having primary lateral sclerosis 
(PLS)-parkinsonism. Four patients had both UMN and LMN signs with parkinsonism 
as well as the characteristic dementia of FTD; they were diagnosed with 
FTD-parkinsonism-ALS. Seven patients had MND, parkinsonism, and autonomic or 
cerebellar dysfunction, a combination compatible with multiple system atrophy 
(MSA). Three patients had syndromes compatible with hereditary spastic 
paraplegia (HSP). In sum, we found that MND occurs in association with diverse 
parkinsonian syndromes; some are heritable, others sporadic and causes are 
uncertain. Having MND may be a risk factor for parkinsonism. A prospective study 
may elucidate this possibility.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23200
PMID: 20669307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2363. Mov Disord. 2010 Oct 30;25(14):2304-10. doi: 10.1002/mds.23347.

Cardiac autonomic dysfunction in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder.

Postuma RB(1), Lanfranchi PA, Blais H, Gagnon JF, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2010 Oct 30;25(14):2269-71.

More than 50% of persons with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) will 
develop Parkinson's disease or Lewy body dementia. Symptom screens and 
metaiodobenzylguanine (MIBG)-scintigraphy suggest autonomic abnormalities in 
idiopathic RBD, but it is unclear whether autonomic abnormalities can predict 
neurodegenerative disease. From a cohort of 99 patients with idiopathic RBD, we 
selected those who developed parkinsonism or dementia. These were matched by 
age, sex, and follow-up duration to patients with RBD who remained disease free 
and to matched controls. From the polysomnographic trace performed at baseline 
evaluation, measures of beat-to-beat RR variability including time domains (mean 
RR-interval and RR-standard deviation) and frequency domains (low and high 
frequency components) were retrospectively assessed. Twenty-one patients with 
idiopathic RBD who developed neurodegenerative disease were included 
(Parkinson's disease-11, multiple system atrophy-1, and dementia-9). Age at PSG 
was 66 years, and 86% were male. PSG was performed on average 6.7 years before 
defined neurodegenerative disease. Comparing all patients with idiopathic RBD to 
controls, there were significant reductions in RR-standard deviation (24.6 ± 2.2 
ms vs. 35.2 ± 3.5 ms, P = 0.006), very low frequency components (238.6 ± 99.6 
ms(2) vs. 840.1 ± 188.3 ms(2), P < 0.001), and low frequency components (127.8 ± 
26.3 ms(2) vs. 288.7 ± 66.2 ms(2), P = 0.032). However, despite clear 
differences between patients with idiopathic RBD and controls, there were no 
differences in any measure between those who did or did not develop disease. 
RR-variability analysis demonstrates substantial autonomic dysfunction in 
idiopathic RBD. However, this dysfunction is identical in patients who will or 
will not develop defined neurodegenerative disease. This suggests that autonomic 
dysfunction is linked with RBD independent of associated Parkinson's disease or 
Lewy body dementia.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23347
PMID: 20669316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2364. Mov Disord. 2010 Sep 15;25(12):1791-800. doi: 10.1002/mds.23221.

Early-onset L-dopa-responsive parkinsonism with pyramidal signs due to ATP13A2, 
PLA2G6, FBXO7 and spatacsin mutations.

Paisán-Ruiz C(1), Guevara R, Federoff M, Hanagasi H, Sina F, Elahi E, Schneider 
SA, Schwingenschuh P, Bajaj N, Emre M, Singleton AB, Hardy J, Bhatia KP, 
Brandner S, Lees AJ, Houlden H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom.

Seven autosomal recessive genes associated with juvenile and young-onset 
Levodopa-responsive parkinsonism have been identified. Mutations in PRKN, DJ-1, 
and PINK1 are associated with a rather pure parkinsonian phenotype, and have a 
more benign course with sustained treatment response and absence of dementia. On 
the other hand, Kufor-Rakeb syndrome has additional signs, which distinguish it 
clearly from Parkinson's disease including supranuclear vertical gaze palsy, 
myoclonic jerks, pyramidal signs, and cognitive impairment. Neurodegeneration 
with brain iron accumulation type I (Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome) due to 
mutations in PANK2 gene may share similar features with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome. 
Mutations in three other genes, PLA2G6 (PARK14), FBXO7 (PARK15), and Spatacsin 
(SPG11) also produce clinical similar phenotypes in that they presented with 
rapidly progressive parkinsonism, initially responsive to Levodopa treatment but 
later, developed additional features including cognitive decline and loss of 
Levodopa responsiveness. Here, using homozygosity mapping and sequence analysis 
in families with complex parkinsonisms, we identified genetic defects in the 
ATP13A2 (1 family), PLA2G6 (1 family) FBXO7 (2 families), and SPG11 (1 family). 
The genetic heterogeneity was surprising given their initially common clinical 
features. On careful review, we found the FBXO7 cases to have a phenotype more 
similar to PRKN gene associated parkinsonism. The ATP13A2 and PLA2G6 cases were 
more seriously disabled with additional swallowing problems, dystonic features, 
severe in some, and usually pyramidal involvement including pyramidal weakness. 
These data suggest that these four genes account for many cases of Levodopa 
responsive parkinsonism with pyramidal signs cases formerly categorized 
clinically as pallido-pyramidal syndrome.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23221
PMCID: PMC6005705
PMID: 20669327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Potential conflict of interest: Nothing to 
report.


2365. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010 Aug;58(8):1447-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02981.x. 
Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Effect of walking distance on 8-year incident depressive symptoms in elderly men 
with and without chronic disease: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study.

Smith TL(1), Masaki KH, Fong K, Abbott RD, Ross GW, Petrovitch H, Blanchette PL, 
White LR.

Author information:
(1)John A. Hartford Center of Excellence in Geriatrics, Department of Geriatric 
Medicine, John A. Burns School of Medicine, University of Hawaii, Honolulu, 
Hawaii 96817, USA. smithtl@hawaii.edu

OBJECTIVES: To determine the effect of walking on incident depressive symptoms 
in elderly Japanese-American men with and without chronic disease.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: The Honolulu-Asia Aging Study.
PARTICIPANTS: Japanese-American men aged 71 to 93 at baseline.
MEASUREMENTS: Physical activity was assessed according to self-reported distance 
walked per day. Depressive symptoms were measured using an 11-question version 
of the Centers for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale (CES-D 11) at the 
fourth examination (n=3,196) and at the seventh examination 8 years later 
(1999/00, n=1,417). Presence of incident depressive symptoms was defined as a 
CES-D 11 score of 9 or greater or taking antidepressants at Examination 7. 
Subjects with prevalent depressive symptoms at baseline were excluded.
RESULTS: Age-adjusted 8-year incident depressive symptoms were 13.6%, 7.6%, and 
8.5% for low (<0.25 miles/day), intermediate (0.25-1.5 miles/day), and high 
(>1.5 miles/day) walking groups at baseline (P=0.008). Multiple logistic 
regression analyses, adjusted for age, education, marital status, cardiovascular 
risk factors, prevalent diseases, and functional impairment, showed that those 
in the intermediate and highest walking groups had significantly lower odds of 
developing 8-year incident depressive symptoms (odds ratio (OR)=0.52, 95% 
confidence interval (CI)=0.32-0.83, P=.006 and OR=0.61, 95% CI= 0.39-0.97, 
P=.04, respectively). Analysis found that this association was significant only 
in participants without chronic diseases (coronary heart disease, 
cerebrovascular accident, cancer, Parkinson's disease, dementia, or cognitive 
impairment) at baseline.
CONCLUSION: Daily physical activity (≥0.25 mile/day) is significantly associated 
with lower risk of 8-year incident depressive symptoms in elderly 
Japanese-American men without chronic disease at baseline.

© 2010, Copyright the Authors. Journal compilation © 2010, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02981.x
PMCID: PMC2955160
PMID: 20670378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2366. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2010 Aug;58(8):1453-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02975.x. 
Epub 2010 Jul 28.

Neuroimaging in the clinical diagnosis of dementia: observations from a memory 
disorders clinic.

Borghesani PR(1), DeMers SM, Manchanda V, Pruthi S, Lewis DH, Borson S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington 
Medical Center, Seattle, Washington, USA. paulrb@uw.edu

Comment in
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 2011 Feb;59(2):375-6; author reply 376.

OBJECTIVES: To determine how often neuroimaging confirms, clarifies, or 
contradicts initial diagnoses of late-life cognitive disorders.
DESIGN: Retrospective case review.
SETTING: Outpatient clinic specializing in memory disorders.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred ninety-three consecutively referred cognitively 
impaired patients.
MEASUREMENTS: Diagnoses using research criteria were developed for each patient 
at the first visit and ranged from cognitive impairment without dementia to 
dementias of single, complex, or indeterminate etiology. Structural (noncontrast 
magnetic resonance imaging) and perfusion (technetium-99m ethyl cysteine dimer 
single photon emission computed tomography) images were categorized together as 
normal, suggestive of specific diseases, or abnormal/not diagnostic.
RESULTS: When a single neurodegenerative disease was suspected clinically 
(n=94), imaging confirmed the diagnosis in 50, contradicted the diagnosis in 32, 
and was abnormal/not diagnostic in 12. When more than one neurodegenerative 
etiology was clinically suspected (n=21), imaging assigned a single diagnosis in 
13 and only cerebrovascular disease in one and was abnormal/not diagnostic in 
seven. In dementia not otherwise specified (NOS) (n=33), imaging suggested a 
specific etiology in 23 and was abnormal/not diagnostic in 10. Abnormal/not 
diagnostic images were more common in cognitive disorder NOS (n=25, 68%) than in 
other clinical groups (22%, chi-square=22.8 P<.001). Neuroimaging indicators of 
cerebrovascular disease were common (60% prevalence) but not predicted by the 
presence of vascular risk factors alone.
CONCLUSION: Overall, neuroimaging confirmed, clarified, or contradicted the 
initial clinical diagnosis in more than 80% of patients, whereas fewer than 20% 
had abnormal/not diagnostic patterns. Imaging suggested a complex dementia 
etiology in 21% of cases clinically thought to be caused by a single process, 
whereas 46% of complex clinical differential diagnoses appeared to reflect a 
single causal pattern. Further work is needed to determine whether refinement of 
clinical diagnoses using specialized neuroimaging improves clinical 
decision-making and patient outcomes.

© 2010, Copyright the Authors. Journal compilation © 2010, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2010.02975.x
PMCID: PMC2955194
PMID: 20670380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2367. Brain Nerve. 2010 Jul;62(7):719-25.

[Concept and clinical presentation of mild cognitive impairment].

[Article in Japanese]

Hanyu H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Shinjuku-ku, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is considered to be a transition state between 
normal cognition and dementia. The subtype of MCI are highly heterogeneous in 
terms of etiology, presentation, and prognosis. Patients with the amnestic 
subtype of MCI are at a high risk of progression to Alzheimer disease (AD); this 
subtype may represent the prodromal stage of AD. In contrast, patients with the 
non-amnestic subtype may be at a high risk of progression to a non-AD dementia, 
including dementia with Lewy bodies, frontotemporal dementia, and vascular 
dementia. Most patients with amnestic MCI exhibit pathologic abnormalities in 
the mesial temporal lobe structures; several other concomitant pathologic 
abnormalities, including argyrophilic grain disease, neurofibrillary tangles, 
hippocampal sclerosis, and vascular lesions are also observed. Patients with MCI 
often exhibit neuropsychiatric symptoms, such as depression and apathy, and 
instrumental ADL are minimally restricted. Moreover, patients with MCI who are 
not aware of their memory deficits and in whom practice effects are not observed 
exhibit parietotemporal hypoperfusion on single photon emission CT, indicating 
that these findings are predictors of progression to AD. In this review, I have 
discussed the most current aspects related to the concept and clinical 
presentation of MCI, with emphasis possible risk factors for conversion to 
dementia.

PMID: 20675876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2368. Brain Res Rev. 2010 Oct 5;65(1):28-55. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2010.05.006. 
Epub 2010 Jun 2.

Neuroimaging for Lewy body disease: is the in vivo molecular imaging of 
α-synuclein neuropathology required and feasible?

Vernon AC(1), Ballard C, Modo M.

Author information:
(1)Kings College London, Institute of Psychiatry, Department of Neuroscience, 
Denmark Hill campus, London, UK.

Alpha-synuclein aggregation is a neuropathological hallmark of many 
neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson's disease (PD), Parkinson's 
disease with dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), collectively 
termed the α-synucleinopathies. Substantial advances in clinical criteria and 
neuroimaging technology over the last 20 years have allowed great strides in the 
detection and differential diagnosis of these disorders. Nevertheless, it is 
clear that whilst the array of different imaging modalities in clinical use 
allow for a robust diagnosis of α-synucleinopathy in comparison to healthy 
subjects, there is no clear diagnostic imaging marker that affords a reliable 
differential diagnosis between the different forms of Lewy body disease (LBD) or 
that could facilitate tracking of disease progression. This has led to a call 
for a biomarker based on the pathological hallmarks of these diseases, namely 
α-synuclein-positive Lewy bodies (LBs). This potentially may be advantageous in 
terms of early disease detection, but may also be leveraged into a potential 
marker of disease progression. We here aim to firstly review the current status 
of neuroimaging biomarkers in PD and related synucleinopathies. Secondly, we 
outline the rationale behind α-synuclein imaging as a potential novel biomarker 
as well as the potential benefits and limitations of this approach. Thirdly, we 
attempt to illustrate the likely technical hurdles to be overcome to permit 
successful in vivo imaging of α-synuclein pathology in the diseased brain. Our 
overriding aim is to provide a framework for discussion of how to address this 
major unmet clinical need.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresrev.2010.05.006
PMID: 20685363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2369. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2010;30(1):64-70. doi: 10.1159/000314682. Epub 2010 
Aug 5.

Cognitive deterioration rates in patients with Parkinson's disease from 
northeastern China.

Luo XG(1), Feng Y, Liu R, Yu HM, Wang L, Wu Z, Ren Y, He ZY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, 
Heping District, Shenyang, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Cognitive impairment (CI) is common in Parkinson's disease 
(PD), and the cognitive deterioration rate (CDR) is heterogeneous among PD 
patients. However, very few studies have reported on the association of PD 
features and risk factors with rapid CDR. The Montreal Cognitive Assessment 
(MoCA) is considered to be a sensitive and reliable approach to detect mild CI. 
In the present study, we sought to define and compare the cognitive profiles and 
clinical features of PD patients with slow or rapid CDRs, and then to identify 
the PD risk factors associated with rapid CDR.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of cognitive rate was performed using the MoCA 
in a cohort of 73 PD patients and 41 controls matched for age, sex and education 
level.
RESULTS: The rapid CDR group was characterized by older age (58.8 years in slow 
CDR vs. 64.1 in rapid CDR; p = 0.02), later age at disease onset (52.7 vs. 61.7 
years; p < 0.001), a faster deterioration rate of movement symptoms (UPDRS III 
increment of 12.8 vs. 5.9/year; p < 0.001), a higher rate in multiple-domain CI 
(38.9 vs. 10.8%), and generally lower MoCA subscores for the Clock Drawing Test, 
attention, verbal fluency and abstraction. According to the univariate logistic 
regression model, onset age, movement deterioration rate, multiple domains CI 
and executive function CI were risk factors for rapid CDR. However, only the 
movement deterioration rate (p = 0.01) and onset age (p = 0.05) remained 
independent predictors for rapid CDR according to the multivariate logistic 
regression model.
CONCLUSIONS: The CI deterioration in a subset of PD patients appears to progress 
more rapidly. Identifying those PD patients may not only help to predict the 
development of PD dementia, but also facilitate therapeutic intervention at 
early disease stages.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000314682
PMID: 20689285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2370. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2010;90:217-35. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7742(10)90016-0.

Transcranial sonography in ataxia.

Krogias C(1), Postert T, Eyding J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Josef-Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Germany.

Transcranial sonography (TCS) identifies basal ganglia alterations in 
extrapyramidal movement disorders such as Parkinson's disease or dystonia. 
Although only rarely reported, TCS also reveals signal alterations of basal 
ganglia in several forms of hereditary and nonhereditary ataxia. Here, the 
examination procedure and its diagnostic value for the classification of ataxia 
are reviewed. Three TCS studies reported hyperechogenicity of substantia nigra 
(SN) as a frequent finding in spinocerebellar ataxia type 2, type 3, and type 
17, indicating a vulnerability of the nigrostriatal system in SCA patients. A 
new "cerebellar examination plane" was proposed, allowing better visualization 
of fourth ventricle enlargement and nucleus dentatus hyperechogenicity as a 
characteristic finding in SCA3 patients. In sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, 
a blurry inhomogeneous hyperechogenic signal pattern of lentiform nucleus was 
identified in all of the patients in a small case series. Furthermore, distinct 
bilateral hyperechogenicity of pallidostriatal regions have been described as a 
novel diagnostic feature in the sonographic differentiation of extrapyramidal 
and atactic movement disorders. TCS is a commonly available, noninvasive, and 
inexpensive diagnostic tool, which provides reliable information about the 
morphology of the brain in ataxias, even in agitated patients who do not 
tolerate other imaging techniques. Further neuropathological and multimodal 
imaging studies are needed to elucidate the precise morphological and 
pathogenetic background of the detected echosignal pathology, and also to 
correlate these findings to the various clinical features of this disease 
entity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0074-7742(10)90016-0
PMID: 20692505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2371. Arch Neurol. 2010 Aug;67(8):970-5. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.177.

Association of alpha-, beta-, and gamma-Synuclein with diffuse lewy body 
disease.

Nishioka K(1), Wider C, Vilariño-Güell C, Soto-Ortolaza AI, Lincoln SJ, 
Kachergus JM, Jasinska-Myga B, Ross OA, Rajput A, Robinson CA, Ferman TJ, 
Wszolek ZK, Dickson DW, Farrer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Florida, 4500 San Pablo Rd, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the association of the genes that encode alpha-, beta-, 
and gamma-synuclein (SNCA, SNCB, and SNCG, respectively) with diffuse Lewy body 
disease (DLBD).
DESIGN: Case-control study. Subjects A total of 172 patients with DLBD 
consistent with a clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease dementia/dementia with 
Lewy bodies and 350 clinically and 97 pathologically normal controls.
INTERVENTIONS: Sequencing of SNCA, SNCB, and SNCG and genotyping of 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms performed on an Applied Biosystems capillary 
sequencer and a Sequenom MassArray pLEX platform, respectively. Associations 
were determined using chi(2) or Fisher exact tests.
RESULTS: Initial sequencing studies of the coding regions of each gene in 89 
patients with DLBD did not detect any pathogenic substitutions. Nevertheless, 
genotyping of known polymorphic variability in sequence-conserved regions 
detected several single-nucleotide polymorphisms in the SNCA and SNCG genes that 
were significantly associated with disease (P = .05 to <.001). Significant 
association was also observed for 3 single-nucleotide polymorphisms located in 
SNCB when comparing DLBD cases and pathologically confirmed normal controls (P = 
.03-.01); however, this association was not significant for the clinical 
controls alone or the combined clinical and pathological controls (P > .05). 
After correction for multiple testing, only 1 single-nucleotide polymorphism in 
SNCG (rs3750823) remained significant in all of the analyses (P = .05-.009).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that variants in all 3 members of the 
synuclein gene family, particularly SNCA and SNCG, affect the risk of developing 
DLBD and warrant further investigation in larger, pathologically defined data 
sets as well as clinically diagnosed Parkinson disease/dementia with Lewy bodies 
case-control series.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.177
PMCID: PMC4727539
PMID: 20697047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2372. Arch Neurol. 2010 Aug;67(8):996-1001. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.166.

A 12-year population-based study of psychosis in Parkinson disease.

Forsaa EB(1), Larsen JP, Wentzel-Larsen T, Goetz CG, Stebbins GT, Aarsland D, 
Alves G.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Box 8100, N-4068 Stavanger, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence, incidence, risk factors, and 
concomitants of Parkinson disease (PD)-associated psychosis (PDP) in a 
population-based prevalent cohort.
DESIGN: Prospective longitudinal cohort study.
SETTING: Community-based study in southwestern Norway.
PARTICIPANTS: Two hundred thirty community-based PD patients were followed up 
prospectively for 12 years. Reassessments were conducted at 4 and 8 years and 
then annually.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Severity of PDP was measured by the Unified Parkinson 
Disease Rating Scale thought disorder (UPDRS-TD) item. Patients with a UPDRS-TD 
score of 2 or more or those taking antipsychotic drugs owing to psychotic 
symptoms were categorized at each visit as having PDP. Generalized estimating 
equations were applied to investigate baseline risk factors for incident PDP and 
clinical and demographic concomitants of PDP during 12 years.
RESULTS: By study's end, 137 patients (60%) had developed hallucinations or 
delusions. The incidence rate of PDP was 79.7 per 1000 person-years. Higher age 
at onset, higher baseline levodopa-equivalent doses, probable rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep behavior disorder at baseline, and follow-up time were independent 
risk factors of incident PDP. Significant concomitant features of patients with 
PDP during the 12-year study period were low activities of daily living function 
(UPDRS II), dementia, high levodopa-equivalent dose, and probable REM sleep 
behavior disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychotic symptoms affect most patients with PD, with increased 
risk in those with higher age at onset, need for high doses of dopaminergic 
drugs, and probable REM sleep behavior disorder. This risk factor pattern and 
the observed associations with increased disability and dementia place PDP 
within a symptom complex signaling a malignant disease course.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.166
PMID: 20697051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2373. Nat Chem. 2009 Jul;1(4):326-31. doi: 10.1038/nchem.247.

Amyloid-β protein oligomerization and the importance of tetramers and dodecamers 
in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease.

Bernstein SL(1), Dupuis NF, Lazo ND, Wyttenbach T, Condron MM, Bitan G, Teplow 
DB, Shea JE, Ruotolo BT, Robinson CV, Bowers MT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, University of California, Santa 
Barbara, California 93106-9510, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Chem. 2009 Jul;1(4):257-8.

In recent years, small protein oligomers have been implicated in the aetiology 
of a number of important amyloid diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, Parkinson's 
disease and Alzheimer's disease. As a consequence, research efforts are being 
directed away from traditional targets, such as amyloid plaques, and towards 
characterization of early oligomer states. Here we present a new analysis 
method, ion mobility coupled with mass spectrometry, for this challenging 
problem, which allows determination of in vitro oligomer distributions and the 
qualitative structure of each of the aggregates. We applied these methods to a 
number of the amyloid-β protein isoforms of Aβ40 and Aβ42 and showed that their 
oligomer-size distributions are very different. Our results are consistent with 
previous observations that Aβ40 and Aβ42 self-assemble via different pathways 
and provide a candidate in the Aβ42 dodecamer for the primary toxic species in 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1038/nchem.247
PMCID: PMC2918915
PMID: 20703363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2374. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2010 Dec;7(8):726-34. doi: 10.2174/156720510793611619.

Disentangling the role of the tau gene locus in sporadic tauopathies.

Vandrovcova J(1), Anaya F, Kay V, Lees A, Hardy J, de Silva R.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Institute & Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, 1 Wakefield Street, London, WC1N 1PJ, UK.

Fibrillar aggregates of abnormally hyperphosphorylated tau protein are the major 
component of the pathological entities, including intraneuronal neurofibrillary 
tangles that define the broad class of late-onset neurodegenerative disorders 
called the tauopathies. Mutations in the tau gene (MAPT) causing familial 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) 
confirm that tau protein dysfunction could be a primary cause of neuronal loss. 
However, in the sporadic tauopathies such as progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD) where MAPT mutation is absent, common 
variation in MAPT that defines the H1 and H2 haplotype clades strongly 
influences disease risk. Surprisingly, this influence on risk extends to 
sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD), traditionally not defined as a tauopathy. 
This review will focus on recent work aimed at elucidating the mechanistic basis 
of this haplotype-specific effect on disease risk, implicating elevated levels 
of MAPT expression, particularly via increased transcription and/or alterations 
in splicing. This conforms to an emerging picture of a shared mechanism that 
underlies the fundamental process(es) leading to neuronal death. Increased 
availability of the fibrillogenic protein substrates of the pathological 
aggregates that define several neurodegenerative proteopathies, eg α-synuclein 
in PD, β-amyloid in AD and tau in the tauopathies, contributes to causation and 
risk in the familial and sporadic forms of these disorders, respectively.

DOI: 10.2174/156720510793611619
PMID: 20704554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2375. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2010 Dec;112(10):917-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2010.07.015. Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Familial early onset frontotemporal dementia caused by a novel S356T MAPT 
mutation, initially diagnosed as schizophrenia.

Momeni P(1), Wickremaratchi MM, Bell J, Arnold R, Beer R, Hardy J, Revesz T, 
Neal JW, Morris HR.

Author information:
(1)Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Department of Internal 
Medicine, Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA.

Autosomal dominant frontotemporal dementia (FTD) due to mutations in the MAPT 
gene is referred to as FTD with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 with tau 
pathology (FTDP-17T). Typically the disease begins in the sixth decade of life. 
We report a novel exon 12 mutation in MAPT (S356T), in a family with an 
exceptionally early age at onset (27 and 29 years), causing familial behavioural 
variant frontotemporal dementia. Both the proband and the proband's father were 
initially diagnosed as having schizophrenia. Pathological examination showed 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with extensive neuronal and glial tau 
deposition. This mutation is one of a small group of MAPT mutations (including 
P301S, G335V and S352L) that cause very early onset FTDP-17T. It is likely that 
the early age at onset reflects a marked pathogenic effect of the mutation 
involving a disturbance of microtubule binding, tau phosphorylation or a major 
acceleration of tau aggregation.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2010.07.015
PMID: 20708332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2376. Exp Neurol. 2010 Nov;226(1):84-9. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.08.005. Epub 
2010 Aug 14.

Sleep alterations in an environmental neurotoxin-induced model of parkinsonism.

McDowell KA(1), Hadjimarkou MM, Viechweg S, Rose AE, Clark SM, Yarowsky PJ, Mong 
JA.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of Maryland, School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, MD, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is classically defined as a motor disorder resulting 
from decreased dopamine production in the basal ganglia circuit. In an attempt 
to better diagnose and treat PD before the onset of severe motor dysfunction, 
recent attention has focused on the early, non-motor symptoms, which include but 
are not limited to sleep disorders such as excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) 
and REM behavioral disorder (RBD). However, few animal models have been able to 
replicate both the motor and non-motor symptoms of PD. Here, we present a 
progressive rat model of parkinsonism that displays disturbances in sleep/wake 
patterns. Epidemiological studies elucidated a link between the Guamanian 
variant of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis/Parkinsonism Dementia Complex (ALS/PDC) 
and the consumption of flour made from the washed seeds of the plant Cycas 
micronesica (cycad). Our study examined the effects of prolonged cycad 
consumption on sleep/wake activity in male, Sprague-Dawley rats. Cycad-fed rats 
exhibited an increase in length and/or number of bouts of rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep and Non-REM (NREM) sleep at the expense of wakefulness during the 
active period when compared to control rats. This hypersomnolent behavior 
suggests an inability to maintain arousal. In addition, cycad-fed rats had 
significantly fewer orexin cells in the hypothalamus. Our results reveal a novel 
rodent model of parkinsonism that includes an EDS-like syndrome that may be 
associated with a dysregulation of orexin neurons. Further characterization of 
this early, non-motor symptom, may provide potential therapeutic interventions 
in the treatment of PD.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2010.08.005
PMCID: PMC2955757
PMID: 20713046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2377. Neurology. 2010 Sep 21;75(12):1055-61. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f39a78. Epub 
2010 Aug 18.

CSF amyloid {beta} 1-42 predicts cognitive decline in Parkinson disease.

Siderowf A(1), Xie SX, Hurtig H, Weintraub D, Duda J, Chen-Plotkin A, Shaw LM, 
Van Deerlin V, Trojanowski JQ, Clark C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, 330 South 9th Street, Second Floor, Philadelphia, PA 
19107, USA. andrew.siderowf@uphs.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 Sep 21;75(12):1036-7.

OBJECTIVE: Cognitive decline associated with Parkinson disease (PD) is common 
and highly disabling. Biomarkers that help identify patients at risk for 
cognitive decline would be useful additions to the clinical management of the 
disease.
METHODS: A total of 45 patients with PD were enrolled in this prospective cohort 
study and had at least 1 yearly longitudinal follow-up evaluation. CSF was 
collected at baseline and cognition was assessed at baseline and follow-up 
visits using the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (DRS-2). CSF was tested for 
amyloid β 1-42 (Aβ(1-42)), p-tau(181p), and total tau levels using the Luminex 
xMAP platform. Mixed linear models were used to test for associations between 
baseline CSF biomarker levels and change in cognition over time.
RESULTS: Lower baseline CSF Aβ(1-42) was associated with more rapid cognitive 
decline. Subjects with CSF Aβ(1-42) levels ≤192 pg/mL declined an average of 
5.85 (95% confidence interval 2.11-9.58, p = 0.002) points per year more rapidly 
on the DRS-2 than subjects above that cutoff, after adjustment for age, disease 
duration, and baseline cognitive status. CSF total tau and p-tau(181p) levels 
were not significantly associated with cognitive decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced CSF Aβ(1-42) was an independent predictor of cognitive 
decline in patients with PD. This observation is consistent with previous 
research showing that Alzheimer disease pathology contributes to cognitive 
impairment in PD. This biomarker may provide clinically useful prognostic 
information, particularly if combined with other risk factors for cognitive 
impairment in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f39a78
PMCID: PMC2942062
PMID: 20720189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2378. Mol Cell Biochem. 2010 Dec;345(1-2):91-104. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0563-x. Epub 
2010 Aug 22.

Metals, oxidative stress and neurodegenerative disorders.

Jomova K(1), Vondrakova D, Lawson M, Valko M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Faculty of Natural Sciences, Constantine The 
Philosopher University, SK-949 74, Nitra, Slovakia. kjomova@ukf.sk

The neurodegenerative diseases, Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease 
(PD), are age-related disorders characterized by the deposition of abnormal 
forms of specific proteins in the brain. AD is characterized by the presence of 
extracellular amyloid plaques and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles in the 
brain. Biochemical analysis of amyloid plaques revealed that the main 
constituent is fibrillar aggregates of a 39-42 residue peptide referred to as 
the amyloid-β protein (Aβ). PD is associated with the degeneration of 
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. One of the 
pathological hallmarks of PD is the presence of intracellular inclusions called 
Lewy bodies that consist of aggregates of the presynaptic soluble protein called 
α-synuclein. There are various factors influencing the pathological depositions, 
and in general, the cause of neuronal death in neurological disorders appears to 
be multifactorial. However, it is clear, that the underlying factor in the 
neurological disorders is increased oxidative stress substantiated by the 
findings that the protein side-chains are modified either directly by reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) or reactive nitrogen species (RNS), or indirectly, by the 
products of lipid peroxidation. The increased level of oxidative stress in AD 
brain is reflected by the increased brain content of iron (Fe) and copper (Cu) 
both capable of stimulating free radical formation (e.g. hydroxyl radicals via 
Fenton reaction), increased protein and DNA oxidation in the AD brain, enhanced 
lipid peroxidation, decreased level of cytochrome c oxidase and advanced 
glycation end products (AGEs), carbonyls, malondialdehyde (MDA), peroxynitrite, 
and heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1). AGEs, mainly through their interaction with 
receptors for advanced glycation end products (RAGEs), further activate 
signaling pathways, inducing formation of proinflammatory cytokines such as 
interleukin-6 (IL-6). The conjugated aromatic ring of tyrosine residues is a 
target for free-radical attack, and accumulation of dityrosine and 
3-nitrotyrosine has also been reported in AD brain. The oxidative stress linked 
with PD is supported by both postmortem studies and by studies showing the 
increased level of oxidative stress in the substantia nigra pars compacta, 
demonstrating thus the capacity of oxidative stress to induce nigral cell 
degeneration. Markers of lipid peroxidation include 4-hydroxy-trans-2-nonenal 
(HNE), 4-oxo-trans-2-nonenal (4-ONE), acrolein, and 4-oxo-trans-2-hexenal, all 
of which are well recognized neurotoxic agents. In addition, other important 
factors, involving inflammation, toxic action of nitric oxide (NO·), defects in 
protein clearance, and mitochondrial dysfunction all contribute to the etiology 
of PD. It has been suggested that several individual antioxidants or their 
combinations can be neuroprotective and decrease the risk of AD or slow its 
progression. The aim of this review is to discuss the role of redox metals Fe 
and Cu and non-redox metal zinc (Zn) in oxidative stress-related etiology of AD 
and PD. Attention is focused on the metal-induced formation of free radicals and 
the protective role of antioxidants [glutathione (GSH), vitamin C (ascorbic 
acid)], vitamin E (α-Tocopherol), lipoic acid, flavonoids [catechins, 
epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG)], and curcumin. An alternate hypothesis topic in 
AD is also discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s11010-010-0563-x
PMID: 20730621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2379. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Mar 30;35(2):348-55. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.08.008. Epub 2010 Aug 22.

Epigenetics in neurodegeneration: a new layer of complexity.

Marques SC(1), Oliveira CR, Pereira CM, Outeiro TF.

Author information:
(1)Programa Doutoral em Biologia Experimental e Biomedicina, Centro de 
Neurociências e Biologia Celular, Coimbra, Portugal.

Several diseases are known to have a multifactorial origin, depending not only 
on genetic but also on environmental factors. They are called "complex 
disorders" and include cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, and 
neuropsychiatric and neurodegenerative diseases. In the latter class, 
Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's diseases (PD) are by far the most common in the 
elderly and constitute a tremendous social and economical problem. Both 
disorders present familial and sporadic forms and although some polymorphisms 
and risk factors have been associated with AD and PD, the precise way by which 
the environment contributes to neurodegeneration is still unclear. Recent 
studies suggest that environmental factors may contribute for neurodegeneration 
through induction of epigenetic modifications, such as DNA methylation, and 
chromatin remodeling, which may induce alterations in gene expression programs. 
Epigenetics, which refers to any process that alters gene activity without 
changing the actual DNA sequence, and leads to modifications that can be 
transmitted to daughter cells, is a relatively novel area of research that is 
currently attracting a high level of interest. Epigenetic modulation is present 
since the prenatal stages, and the aging process is now accepted to be 
associated with a loss of phenotypic plasticity to epigenetic modifications. 
Since aging is the most important risk factor for idiopathic AD and PD, it is 
expected that epigenetic alterations on DNA and/or chromatin structure may also 
accumulate in neurodegeneration, accounting at least in part to the etiology of 
these disorders.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2010.08.008
PMID: 20736041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2380. Brain. 2010 Sep;133(9):2664-76. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq221.

Motor and cognitive outcome in patients with Parkinson's disease 8 years after 
subthalamic implants.

Fasano A(1), Romito LM, Daniele A, Piano C, Zinno M, Bentivoglio AR, Albanese A.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Rome, Italy.

Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus represents the most important 
innovation for treatment of advanced Parkinson's disease. Prospective studies 
have shown that although the beneficial effects of this procedure are maintained 
at 5 years, axial motor features and cognitive decline may occur in the long 
term after the implants. In order to address some unsolved questions raised by 
previous studies, we evaluated a series of 20 consecutive patients who received 
continuous stimulation for 8 years. The overall motor improvement reported at 5 
years (55.5% at Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale-motor part, P < 0.001 
compared with baseline) was only partly retained 3 years later (39%, P < 0.001, 
compared with baseline; -16.5%, P < 0.01, compared with 5 years), with 
differential effects on motor features: speech did not improve and postural 
stability worsened (P < 0.05). The preoperative levodopa equivalent daily dose 
was reduced by 58.2% at 5 years and by 60.3% at 8 years. In spite of subtle 
worsening of motor features, a dramatic impairment in functional state (-56.6% 
at Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale-Activities of Daily Living, P < 
0.01) emerged after the fifth year of stimulation. The present study did not 
reveal a predictive value of preoperative levodopa response, whereas few single 
features at baseline (such as gait and postural stability motor scores and the 
preoperative levodopa equivalent daily dose) could predict long-term motor 
outcome. A decline in verbal fluency (slightly more pronounced than after 5 
years) was detected after 8 years. A significant but slight decline in tasks of 
abstract reasoning, episodic memory and executive function was also found. One 
patient had developed dementia at 5 years with further progression at 8 years. 
Executive dysfunction correlated significantly with postural stability, 
suggesting interplay between axial motor deterioration and cognition. Eight 
years after surgery, no significant change was observed on scales assessing 
depression or anxiety when compared with baseline. At 8 years, there was no 
significant increase of side-effects when compared with 5-year follow-up. In 
conclusion, deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus is a safe 
procedure with regard to cognitive and behavioural morbidity over long-term 
follow-up. However, the global benefit partly decreases later in the course of 
the disease, due to progression of Parkinson's disease and the appearance of 
medication- and stimulation-resistant symptoms.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq221
PMID: 20802207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2381. Nervenarzt. 2010 Oct;81(10):1189-95. doi: 10.1007/s00115-010-3025-5.

[Sonography of the parenchyma in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in German]

Hagenah J(1), Seidel G.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Universitätsklinikum Schleswig-Holstein,Campus Lübeck, 
Ratzeburger Allee 160, 23538, Lübeck, Deutschland. 
johann.hagenah@neuro.uni-luebeck.de

Transcranial sonography (TCS) of the brain parenchyma is a non-invasive and 
easily applicable neuroimaging technique which is used as a diagnostic tool in 
Parkinson's disease. Up to 90% of patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease 
but only 10-15% of the healthy population show an abnormal echogenicity 
(hyperechogenicity) of the substantia nigra (SN). TCS has been demonstrated to 
be a useful tool in the differential diagnosis of patients with essential tremor 
or atypical parkinsonian syndromes, including the parkinsonian variant of 
multiple system atrophy (MSA-P) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) where 
hyperechogenicity of the SN is less frequent. Abnormal echogenicity of the SN 
has been found in almost all investigated monogenic types of parkinsonism and 
even in asymptomatic mutation carriers. The nature of the pathological substrate 
leading to the abnormal echogenicity of the SN remains elusive. Longitudinal 
studies of asymptomatic subjects with abnormal echogenicity of the SN are still 
ongoing to evaluate the risk for developing Parkinson's disease in the future in 
these subjects.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-010-3025-5
PMID: 20802993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2382. Neuropsychology. 2010 Sep;24(5):599-607. doi: 10.1037/a0019221.

Recognition by familiarity is preserved in Parkinson's without dementia and 
Lewy-Body disease.

Algarabel S(1), Rodríguez LA, Escudero J, Fuentes M, Peset V, Pitarque A, 
Cómbita LM, Mazón JF.

Author information:
(1)Methodology Department, University of Valencia, Blasco Ibanyez, 21, 46010 
Valencia, Spain. Salvador.Algarabel@uv.es

OBJECTIVE: The retrieval deficit hypothesis states that the lack of deficit in 
recognition often observed in patients with Parkinson's disease is because of 
the low retrieval requirements of the task, given that these patients have 
retrieval and not encoding deficits. To test this hypothesis we investigated 
recognition memory by familiarity in Parkinson's patients and in patients with 
Lewy Bodies disease and Parkinson with dementia.
METHOD: We analyzed to what extent the experimental groups were able to 
recognize by familiarity in a typical yes/no recognition memory task. The 
experimental groups were patients with early nondemented Parkinson's disease, 
advanced nondemented Parkinson's disease, demented Parkinson's patients, and 
patients with dementia with Lewy Bodies. We compared their performance with a 
group of young and another group of old healthy participants. The estimation of 
familiarity was made by analyzing recognition of word targets and distractors 
consisting of combinations of different letters in comparison with a condition 
in which targets and distractors were composed of similar letters, even though 
subjects were unaware of the independent variable.
RESULTS: The results indicate that familiarity was used at the same level by 
controls, patients with early Parkinson's disease and patients with dementia 
with Lewy Bodies. Although late Parkinson patients also used familiarity, its 
effect was only marginally significant. Patients with Parkinson's disease and 
dementia were not capable of using familiarity in recognition memory.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the retrieval deficit hypothesis as Parkinson's 
patients without dementia show no deficit in a situation in which the retrieval 
requirements are minimal.

Copyright 2010 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/a0019221
PMID: 20804248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2383. Hum Mol Genet. 2010 Nov 15;19(22):4385-98. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq361. Epub 2010 
Aug 31.

A point mutation in the dynein heavy chain gene leads to striatal atrophy and 
compromises neurite outgrowth of striatal neurons.

Braunstein KE(1), Eschbach J, Ròna-Vörös K, Soylu R, Mikrouli E, Larmet Y, René 
F, Gonzalez De Aguilar JL, Loeffler JP, Müller HP, Bucher S, Kaulisch T, Niessen 
HG, Tillmanns J, Fischer K, Schwalenstöcker B, Kassubek J, Pichler B, Stiller D, 
Petersen A, Ludolph AC, Dupuis L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The molecular motor dynein and its associated regulatory subunit dynactin have 
been implicated in several neurodegenerative conditions of the basal ganglia, 
such as Huntington's disease (HD) and Perry syndrome, an atypical Parkinson-like 
disease. This pathogenic role has been largely postulated from the existence of 
mutations in the dynactin subunit p150(Glued). However, dynactin is also able to 
act independently of dynein, and there is currently no direct evidence linking 
dynein to basal ganglia degeneration. To provide such evidence, we used here a 
mouse strain carrying a point mutation in the dynein heavy chain gene that 
impairs retrograde axonal transport. These mice exhibited motor and behavioural 
abnormalities including hindlimb clasping, early muscle weakness, incoordination 
and hyperactivity. In vivo brain imaging using magnetic resonance imaging showed 
striatal atrophy and lateral ventricle enlargement. In the striatum, altered 
dopamine signalling, decreased dopamine D1 and D2 receptor binding in positron 
emission tomography SCAN and prominent astrocytosis were observed, although 
there was no neuronal loss either in the striatum or substantia nigra. In vitro, 
dynein mutant striatal neurons displayed strongly impaired neuritic morphology. 
Altogether, these findings provide a direct genetic evidence for the requirement 
of dynein for the morphology and function of striatal neurons. Our study 
supports a role for dynein dysfunction in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative 
disorders of the basal ganglia, such as Perry syndrome and HD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddq361
PMCID: PMC3298848
PMID: 20807776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2384. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010 Oct;18(10):928-39. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181d5792a.

Goal-oriented cognitive rehabilitation for people with early-stage Alzheimer 
disease: a single-blind randomized controlled trial of clinical efficacy.

Clare L(1), Linden DE, Woods RT, Whitaker R, Evans SJ, Parkinson CH, van 
Paasschen J, Nelis SM, Hoare Z, Yuen KS, Rugg MD.

Author information:
(1)Bangor University, United Kingdom. l.clare@bangor.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: To provide evidence regarding the clinical efficacy of cognitive 
rehabilitation (CR) in early-stage Alzheimer disease (AD).
DESIGN: Single-blind randomized controlled trial comparing CR with relaxation 
therapy and no treatment.
SETTING: Outpatient, community-based setting.
PARTICIPANTS: Sixty-nine individuals (41 women, 28 men; mean age 77.78 years, 
standard deviation 6.32, range = 56-89) with a diagnosis of AD or mixed AD and 
vascular dementia and a Mini-Mental State Examination score of 18 or above, and 
receiving a stable dose of acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting medication. 
Forty-four family carers also contributed.
INTERVENTION: Eight weekly individual sessions of CR consisting of personalized 
interventions to address individually relevant goals supported by components 
addressing practical aids and strategies, techniques for learning new 
information, practice in maintaining attention and concentration, and techniques 
for stress management.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcomes were goal performance and satisfaction, 
assessed using the Canadian Occupational Performance Measure. Questionnaires 
assessing mood, quality of life and career strain, and a brief 
neuropsychological test battery were also administered. A subset of participants 
underwent functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
RESULTS: CR produced significant improvement in ratings of goal performance and 
satisfaction, whereas scores in the other two groups did not change. Behavioral 
changes in the CR group were supported by fMRI data for a subset of 
participants.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings support the clinical efficacy of CR in early-stage AD. 
CR offers a means of assisting people with early-stage AD and their families in 
managing the effects of the condition.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181d5792a
PMID: 20808145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2385. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2011 Mar;118(3):301-14. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-010-0470-z. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Brain iron metabolism and its perturbation in neurological diseases.

Crichton RR(1), Dexter DT, Ward RJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Condensed Material and Nanosciences, Université Catholique de 
Louvain, Place Louis Pasteur 1, 1348, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. 
Robert.Crichton@uclouvain.be

Metal ions are of particular importance in brain function, notably iron. A broad 
overview of iron metabolism and its homeostasis both at the cellular level 
(involving regulation at the level of mRNA translation) and the systemic level 
(involving the peptide 'hormone' hepcidin) is presented. The mechanisms of iron 
transport both across the blood-brain barrier and within the brain are then 
examined. The importance of iron in the developing foetus and in early life is 
underlined. We then review the growing corpus of evidence that many 
neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) are the consequence of dysregulation of brain 
iron homeostasis. This results in the production of reactive oxygen species, 
generating reactive aldehydes, which, together with further oxidative insults, 
causes oxidative modification of proteins, manifested by carbonyl formation. 
These misfolded and damaged proteins overwhelm the ubiquitin/proteasome system, 
accumulating the characteristic inclusion bodies found in many NDs. The 
involvement of iron in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease is then 
examined, with emphasis on recent data linking in particular interactions 
between iron homeostasis and key disease proteins. We conclude that there is 
overwhelming evidence for a direct involvement of iron in NDs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-010-0470-z
PMID: 20809066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2386. J Nucl Med. 2010 Sep;51(9):1418-30. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.110.077164.

Target-specific PET probes for neurodegenerative disorders related to dementia.

Kadir A(1), Nordberg A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Alzheimer Neurobiology, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences 
and Society, Karolinska Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Dementia is a highly prevalent problem causing considerable disability and 
mortality and exacting great costs to individuals, their families, and society. 
The 4 most common neurodegenerative disorders that cause dementia-Alzheimer 
disease, frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, and dementia in 
Parkinson disease-have different underlying etiologies and pathogenetic 
mechanisms. There is a great need for early diagnostic markers; functional brain 
imaging may therefore assist in the detection and differential diagnosis of 
dementia due to neurodegenerative diseases. Functional imaging such as PET 
allows in vivo imaging of functional brain activity indicating cerebral blood 
flow and cerebral glucose metabolism, and PET allows imaging of neurotransmitter 
activity, including that of the cholinergic, dopaminergic, and serotonergic 
systems. New PET neuroimaging tracers are being developed for detecting 
pathologic parameters such as amyloid plaque and microglial activity. The 
development of molecular imaging is important for early diagnosis of dementia, 
selection of patients for therapies, and evaluation of therapies.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.110.077164
PMID: 20810758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2387. Neurology. 2010 Sep 28;75(13):1203-10. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f52db1. Epub 
2010 Sep 1.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs are associated with increased neuritic 
plaques.

Sonnen JA(1), Larson EB, Walker RL, Haneuse S, Crane PK, Gray SL, Breitner JC, 
Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98104, USA. 
jsonnen@u.washington.edu

OBJECTIVES: Observational and experimental studies suggest that nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) may protect against Alzheimer disease (AD); 
however, clinical trials and other observational studies, including the Adult 
Changes in Thought (ACT) study, show no protection or promotion of AD. The 
objective of this study is to determine the relationship between common 
dementia-associated pathologies and mid- to late-life NSAID exposure.
METHODS: We examined the association of mid- to late-life NSAID use with 
neuropathologic findings on 257 autopsies from ACT, a population-based study of 
brain aging and incident dementia. Cumulative standard daily doses (SDD) of 
nonselective NSAIDs were determined from ≥10 years of computerized pharmacy 
dispensing data. Analyses were adjusted for selection bias to broaden 
generalizability of results to 3,026 eligible participants in the ACT cohort. 
Seven pathologic indices were evaluated: intermediate or frequent score for 
neuritic plaques, Braak stages V or VI for neurofibrillary tangles, >2 cerebral 
microinfarcts, the presence of any neocortical Lewy bodies, any macroscopic 
infarcts, any amyloid angiopathy, and moderate or severe atherosclerosis.
RESULTS: Of the neuropathologic indices evaluated, only neuritic plaque score 
was significantly increased in participants with greater use of nonselective 
NSAIDs (p = 0.065), specifically in those with high levels of cumulative use: 
1,000-2,000 SDD (adjusted relative risk [RR] 2.16, 95% confidence interval [CI] 
1.02-4.25, compared to light/nonuse [<60 SDD]) and >2,000 SDD (adjusted RR 2.37, 
95% CI 1.24-4.67).
CONCLUSIONS: Increased neuritic plaque accumulation may explain the association 
between heavy use of nonselective NSAIDs and increased risk of dementia among 
ACT participants.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f52db1
PMCID: PMC3013492
PMID: 20811000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2388. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2010 Oct;166(10):829-33. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2010.07.004. 
Epub 2010 Sep 1.

Diagnostic criteria for multiple system atrophy and progressive supranuclear 
palsy.

Wenning GK(1), Colosimo C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neurobiology, Department of Neurology, University of 
Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria. gregorwenning@i-med.ac.at

The atypical parkinsonian disorders (APD) embrace a heterogeneous group of 
movement disorders all characterized by prominent parkinsonism, accompanied by 
specific additional features such as cerebellar ataxia, early autonomic 
dysfunction, early dementia, pyramidal tract signs, myoclonus, supranuclear gaze 
palsy, apraxia which are atypical for idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Beside these features, rapid disease progression and poor or absent response to 
L-Dopa therapy both raise the suspicion of an APD. Currently, multiple system 
atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), corticobasal degeneration 
(CBD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are referred to as APD. Clinical 
diagnosis can be difficult in early stages and although the predictive value of 
the widely established, diagnostic criteria is high at first neurological 
evaluation sensitivity tends to be poor and may be less than 30%. In this 
review, we will discuss diagnostic issues in MSA and PSP.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2010.07.004
PMID: 20813385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2389. PLoS Genet. 2010 Sep 2;6(9):e1001087. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001087.

Inhibition of GSK-3 ameliorates Abeta pathology in an adult-onset Drosophila 
model of Alzheimer's disease.

Sofola O(1), Kerr F, Rogers I, Killick R, Augustin H, Gandy C, Allen MJ, Hardy 
J, Lovestone S, Partridge L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Evolution, and Environment, Institute of Healthy 
Ageing and Research, University College London, London, United Kingdom.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2012 Jan;8(1). doi: 
10.1371/annotation/baa8a2a9-130b-4959-b6fb-6f786fd02826.

Abeta peptide accumulation is thought to be the primary event in the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), with downstream neurotoxic effects 
including the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein. Glycogen synthase kinase-3 
(GSK-3) is increasingly implicated as playing a pivotal role in this amyloid 
cascade. We have developed an adult-onset Drosophila model of AD, using an 
inducible gene expression system to express Arctic mutant Abeta42 specifically 
in adult neurons, to avoid developmental effects. Abeta42 accumulated with age 
in these flies and they displayed increased mortality together with progressive 
neuronal dysfunction, but in the apparent absence of neuronal loss. This fly 
model can thus be used to examine the role of events during adulthood and early 
AD aetiology. Expression of Abeta42 in adult neurons increased GSK-3 activity, 
and inhibition of GSK-3 (either genetically or pharmacologically by lithium 
treatment) rescued Abeta42 toxicity. Abeta42 pathogenesis was also reduced by 
removal of endogenous fly tau; but, within the limits of detection of available 
methods, tau phosphorylation did not appear to be altered in flies expressing 
Abeta42. The GSK-3-mediated effects on Abeta42 toxicity appear to be at least in 
part mediated by tau-independent mechanisms, because the protective effect of 
lithium alone was greater than that of the removal of tau alone. Finally, 
Abeta42 levels were reduced upon GSK-3 inhibition, pointing to a direct role of 
GSK-3 in the regulation of Abeta42 peptide level, in the absence of APP 
processing. Our study points to the need both to identify the mechanisms by 
which GSK-3 modulates Abeta42 levels in the fly and to determine if similar 
mechanisms are present in mammals, and it supports the potential therapeutic use 
of GSK-3 inhibitors in AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001087
PMCID: PMC2932684
PMID: 20824130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


2390. Mov Disord. 2010 Nov 15;25(15):2555-62. doi: 10.1002/mds.23322.

Metric properties of the mini-mental Parkinson and SCOPA-COG scales for rating 
cognitive deterioration in Parkinson's disease.

Serrano-Dueñas M(1), Calero B, Serrano S, Serrano M, Coronel P.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorder and Biostatistic Units, Neurological Service, Carlos 
Andrade Marín Hospital, Quito, Ecuador. mserranod@gmail.com

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a chronic neurodegenerative disorder that causes 
cognitive impairment and dementia in ∼30% of patients.
OBJECTIVE: Compare metric qualities of Mini-Mental Parkinson (MMP) and scales 
for outcomes in Parkinson's disease-cognition (SCOPA-COG) with respect to their 
relative reliability, validity and ability to predict symptoms (mobility, 
quality of life, social repercussions, and mood) in PD patients. Outpatients 
(n=123, 78 males/45 females) diagnosed with PD were included in the study. A 
multilevel (hierarchical) modeling analysis was performed along with tests of 
reliability and validity to ascertain which of the two models better predicts 
symptoms related to PD.
RESULTS: The MMP differed significantly between patients with Hoehn and Yahr 
(H&Y) stages 1, 2 or versus 4/5 (grouped together). The SCOPA-COG showed 
differences only between patients in H&Y stages 2 versus 4/5. Both scales were 
dependent on educational background and age. The SCOPA-COG had a higher 
coefficient of variation (0.303) than the MMP (0.184), indicating that it was 
the more discriminative of the two.
CONCLUSIONS: The SCOPA-COG has some advantages over the MMP, the most important 
being a greater discriminative ability. Multilevel hierarchical analysis 
clarified the necessity of stratifying the PD population according to 
educational background, years of illness, and H&Y stage when using these scales.

© 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23322
PMID: 20824734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2391. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2010 Sep;78(9):513-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1245644. 
Epub 2010 Sep 8.

[Dementia in morbus Parkinson: reasonable diagnostics and rational therapy].

[Article in German]

Timmermann L(1), Maier F, Eggers C, Schmidt M, Kalbe E.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurologie, Universitätsklinik Köln. 
lars.timmermann@uk-koeln.de

Cognitive decline is a common disorder in idiopathic Parkinson's syndrome, the 
risk for the development of a dementia is four- to six-fold higher for 
Parkinsonian patients. The cognitive profile in Parkinson's disease dementia 
(PDD) differs from that of Alzheimer-type dementias. The affected cognitive 
functions include attention, executive functions, visual-spatial functions and 
recall. The main differential diagnosis for PDD is the Lewy body dementia (LBD), 
which can be differentiated through the temporal development of motor and 
cognitive symptoms. Cognitive symptoms in Parkinsonian syndromes have a relevant 
negative impact on quality of life, on the burden for the care-givers, on the 
prognosis of the disease and on the possible referral to a nursing home. 
Dementias in Parkinsonian syndromes (PDD and LBD) need a confirmatory diagnosis 
at an early stage in order to initiate further therapeutic steps with, e. g., 
acetylcholine esterase inhibitors or, perspectively, neuropsychological training 
methods.

Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart, New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1245644
PMID: 20827651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2392. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Nov;16(9):590-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.08.008. Epub 2010 Sep 9.

Tests of dorsolateral frontal function correlate with objective tests of 
postural stability in early to moderate stage Parkinson's disease.

Nocera JR(1), Price C, Fernandez HH, Amano S, Vallabhajosula S, Okun MS, Hwynn 
N, Hass CJ.

Author information:
(1)Brain Rehabilitation Research Center, Malcom Randall VAMC, Gainesville, FL, 
USA. jnocera@ufl.edu

A substantial number of individuals with Parkinson's disease who display 
impaired postural stability experience accelerated cognitive decline and an 
increased prevalence of dementia. To date, studies suggest that this 
relationship, believed to be due to involvement of nondopaminergic circuitry, 
occurs later in the disease process. Research has yet to adequately investigate 
this cognitive-posturomotor relationship especially when examining earlier 
disease states. To gain greater understanding of the relationship between 
postural stability and cognitive function/dysfunction we evaluated a more 
stringent, objective measure of postural stability (center of pressure 
displacement), and also more specific measures of cognition in twenty-two 
patients with early to moderate stage Parkinson's disease. The magnitude of the 
center of pressure displacement in this cohort was negatively correlated with 
performance on tests known to activate dorsolateral frontal regions. 
Additionally, the postural stability item of the UPDRS exhibited poor 
correlation with the more objective measure of center of pressure displacement 
and all specific measures of cognition. These results may serve as rationale for 
a more thorough evaluation of postural stability and cognition especially in 
individuals with mild Parkinson's disease. Greater understanding of the 
relationship between motor and cognitive processes in Parkinson's disease will 
be critical for understanding the disease process and its potential therapeutic 
possibilities.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.08.008
PMCID: PMC2997686
PMID: 20829093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2393. Folia Med (Plovdiv). 2010 Apr-Jun;52(2):5-13. doi: 10.2478/v10153-010-0041-y.

Early noninvasive diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases.

Danev SI(1), St Stoyanov D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, St Anna University Hospital, Sofia, 
Bulgaria.

This paper reviews the contemporary trends in the pathobiochemistry of 
neurodegenerative disorders with respect to their early predictive diagnosis and 
possible treatment interventions. If we consider the current epidemiological 
data related to neurodegenerative disorders, medicine is going to face in the 
near future latent pandemic situations. The introduction puts an emphasis on the 
emerging importance of one major cluster of neurodegenerative disorders: 
diseases of the abnormal protein beta-conformation. The cluster includes such 
significant diseases as Alzheimer, Pick, Huntington, Parkinson disease, as well 
as the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (Creuzfeldt-Jakob disease). The 
pathogenetic mechanisms in the determination of this group of disorders are 
explored with an emphasis on the impairment of post-synthetic chaperone 
correction. The central role of a number of such protein products is discussed. 
In particular the pathobiochemical mechanisms concerning the formation of 
beta-amyloid, alpha and beta synucleins, scrapie isoform of the prion protein 
are presented. A new diagnostic principle allowing the early and specific 
diagnosis of the conformation diseases protein via amplification techniques is 
presented. These methods compete in sensitivity with the PCR methods and shows 
promises for effective treatment. In conclusion, beta-pathies are considered a 
suitable example for the modern concept of cluster and prototype diagnosis in 
medicine and especially in clinical neurosciences.

DOI: 10.2478/v10153-010-0041-y
PMID: 20836391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2394. Neurodegener Dis. 2011;8(3):129-37. doi: 10.1159/000319452. Epub 2010 Sep 13.

Oxidative imbalance in different neurodegenerative diseases with memory 
impairment.

Gironi M(1), Bianchi A, Russo A, Alberoni M, Ceresa L, Angelini A, Cursano C, 
Mariani E, Nemni R, Kullmann C, Farina E, Martinelli Boneschi F.

Author information:
(1)Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, Santa Maria Nascente Clinical Research Center, 
Milan, Italy. mgironi @ dongnocchi.it

BACKGROUND: Byproducts of oxidative metabolic reactions could play a role in the 
pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative diseases (ND) including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). We designed a study aimed at investigating a large set of 
oxidative and antioxidant markers in a sample of patients affected by different 
forms of dementia or memory impairment.
METHODS: Serum levels of coenzyme Q(10), malondialdehyde (MDA), the total, 
oxidized and reduced forms of glutathione (GStot, GSSG and GSH, respectively), 
reactive oxygen species, anti-oxidized low-density lipoprotein antibodies and 
antioxidant power (PAO) were investigated in patients affected by AD, mild 
cognitive impairment, dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease with 
dementia. The patient sample (n = 66) was compared with healthy subjects (HC; n 
= 62), and a comparison across pathological subgroups was also performed. A 
multivariate logistic regression model was implemented in order to calculate an 
algorithm model for predicting the risk of developing a neurodegenerative 
disorder.
RESULTS: The comparison between the memory deficit (MD) group and HC showed a 
significant difference for MDA (MD: 6.3 ± 2.8 μg/l; HC: 9.1 ± 4.9 μg/l; p = 1.7 
× 10(-6)), GStot (MD: 260.4 ± 62.6 mg/l; HC: 306.5 ± 60.7 mg/l; p = 2.2 × 
10(-5)), GSH (MD: 208.9 ± 68.4 mg/l; HC: 295.3 ± 101.3 mg/l; p = 2.2 × 10(-7)) 
and PAO (MD: 1,066.5 ± 247.7 μmol; HC: 954.9 ± 200.4 μmol; p = 0.8 × 10(-3)). By 
contrast, no differences in the levels of the studied markers were detected 
across the different forms of ND. An older age, higher levels of PAO, lower 
levels of GSH and MDA and the use of cardiovascular or antidepressant drugs were 
the most important factors associated with the carrier ship of neurodegenerative 
disorder.
CONCLUSION: To our knowledge, this is the first study reporting similar 
oxidative imbalance in different forms of memory impairment, regardless of the 
specific etiology. Low GSH levels could be considered as a favorable factor in 
ND; at the same time it could be suggested that higher levels of PAO represent a 
counteracting mechanism against an increased oxidative stress. The association 
between vascular risk factors, depressive status and cognitive impairment is in 
line with findings in the literature.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000319452
PMID: 20838029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2395. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Nov;120(5):641-9. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0741-7. Epub 
2010 Sep 14.

Glucocerebrosidase is present in α-synuclein inclusions in Lewy body disorders.

Goker-Alpan O(1), Stubblefield BK, Giasson BI, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, NHGRI, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-3708, USA.

Mutations in the gene encoding the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase, known to 
cause Gaucher disease (GD), are a risk factor for the development of Parkinson 
disease (PD) and related disorders. This association is based on the concurrence 
of parkinsonism and GD, the identification of glucocerebrosidase mutations in 
cohorts with PD from centers around the world, and neuropathologic findings. The 
contribution of glucocerebrosidase to the development of parkinsonian pathology 
was explored by studying seven brain samples from subjects carrying 
glucocerebrosidase mutations with pathologic diagnoses of PD and/or Lewy body 
dementia. Three individuals had GD and four were heterozygous for 
glucocerebrosidase mutations. All cases had no known family history of PD and 
the mean age of disease onset was 59 years (range 42-77). Immunofluorescence 
studies on brain tissue samples from patients with parkinsonism associated with 
glucocerebrosidase mutations showed that glucocerebrosidase was present in 
32-90% of Lewy bodies (mean 75%), some ubiquitinated and others 
non-ubiquitinated. In samples from seven subjects without mutations, <10% of 
Lewy bodies were glucocerebrosidase positive (mean 4%). This data demonstrates 
that glucocerebrosidase can be an important component of α-synuclein-positive 
pathological inclusions. Unraveling the role of mutant glucocerebrosidase in the 
development of this pathology will further our understanding of the lysosomal 
pathways that likely contribute to the formation and/or clearance of these 
protein aggregates.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0741-7
PMCID: PMC3352317
PMID: 20838799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors of this 
manuscript have no conflicts of interest to disclose.


2396. Mov Disord. 2011 Jan;26(1):176-81. doi: 10.1002/mds.23358. Epub 2010 Sep 14.

Reduced but not oxidized cerebrospinal fluid glutathione levels are lowered in 
Lewy body diseases.

Maetzler W(1), Schmid SP, Wurster I, Liepelt I, Gaenslen A, Gasser T, Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Center of Neurology, Hertie Institute for 
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, Germany. 
walter.maetzler@uni-tuebingen.de

Reduced (GSH(R)) but not oxidized glutathione (GSSG) has been shown to be 
dramatically altered in the substantia nigra (SN) of Lewy body disease (LBD) 
patients post mortem; but up to now, there is no convincing evidence that these 
changes can be monitored in vivo. We investigated GSH(R) and GSSG in rapidly 
processed cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma samples of 80 LBD and 35 control 
subjects and detected reduced CSF GSH(R) levels in LBD subjects. The reduction 
was negatively associated with age but not with disease-associated parameters. 
Plasma GSH(R), CSF GSSG, and plasma GSSG levels did not significantly differ 
between the groups. Our findings confirm the results from neuropathologic 
studies, which demonstrated an alteration of the glutathione system in LBD. We 
hypothesize that alterations of the glutathione system occur in a very early 
stage of the disease or may even represent a risk marker for LBD.

Copyright © 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23358
PMID: 20842692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2397. Lancet Neurol. 2010 Nov;9(11):1070-7. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70216-7. Epub 
2010 Sep 16.

Decreased striatal dopamine transporter uptake and substantia nigra 
hyperechogenicity as risk markers of synucleinopathy in patients with idiopathic 
rapid-eye-movement sleep behaviour disorder: a prospective study [corrected].

Iranzo A(1), Lomeña F, Stockner H, Valldeoriola F, Vilaseca I, Salamero M, 
Molinuevo JL, Serradell M, Duch J, Pavía J, Gallego J, Seppi K, Högl B, Tolosa 
E, Poewe W, Santamaria J; Sleep Innsbruck Barcelona (SINBAR) group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital Clinic, Networked Biomedical 
Research Centre for Neurodegenerative Diseases, The August Pi i Sunyer 
Biomedical Research Institute, Spain. airanzo@clinic.ub.es

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2010 Nov;9(11):1045.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2010 Nov;9(11):1040-2.

BACKGROUND: Patients with idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behaviour disorder 
(IRBD) may develop neurodegenerative conditions associated with substantia nigra 
dysfunction such as Parkinson's disease. In patients with Parkinson's disease, 
¹²³I-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl)-nortropane 
(¹²³I-FP-CIT) SPECT detects striatal dopamine dysfunction resulting from nigral 
pathology whereas transcranial sonography (TCS) shows increased substantia nigra 
echogenic size, even before parkinsonism is clinically evident. We postulated 
that these neuroimaging changes could occur in a proportion of IRBD individuals 
who might then be at increased risk for development of a neurodegenerative 
disorder associated with substantia nigra dysfunction.
METHODS: In our prospective study, we identified patients with IRBD from 
individuals referred to our sleep disorders centre in Barcelona, Spain. At 
baseline, we assessed dopamine transporter [corrected] uptake by use of 
¹²³I-FP-CIT SPECT, and estimated echogenicity of the substantia nigra by use of 
TCS. After a follow-up of 2·5 years, participants were clinically assessed to 
establish whether they had developed neurodegenerative syndromes. Data were 
compared with those of matched healthy controls.
FINDINGS: 43 individuals with IRBD agreed to participate in the study. We found 
reduced ¹²³I-FP-CIT binding in the striatum (p=0·045) in 17 (40%) of 43 
participants compared with 18 controls, and substantia nigra hyperechogenicity 
in 14 (36%) of 39 participants with IRBD, compared with 16 (11%) of 149 controls 
(p=0·0002). Tracer uptake reduction was more pronounced in the putamen than it 
was in the caudate nucleus. 27 (63%) participants had reduced ¹²³I-FP-CIT 
binding or substantia nigra hyperechogenicity at baseline. Eight (30%) of these 
participants developed a neurodegenerative disorder (five Parkinson's disease, 
two dementia with Lewy bodies, and one multiple system atrophy). Individuals 
with normal neuroimaging results remained disease-free. Sensitivity of combined 
¹²³I-FP-CIT SPECT and TCS to predict conversion to synucleinopathy after 2·5 
years was 100% and specificity was 55%.
INTERPRETATION: In patients with IRBD, ¹²³I-FP-CIT SPECT and TCS can detect 
subclinical changes much the same as those typically seen in patients with early 
Parkinson's disease. Decreased striatal ¹²³I-FP-CIT binding and substantia nigra 
hyperechogenicity might be useful markers to identify individuals at increased 
risk for development of synucleinopathies.
FUNDING: None.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(10)70216-7
PMID: 20846908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2398. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;22(2):415-21. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101140.

Neurovascular coupling in Parkinson's disease patients: effects of dementia and 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitor treatment.

Rosengarten B(1), Dannhardt V, Burr O, Pöhler M, Rosengarten S, Oechsner M, 
Reuter I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology of the Justus-Liebig University-Giessen, Giessen, 
Germany. bernhard.rosengarten@neuro.med.unigiessen.de

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) lead to a cholinergic 
deficit in the brain which is not only related to dementia, but may also lead to 
a disturbed neurovascular coupling. We investigated the effect of cholinergic 
decline on neurovascular coupling in PD patients. Patients with idiopathic PD 
were divided in groups without (n=59; 65 ± 9 y) or with moderate dementia as 
specified by Mini-Mental State Examination. The demented patients were assigned 
to groups with (n=55; 73 ± 6 y) or without (n=61; 72 ± 8 y) acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitor treatment. Neurovascular coupling was assessed by a simultaneous 
electroencephalography-Doppler technique applying a contrast-based visual 
stimulation task. Visually evoked potential amplitudes (N75-P100) and parameters 
of the hemodynamic response in the posterior cerebral artery were obtained using 
a control system approach (resting flow velocity, gain, attenuation, rate time, 
and natural frequency). Data were compared to a healthy control group of a 
similar age range (n=20; 63 ± 8 yr). Compared to controls, patient groups 
presented no differences in evoked potential amplitudes or neurovascular 
coupling parameters. The reported 30% decline in acetylcholinesterase activity 
in PD patients did not lead to measurable changes in neurovascular coupling. In 
AD patients additional factors might explain the uncoupling and higher 
cerebrovascular risk detected in clinical studies.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-101140
PMID: 20847429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2399. Arthritis Care Res (Hoboken). 2010 Sep;62(9):1287-93. doi: 10.1002/acr.20200.

Musculoskeletal pain and incident disability in community-dwelling older adults.

Buchman AS(1), Shah RC, Leurgans SE, Boyle PA, Wilson RS, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. 
Buchman@rush.edu

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that the number of areas of musculoskeletal 
pain reported is related to incident disability.
METHODS: Subjects included 898 older persons from the Rush Memory and Aging 
Project without dementia, stroke, or Parkinson's disease at baseline. All 
participants underwent detailed baseline evaluation of self-reported pain in the 
neck or back, hands, hips, knees, or feet, as well as annual self-reported 
assessments of instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), basic activities 
of daily living (ADLs), and mobility disability. Mobility disability was also 
assessed using a performance-based measure.
RESULTS: The average followup was 5.6 years. Using a series of proportional 
hazards models that controlled for age, sex, and education, the risk of IADL 
disability increased by ∼10% for each additional painful area reported (hazard 
ratio [HR] 1.10, 95% confidence interval [95% CI] 1.01-1.20) and the risk of ADL 
disability increased by ∼20% for each additional painful area (HR 1.20, 95% CI 
1.11-1.31). The association with self-report mobility disability did not reach 
significance (HR 1.09, 95% CI 0.99-1.20). However, the risk of mobility 
disability based on gait speed performance increased by ∼13% for each additional 
painful area (HR 1.13, 95% CI 1.04-1.22). These associations did not vary by 
age, sex, or education and were unchanged after controlling for several 
potential confounding variables including body mass index, physical activity, 
cognition, depressive symptoms, vascular risk factors, and vascular diseases.
CONCLUSION: Among nondisabled community-dwelling older adults, the risk of 
disability increases with the number of areas reported with musculoskeletal 
pain.

DOI: 10.1002/acr.20200
PMCID: PMC3445435
PMID: 20853470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2400. Neurology. 2010 Sep 21;75(12):1062-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f39d0e.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease: a multicenter pooled analysis.

Aarsland D(1), Bronnick K, Williams-Gray C, Weintraub D, Marder K, Kulisevsky J, 
Burn D, Barone P, Pagonabarraga J, Allcock L, Santangelo G, Foltynie T, Janvin 
C, Larsen JP, Barker RA, Emre M.

Author information:
(1)Stavanger University Hospital, Psychiatric Division, PO Box 8100, 4068 
Stavanger, Norway. daarsland@gmail.com

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 Sep 21;75(12):1038-9.
    Evid Based Ment Health. 2011 Feb;14(1):5.

BACKGROUND: In studies of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in Parkinson disease 
(PD), patients without dementia have reported variable prevalences and profiles 
of MCI, likely to be due to methodologic differences between the studies.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to determine frequency and the 
profile of MCI in a large, multicenter cohort of well-defined patients with PD 
using a standardized analytic method and a common definition of MCI.
METHODS: A total of 1,346 patients with PD from 8 different cohorts were 
included. Standardized analysis of verbal memory, visuospatial, and 
attentional/executive abilities was performed. Subjects were classified as 
having MCI if their age- and education-corrected z score on one or more 
cognitive domains was at least 1.5 standard deviations below the mean of either 
control subjects or normative data.
RESULTS: A total of 25.8% of subjects (95% confidence interval [CI] 23.5-28.2) 
were classified as having MCI. Memory impairment was most common (13.3%; 
11.6-15.3), followed by visuospatial (11.0%; 9.4-13.0) and attention/executive 
ability impairment (10.1%; 8.6-11.9). Regarding cognitive profiles, 11.3% 
(9.7-13.1) were classified as nonamnestic single-domain MCI, 8.9% (7.0-9.9) as 
amnestic single-domain, 4.8% (3.8-6.1) as amnestic multiple-domain, and 1.3% 
(0.9-2.1) as nonamnestic multiple-domain MCI. Having MCI was associated with 
older age at assessment and at disease onset, male gender, depression, more 
severe motor symptoms, and advanced disease stage.
CONCLUSIONS: MCI is common in patients with PD without dementia, affecting a 
range of cognitive domains, including memory, visual-spatial, and 
attention/executive abilities. Future studies of patients with PD with MCI need 
to determine risk factors for ongoing cognitive decline and assess interventions 
at a predementia stage.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181f39d0e
PMCID: PMC2942065
PMID: 20855849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]