2201. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2010 Jun;7(4):307-22. doi: 10.2174/156720510791162395.

A new hypothesis of pathogenesis based on the divorce between mitochondria and 
their host cells: possible relevance for Alzheimer's disease.

Agnati LF(1), Guidolin D, Baluska F, Leo G, Barlow PW, Carone C, Genedani S.

Author information:
(1)Department of BioMedical Sciences, University of Modena and IRCCS Lido, 
Venezia, Italy. luigiagnati@tin.it

On the basis of not only the endosymbiotic theory of eukaryotic cell 
organization and evolution but also of observations of transcellular 
communication via Tunneling NanoTubes (TNTs), the hypothesis is put forward that 
when mitochondria, which were once independently living prokaryote-like 
organisms, are subjected to detrimental genetic, toxic, or environmental 
conditions, including age-related endogenous factors, they can regress towards 
their original independent state. At that point, they can become potentially 
pathogenic intruders within their eukaryotic host cell. Because of the 
protoplasmic disequilibrium caused by an altered, or mutated, mitochondral 
population, certain host cells with a minimal capacity for self-renewal, such as 
dopaminergic neurons, risk a loss of function and degenerate. It is also 
proposed that altered mitochondria, as well as their mutated mtDNA, can migrate, 
via TNTs, into adjacent cells. In this way, neurodegenerative states are 
propagated between cells (glia and/or neurons) of the Central Nervous System 
(CNS) and that this leads to conditions such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
disease. This proposal finds indirect support from observations on 
rotenone-poisoned glioblastoma cells which have been co-cultured with 
non-poisoned cells. Immunocytochemical techniques revealed that mitochondria, 
moving along the TNTs, migrated from the poisoned cells towards the healthy 
cells. It has also been demonstrated by means of immunocytochemistry that, in 
glioblastoma cell cultures, Amyloid Precursor Protein (APP) is present in TNTs, 
hence it may migrate from one cell to neighbouring cells. This datum may be of 
high relevance for a better understanding of Alzheimer's Disease (AD) since 
molecular, cellular, and animal model studies have revealed that the formation 
of amyloid beta (Abeta) and other derivatives of the APP are key pathogenic 
factors in AD, causing mitochondrial dysfunction, free radical generation, 
oxidative damage, and inflammation. Furthermore, the present data demonstrate 
the presence of alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) within TNTs, hence a similar 
pathogenic mechanism to the one surmised for AD, but centred on alpha-syn rather 
than on Abeta, may play a role in Parkinson's Disease (PD). As a matter of fact, 
alpha-syn can enter mitochondria and interact with complex I causing respiratory 
deficiency and increased oxygen free radical production. In agreement with this 
view, it has been demonstrated that, in comparison with normal subjects, PD 
patients show a significant accumulation of alpha-syn at Substantia Nigra and 
Striatal level, predominantly associated with the inner mitochondrial membrane,. 
These observations suggest that potentially neuropathogenic proteins, such as 
Abeta and alpha-syn, can not only diffuse via the extracellular space but also 
move from cell to cell also via TNTs where they can cause mitochondrial damage 
and cell degeneration. A mathematical model (see Appendix) is proposed to 
simulate the pathogenic consequences of the migration of altered mitochondria 
and/or of their mtDNA via TNTs. The results of the present simulation is 
compatible with the proposal that mutated mitochondrial agents behave as though 
they were infectious particles migrating through a continuum of interconnected 
cells.

DOI: 10.2174/156720510791162395
PMID: 19860724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2202. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Nov;80(11):1279-82. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.170043.

Occurrence and risk factors for apathy in Parkinson disease: a 4-year 
prospective longitudinal study.

Pedersen KF(1), Alves G, Aarsland D, Larsen JP.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
PO Box 8100, N-4068 Stavanger, Norway. kenfrp@online.no

BACKGROUND: Apathy is a common but under-recognised behavioural disorder 
associated with depression and cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson 
disease (PD). However, the longitudinal course of apathy in PD has not been 
studied.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the occurrence of and risk factors for apathy over time in 
a representative sample of patients with PD.
METHODS: A sample of 139 patients was drawn from a population-based prevalence 
study of PD in Rogaland County, Western Norway. Apathy was measured with the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory, using a composite score >or=4 to indicate clinically 
significant apathy. Additional measurements included standardised rating scales 
for parkinsonism, depression and cognitive impairment. A follow-up evaluation 
was carried out in 79 patients (78.2% of the survivors) 4 years later.
RESULTS: Of the 79 patients included in this study, 29 patients (36.7%) had 
never had apathy, 11 (13.9%) had persistent apathy, and a further 39 (49.4%) 
developed apathy during follow-up. At follow-up, patients with apathy were more 
frequently depressed and demented than never-apathetic patients. Dementia at 
baseline and a more rapid decline in speech and axial impairment during 
follow-up were independent risk factors for incident apathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Apathy is a persistent behavioural feature in PD with a high 
incidence and prevalence over time. Progression of motor signs predominantly 
mediated by non-dopaminergic systems may be a useful preclinical marker for 
incident apathy in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.170043
PMID: 19864662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2203. Disabil Rehabil. 2010;32(11):917-28. doi: 10.3109/09638280903362712.

Client and therapist views on exercise programmes for early-mid stage 
Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease.

Quinn L(1), Busse M, Khalil H, Richardson S, Rosser A, Morris H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiotherapy, Cardiff University, Ty Dewi Sant, Heath Park, 
Cardiff, UK. QuinnL1@cardiff.ac.uk

PURPOSE: Physiotherapists frequently prescribe home exercise programmes for 
individuals with Parkinson's disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD); 
however, little is known about clients' perceptions of such programmes and any 
barriers that may affect participation and compliance.
METHOD: A qualitative design was used to capture the attitudes and experiences 
of people with early-mid stage HD and PD, and with physiotherapists who have 
experience in neurodegenerative diseases. Two focus groups were conducted for 
physiotherapists (n = 8); individual interviews were conducted for clients with 
HD and PD (n = 10). Conversations were digitally recorded and transcribed, and 
transcriptions were analysed using grounded theory and validated through 
researcher triangulation. Concepts were categorised according to emerging themes 
and findings were verified by participants.
RESULTS: Both groups cited several barriers to engagement in exercise 
programmes, which included disease-specific impairments, individual safety and 
the location at which exercising takes place. Therapists felt that a client's 
cognition could affect their ability to participate in an exercise programme. 
Therapists and clients offered a number of strategies to overcome barriers to 
exercise.
CONCLUSIONS: Therapists should work in collaboration with clients to evaluate 
their individual considerations, identify barriers to exercise and design a 
client-specific programme that is acceptable and feasible for the client.

DOI: 10.3109/09638280903362712
PMID: 19874213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2204. Mov Disord. 2009;24 Suppl 2:S699-702. doi: 10.1002/mds.22582.

Assessing disease progression with MRI in atypical parkinsonian disorders.

Köllensperger M(1), Wenning GK.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, 
Austria.

During the last decade, novel MR techniques have become available to support the 
early differential diagnosis of Parkinsonism and also to generate MR surrogate 
markers of disease progression. The article reviews the current state of the art 
focusing on three atypical parkinsonian disorders: multiple system atrophy 
(MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB).

Copyright 2009 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22582
PMID: 19877233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2205. Mov Disord. 2009;24 Suppl 2:S748-53. doi: 10.1002/mds.22670.

MRI and cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Ibarretxe-Bilbao N(1), Tolosa E, Junque C, Marti MJ.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) may present impairment in cognitive 
functions even at early stages of the disease. When compared with the general 
population, their risk of dementia is five to six times higher. Recent 
investigations using structural MRI have shown that dementia in PD is related to 
cortical structural changes and that specific cognitive dysfunctions can be 
attributed to atrophy in specific structures. We review the structural MRI 
studies carried out in PD using either a manual region of interest (ROI) 
approach or voxel-based morphometry (VBM). ROI studies have shown that 
hippocampal volume is decreased in patients with PD with and without dementia; 
in addition, hippocampal atrophy correlated with deficits in verbal memory. VBM 
studies have demonstrated that dementia in PD involves structural changes in 
limbic areas and widespread cortical atrophy. Findings in nondemented patients 
with PD are less conclusive, possibly because cognitively heterogeneous groups 
of patients have been studied. Patients with PD with cognitive impairment and/or 
visual hallucinations present greater brain atrophy than patients without these 
characteristics. These findings suggest that cortical atrophy is related to 
cognitive dysfunction in PD and precedes the development of dementia. Structural 
MRI might therefore provide an early marker for dementia in PD.

Copyright 2009 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22670
PMID: 19877242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2206. J Neurol. 2010 Mar;257(3):459-60. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5363-4. Epub 2009 Nov 
1.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations p.L444P and p.N370S are not associated with 
multisystem atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal 
degeneration in Polish patients.

Jamrozik Z, Lugowska A, Slawek J, Kwiecinski H.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5363-4
PMID: 19882201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2207. Radiologia. 2010 Jan-Feb;52(1):4-17. doi: 10.1016/j.rx.2009.09.005. Epub 2009 
Nov 4.

[The basics of imaging dementia].

[Article in Spanish]

Arana Fernández de Moya E(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Radiología, Hospital Quirón, Valencia, España.

Dementia is becoming more common as the population ages. We review the 
prevalence of different causes of dementia. Alzheimer's disease heads the list, 
followed by vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration. Although these are distinct entities, their symptoms overlap and 
they have many comorbid conditions in common. We review the importance of 
recognizing the early symptoms and signs of dementia and point out the key 
differences between different types of dementia. We illustrate the fundamental 
importance of differentiating between reversible and irreversible disease on 
imaging and of establishing the follow-up of patients with irreversible 
conditions.

Copyright 2009 SERAM. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.rx.2009.09.005
PMID: 19892380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2208. Neurobiol Dis. 2010 Feb;37(2):455-60. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.10.025. Epub 2009 
Nov 10.

Early Parkinson's disease: longitudinal changes in brain activity during 
sequence learning.

Carbon M(1), Reetz K, Ghilardi MF, Dhawan V, Eidelberg D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurosciences, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, 
Manhasset, NY 11030, USA. david1@nshs.edu

Impairment of sequence learning is common in Parkinson's disease (PD), but the 
time course of this cognitive abnormality is not known. We assessed longitudinal 
changes in sequence learning performance and associated task-related cerebral 
blood flow in 13 early stage PD patients who underwent H(2)(15)O PET at baseline 
and again 2 years later. Ten healthy volunteer subjects served as controls. A 
trend toward decline in learning performance (p=0.08) was evident over the 2 
years of follow-up. During this interval, significant declines in 
learning-related activation were detected in parietal and temporo-occipital 
association areas and in the right dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. 
Learning-related activation in these regions was normal at baseline, but 
declined to subnormal levels (p<0.01) at 2 years. Significant hippocampal 
activation (p<0.005) was present in the subjects with high learning performance 
over time. The findings are consistent with a decline in learning-related neural 
activity in cortical areas with prominent Lewy body formation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2009.10.025
PMCID: PMC2818462
PMID: 19900556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2209. Radiol Technol. 2009 Nov-Dec;81(2):153-68.

The many faces of dementia.

Shagam JY(1).

Author information:
(1)University of New Mexico in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Dementia is a progressive and incurable condition that in one way or another 
affects nearly everyone. Examples of specific types of dementia include 
Alzheimer disease, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. Age is the primary risk factor for dementia and the long-term 
social and economic effects of dementia are immense. Functional medical imaging 
is an important research tool that eventually may become a practical screening 
tool for early-stage dementia, to confirm a clinical diagnosis and to help 
clinicians manage patient care. Functional medical imaging also may play a role 
in research regarding the development of new medications to prevent or delay the 
progression of Alzheimer disease and other dementias. This article is a Directed 
Reading. Your access to Directed Reading quizzes for continuing education credit 
is determined by your area of interest. For access to other quizzes, go to 
www.asrt.org/store.

PMID: 19901352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2210. PLoS Med. 2009 Nov;6(11):e1000180. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000180. Epub 2009 
Nov 10.

Epidemiological pathology of dementia: attributable-risks at death in the 
Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study.

Matthews FE(1), Brayne C, Lowe J, McKeith I, Wharton SB, Ince P.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council (MRC) Biostatistics, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Dementia drug development aims to modulate pathological processes 
that cause clinical syndromes. Population data (epidemiological neuropathology) 
will help to model and predict the potential impact of such therapies on 
dementia burden in older people. Presently this can only be explored through 
post mortem findings. We report the attributable risks (ARs) for dementia at 
death for common age-related degenerative and vascular pathologies, and other 
factors, in the MRC Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (MRC CFAS).
METHODS AND FINDINGS: A multicentre, prospective, longitudinal study of older 
people in the UK was linked to a brain donation programme. Neuropathology of 456 
consecutive brain donations assessed degenerative and vascular pathologies. 
Logistic regression modelling, with bootstrapping and sensitivity analyses, was 
used to estimate AR at death for dementia for specific pathologies and other 
factors. The main contributors to AR at death for dementia in MRC CFAS were age 
(18%), small brain (12%), neocortical neuritic plaques (8%) and neurofibrillary 
tangles (11%), small vessel disease (12%), multiple vascular pathologies (9%), 
and hippocampal atrophy (10%). Other significant factors include cerebral 
amyloid angiopathy (7%) and Lewy bodies (3%).
CONCLUSIONS: Such AR estimates cannot be derived from the living population; 
rather they estimate the relative contribution of specific pathologies to 
dementia at death. We found that multiple pathologies determine the overall 
burden of dementia. The impact of therapy targeted to a specific pathology may 
be profound when the dementia is relatively "pure," but may be less impressive 
for the majority with mixed disease, and in terms of the population. These data 
justify a range of strategies, and combination therapies, to combat the 
degenerative and vascular determinants of cognitive decline and dementia. Please 
see later in the article for the Editors' Summary.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.1000180
PMCID: PMC2765638
PMID: 19901977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


2211. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Oct;1180:97-110. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04943.x.

Biomarkers in Huntington's and Parkinson's Disease.

O'Keeffe GC(1), Michell AW, Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0PY, United Kingdom. go215@cam.ac.uk

Parkinson's (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD) are chronic neurodegenerative 
conditions of the brain with a variety of clinical presentations including a 
disorder of movement and a range of nonmotor deficits. HD is genetic in origin 
and the causative gene and protein known, namely mutant Huntingtin, which leads 
to widespread early neuronal dysfunction and death throughout the brain. In 
contrast, the etiology of sporadic PD is unknown, and the pathology targets the 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons with the formation of alpha-synuclein 
positive Lewy bodies. In both diseases, the ability to accurately diagnose the 
disease in the early stages and monitor progression over time remains a major 
challenge given the majority of the pathology is sited deep within the CNS. This 
challenge has gained extra significance as the development of disease-modifying 
drugs starts to emerge into the clinic. To this end, there is a need to find 
biomarkers that will help in the accurate diagnosis of the disease and/or 
prediction of its clinical onset as well as biomarkers that are able to 
faithfully track disease progression independent of any symptomatic effects of 
any therapies. In addition, these same markers may also help stratify each of 
these heterogeneous disorders into specific subtypes that share particular 
clinical and pathological characteristics.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04943.x
PMID: 19906264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2212. Mov Disord. 2009 Dec 15;24(16):2391-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.22843.

Apathy may herald cognitive decline and dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Dujardin K(1), Sockeel P, Delliaux M, Destée A, Defebvre L.

Author information:
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, France. k-dujardin@chru-lille.fr

Apathy is usually defined as a lack of motivation. It may occur as part of 
another disorder (notably depression and dementia) or as an isolated syndrome. 
In Parkinson's disease (PD), apathy is common and several studies have reported 
an association between this condition and more severe cognitive symptoms, such 
as executive dysfunction. However, this association has not been thoroughly 
investigated. The aim of this study (in nondepressed, nondemented PD patients) 
was to examine whether or not cognitive decline and/or dementia occurred more 
frequently in apathetic subjects than in nonapathetic subjects. Forty 
consecutive PD patients participated in the study (20 with apathy and 20 
without). None of the subjects were either demented or depressed at the time of 
study entry. The patients' cognitive functions were extensively assessed twice: 
at study entry and after an 18-month follow-up period. At study entry, the 
apathetic PD patients had significantly lower global cognitive status and 
executive function scores than the nonapathetic subjects. After a median period 
of 18 months, the rate of conversion to dementia was found to be significantly 
higher in the apathetic group than in the nonapathetic group (8 of 20 and 1 of 
20, respectively). Even in nondemented patients, the decrease over time in 
cognitive performance (mainly executive function but also memory impairment) was 
significantly greater in apathetic subjects than in nonapathetic subjects. These 
findings suggest that in nondemented, nondepressed PD patients, apathy may be a 
predictive factor for dementia and cognitive decline over time.

(c) 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22843
PMID: 19908317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2213. Neuromolecular Med. 2010 Sep;12(3):229-36. doi: 10.1007/s12017-009-8103-0. Epub 
2009 Nov 13.

Kinesin light chain 1 gene haplotypes in three conformational diseases.

von Otter M(1), Landgren S, Nilsson S, Lundvall C, Minthon L, Bogdanovic N, 
Andreasen N, Gustafson DR, Skoog I, Wallin A, Håkansson A, Nissbrandt H, 
Zetterberg M, Tasa G, Blennow K, Zetterberg H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, Gothenburg, 
Sweden. malin.vonotter@gu.se

A functional intracellular transport system is essential to maintain cell shape 
and function especially in elongated cells, e.g. neurons and lens fibre cells. 
Impaired intracellular transport has been suggested as a common pathological 
mechanism for age-related diseases characterised by protein aggregation. Here, 
we hypothesise that common genetic variation in the transport protein kinesin 
may influence the risk of Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
age-related cataract. This case-control study involves a PD material (165 cases 
and 190 controls), an AD material (653 cases and 845 controls) and a cataract 
material (495 cases and 183 controls). Genetic variation in the kinesin light 
chain 1-encoding gene (KLC1) was tagged by six tag single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs). Single SNPs and haplotypes were analysed for associations 
with disease risk, age parameters, mini-mental state examination scores and 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers for AD using logistic or linear regression. 
Genetic variation in KLC1 did not influence risk of PD. Weak associations with 
risk of AD were seen for rs8007903 and rs3212079 (P (c) = 0.04 and P (c) = 0.02, 
respectively). Two SNPs (rs8007903 and rs8702) influenced risk of cataract (P 
(c) = 0.0007 and P (c) = 0.04, respectively). However, the allele of rs8007903 
that caused increased risk of AD caused reduced risk of cataract, speaking 
against a common functional effect of this particular SNP in the two diseases. 
Haplotype analyses did not add significantly to the associations found in the 
single SNP analyses. Altogether, these results do not convincingly support KLC1 
as a major susceptibility gene in any of the studied diseases, although there is 
a small effect of KLC1 in relation to cataract.

DOI: 10.1007/s12017-009-8103-0
PMID: 19911314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2214. Gene. 2010 Feb 1;451(1-2):23-31. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.11.006. Epub 2009 Nov 
12.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoprotein E3 modestly activates splicing of tau 
exon 10 via its proximal downstream intron, a hotspot for frontotemporal 
dementia mutations.

Wang Y(1), Gao L, Tse SW, Andreadis A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, University of Massachusetts Medical School, 55 
Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is important to normal neuronal activity 
in the mammalian nervous system. Aggregated tau is the major component of 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), structures present in the brains of people 
affected by neurodegenerative diseases called tauopathies. Tauopathies include 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism (FTDP) and 
the early-onset dementia observed in Down syndrome (DS; trisomy 21). Splicing 
misregulation of adult-specific exon 10 results in expression of abnormal ratios 
of tau isoforms, leading to FTDP. Positions +3 to +19 of the intron downstream 
of exon 10 define a hotspot: Point mutations in it result in tauopathies. All 
these mutations increase exon 10 inclusion except for mutation +19, which almost 
entirely excludes exon 10. To investigate the tau connection between DS and AD, 
we examined splicing factors located on chromosome 21 for their effect on tau 
exon 10. By co-transfections, co-immunoprecipitations and RNAi constructs, we 
discovered that one of them, hnRNPE3 (PCBP3), modestly activates splicing of 
exon 10 by interacting with its proximal downstream intron around position +19. 
These results, coupled with the developmental profile of hnRNPE3, suggest a 
pathogenic role for splicing factors on chromosome 21 in neurodegenerative 
diseases with tangles and create a connection between tau splicing and the 
early-onset dementia of Down syndrome.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2009.11.006
PMCID: PMC2815234
PMID: 19914360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2215. Ugeskr Laeger. 2009 Nov 2;171(45):3268-71.

[Mobile phone use as a risk factor for affection of the central nerve 
system--secondary publication].

[Article in Danish]

Schüz J(1), Waldemar G, Olsen JH, Johansen C.

Author information:
(1)Institut for Epidemiologisk Kraftforskning, Kraftens Bekampelse, DK-2100 
Kobenhavn Ø, Denmark. joachim@cancer.dk

In a large nationwide cohort study including 420,095 persons whose first mobile 
phone subscription was between 1982 and 1995, who were followed through 2003 for 
hospital contacts for a diagnosis of a central nervous system disease, we 
observed 10-20% more hospital contacts than expected for migraine and vertigo 
and 30-40% less hospital contacts than expected for dementia (Alzheimer's 
disease, vascular and other dementia), Parkinson's disease and epilepsy among 
men. No associations were seen for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple 
sclerosis or epilepsy in women.

PMID: 19916195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2216. Nat Rev Neurol. 2009 Dec;5(12):649-58. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2009.175. Epub 2009 
Nov 17.

Changing perspectives regarding late-life dementia.

Fotuhi M(1), Hachinski V, Whitehouse PJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Memory and Brain Health, The Sandra and Malcolm Berman Brain & 
Spine Institute, Baltimore, MD 21209,, USA. mfotuhi@lifebridgehealth.org

Individuals over 80 years of age represent the most rapidly growing segment of 
the population, and late-life dementia has become a major public health concern 
worldwide. Development of effective preventive and treatment strategies for 
late-life dementia relies on a deep understanding of all the processes involved. 
In the centuries since the Greek philosopher Pythagoras described the inevitable 
loss of higher cognitive functions with advanced age, various theories regarding 
the potential culprits have dominated the field, ranging from demonic 
possession, through 'hardening of blood vessels', to Alzheimer disease (AD). 
Recent studies suggest that atrophy in the cortex and hippocampus-now considered 
to be the best determinant of cognitive decline with aging-results from a 
combination of AD pathology, inflammation, Lewy bodies, and vascular lesions. A 
specific constellation of genetic and environmental factors (including 
apolipoprotein E genotype, obesity, diabetes, hypertension, head trauma, 
systemic illnesses, and obstructive sleep apnea) contributes to late-life brain 
atrophy and dementia in each individual. Only a small percentage of people 
beyond the age of 80 years have 'pure AD' or 'pure vascular dementia'. These 
concepts, formulated as the dynamic polygon hypothesis, have major implications 
for clinical trials, as any given drug might not be ideal for all elderly people 
with dementia.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2009.175
PMID: 19918254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2217. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 19;4(11):e7917. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007917.

Experimental diabetes mellitus exacerbates tau pathology in a transgenic mouse 
model of Alzheimer's disease.

Ke YD(1), Delerue F, Gladbach A, Götz J, Ittner LM.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain & Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia.

Diabetes mellitus (DM) is characterized by hyperglycemia caused by a lack of 
insulin, insulin resistance, or both. There is increasing evidence that insulin 
also plays a role in Alzheimer's disease (AD) as it is involved in the 
metabolism of beta-amyloid (Abeta) and tau, two proteins that form Abeta plaques 
and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs), respectively, the hallmark lesions in AD. 
Here, we examined the effects of experimental DM on a pre-existing tau pathology 
in the pR5 transgenic mouse strain that is characterized by NFTs. pR5 mice 
express P301L mutant human tau that is associated with dementia. Experimental DM 
was induced by administration of streptozotocin (STZ), which causes insulin 
deficiency. We determined phosphorylation of tau, using immunohistochemistry and 
Western blotting. Solubility of tau was determined upon extraction with sarkosyl 
and formic acid, and Gallyas silver staining was employed to reveal NFTs. 
Insulin depletion by STZ administration in six months-old non-transgenic mice 
causes increased tau phosphorylation, without its deposition or NFT formation. 
In contrast, in pR5 mice this results in massive deposition of 
hyperphosphorylated, insoluble tau. Furthermore, they develop a pronounced 
tau-histopathology, including NFTs at this early age, while the pathology in 
sham-treated pR5 mice is moderate. Whereas experimental DM did not result in 
deposition of hyperphosphorylated tau in non-transgenic mice, a predisposition 
to develop a tau pathology in young pR5 mice was both sufficient and necessary 
to exacerbate tau deposition and NFT formation. Hence, DM can accelerate onset 
and increase severity of disease in individuals with a predisposition to 
developing tau pathology.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007917
PMCID: PMC2775636
PMID: 19936237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2218. J Nanoneurosci. 2009 Jun 1;1(1):42-55. doi: 10.1166/jns.2009.005.

Metal chelators coupled with nanoparticles as potential therapeutic agents for 
Alzheimer's disease.

Liu G(1), Men P, Perry G, Smith MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84108, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a devastating neuro-degenerative disorder 
characterized by the progressive and irreversible loss of memory followed by 
complete dementia. Despite the disease's high prevalence and great economic and 
social burden, an explicative etiology or viable cure is not available. Great 
effort has been made to better understand the disease's pathogenesis, and to 
develop more effective therapeutic agents. However, success is greatly hampered 
by the presence of the blood-brain barrier that limits a large number of 
potential therapeutics from entering the brain. Nanoparticle-mediated drug 
delivery is one of the few valuable tools for overcoming this impediment and its 
application as a potential AD treatment shows promise. In this review, the 
current studies on nanoparticle delivery of chelation agents as possible 
therapeutics for AD are discussed because several metals are found excessive in 
the AD brain and may play a role in the disease development. Specifically, a 
novel approach involving transport of iron chelation agents into and out of the 
brain by nanoparticles is highlighted. This approach may provide a safer and 
more effective means of simultaneously reducing several toxic metals in the AD 
brain. It may also provide insights into the mechanisms of AD pathophysiology, 
and prove useful in treating other iron-associated neurodegenerative diseases 
such as Friedreich's ataxia, Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease and 
Hallervorden-Spatz Syndrome. It is important to note that the use of 
nanoparticle-mediated transport to facilitate toxicant excretion from diseased 
sites in the body may advance nanoparticle technology, which is currently 
focused on targeted drug delivery for disease prevention and treatment. The 
application of nanoparticle-mediated drug transport in the treatment of AD is at 
its very early stages of development and, therefore, more studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.1166/jns.2009.005
PMCID: PMC2780350
PMID: 19936278


2219. Ann Neurol. 2009 Nov;66(5):591-6. doi: 10.1002/ana.21778.

Dopaminergic transplantation for Parkinson's disease: current status and future 
prospects.

Olanow CW(1), Kordower JH, Lang AE, Obeso JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 10029, 
USA. warren.olanow@mssm.edu

Cell-based therapies that involve transplantation into the striatum of 
dopaminergic cells have attracted considerable interest as possible treatments 
for Parkinson's disease (PD). However, all double-blind, sham-controlled, 
studies have failed to meet their primary endpoints, and transplantation of 
dopamine cells derived from the fetal mesencephalon is associated with a 
potentially disabling form of dyskinesia that persists even after withdrawal of 
levodopa (off-medication dyskinesia). In addition, disability in advanced 
patients primarily results from features such as gait dysfunction, freezing, 
falling, and dementia, which are likely due to nondopaminergic pathology. These 
features are not adequately controlled with dopaminergic therapies and are thus 
unlikely to respond to dopaminergic grafts. More recently, implanted dopamine 
neurons have been found to contain Lewy bodies, suggesting that they are 
dysfunctional and may have been affected by the PD pathological process. 
Collectively, these findings do not bode well for the short-term future of 
cell-based dopaminergic therapies in PD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21778
PMID: 19938101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2220. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Mar;16(3):177-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.002. Epub 2009 Nov 25.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: subtypes and motor 
characteristics.

Sollinger AB(1), Goldstein FC, Lah JJ, Levey AI, Factor SA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, 
USA. asollin@emory.edu

The aims of this project were to determine the risk factors for and clinical 
characteristics of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in Parkinson's disease (PD). 
We performed a retrospective record review of 72 non-demented PD patients (age: 
57.79 +/- 10.57, duration of PD: 7.32 +/- 4.97) who completed a standardized 
neurological assessment, including a full neuropsychological battery, as part of 
their diagnostic work-up. Of these participants, 47.2% were cognitively normal 
and 52.8% met criteria for MCI. The majority of MCI patients had single domain 
MCI (23/38), the affected domains being memory (n = 9), executive function (n = 
6), visuospatial skills (n = 6), and language (n = 2). The MCI group had longer 
duration of disease and higher postural instability and gait disorder subscale 
scores than the cognitively normal group. This report provides further support 
for use of the concept of MCI in PD research. There may be certain disease 
characteristics that could alert practitioners to the emergence of cognitive 
changes in patients. Future studies should focus on additional risk factors for 
MCI subtypes and their possible progression to frank dementia.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.11.002
PMCID: PMC3622717
PMID: 19939721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2221. Gut Pathog. 2009 Nov 26;1(1):20. doi: 10.1186/1757-4749-1-20.

Blood profile holds clues to role of infection in a premonitory state for 
idiopathic parkinsonism and of gastrointestinal infection in established 
disease.

Charlett A(1), Dobbs RJ, Dobbs SM, Weller C, Ibrahim MA, Dew T, Sherwood R, 
Oxlade NL, Plant JM, Bowthorpe J, Lawson AJ, Curry A, Peterson DW, Bjarnason IT.

Author information:
(1)Therapeutics Research Group, Institute of Psychiatry at King's College 
London, London, UK. andre.charlett@hpa.org.uk

The two-stage neuroinflammatory process, containment and progression, proposed 
to underlie neurodegeneration may predicate on systemic inflammation arising 
from the gastrointestinal tract. Helicobacter infection has been described as 
one switch in the pathogenic-circuitry of idiopathic parkinsonism (IP): 
eradication modifies disease progression and marked deterioration accompanies 
eradication-failure. Moreover, serum Helicobacter-antibody-profile predicts 
presence, severity and progression of IP. Slow gastrointestinal-transit precedes 
IP-diagnosis and becomes increasingly-apparent after, predisposing to 
small-intestinal bacterial-overgrowth (SIBO). Although IP is well-described as a 
systemic illness with a long prodrome, there has been no comprehensive overview 
of the blood profile. Here, it is examined in relation to Helicobacter status 
and lactulose-hydrogen-breath-testing for SIBO. A robust finding of reduced 
lymphocyte count in 126 IP-probands and 79 spouses (without clinically-definite 
IP), compared with that in 381 controls (p < 0.001 in each case), was not 
explained by Helicobacter-status or breath-hydrogen. This complements a previous 
report that spouses were 'down-the-pathway' to 'clinically-definite' disease. In 
205 other controls without clinically-definite IP, there were strong 
associations between sporadic cardinal features and immunoglobulin class 
concentration, not explained by Helicobacter-status. Premonitory states for 
idiopathic parkinsonism associated with relative lymphopenia, higher serum 
immunoglobulin concentrations and evidence of enteric-nervous-system damage may 
prove viral in origin.Although only 8% of the above 79 spouses were 
urea-breath-test-positive for Helicobacter, all 8 spouses with 
clinically-definite IP were (p < 0.0001). Transmission of a 'primer' to a 
Helicobacter-colonised recipient might result in progression to the diagnostic 
threshold. Twenty-five percent of the 126 probands were seropositive for 
anti-nuclear autoantibody. In 20 probands, monitored before and serially after 
anti-Helicobacter therapy, seropositivity marked a severe hypokinetic response 
(p = 0.03). It may alert to continuing infection, even at low-density. 
Hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for dementia and depression. Serum 
homocysteine exceeded the target in 43% of the 126 IP-probands. It was partially 
explained by serum B12 (12% variance, p < 0.001), but not by Helicobacter-status 
(gastric-atrophy uncommon in IP) or levodopa treatment. Immune-inflammatory 
activation increases homocysteine production. Since an estimated 60% of probands 
are hydrogen-breath-test positive, SIBO, with its increased bacterial 
utilisation of B12, is a likely cause. Thus, two prognostic indicators in 
established IP fit with involvement of Helicobacter and SIBO.

DOI: 10.1186/1757-4749-1-20
PMCID: PMC2795757
PMID: 19941660


2222. Cell Res. 2009 Dec;19(12):1401-3. doi: 10.1038/cr.2009.131. Epub 2009 Dec 1.

Proteomic analysis of the cerebrospinal fluid of Parkinson's disease patients.

Guo J, Sun Z, Xiao S, Liu D, Jin G, Wang E, Zhou J, Zhou J.

DOI: 10.1038/cr.2009.131
PMID: 19949427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2223. Geriatr Gerontol Int. 2009 Dec;9(4):382-90. doi: 
10.1111/j.1447-0594.2009.00538.x.

Associated conditions and clinical significance of awake bruxism.

Kwak YT(1), Han IW, Lee PH, Yoon JK, Suk SH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hyoja Geriatric Hospital, Sanghari 33, 
Guseong-myeon, Yongin-si Gyeongi-do 449-914, Korea. ytkwak@drkwak.com

BACKGROUND: Awake bruxism is defined as an oral parafunctional activity that 
includes clenching and grinding of teeth during wakefulness. Confirming the 
possible related anatomy and the clinical significance of awake bruxism in 
geriatric hospitals is the aim of this study.
METHODS: We analyzed the medical records of 503 patients who were admitted to 
hospital from April to June 2008. After the recognition of bruxism, the 
clinical, brain imaging studies and statistical parametric mapping (SPM) of 
brain single photon emission computed tomography were performed.
RESULTS: In each disease group, five of 125 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients 
(4.0%), three of 11 frontotemporal dementia (FTD) patients (27.3%), seven of 230 
stroke patients (including two patients related to citalopram, 3.0%), one of 45 
Parkinson's disease patients (2.2%) and four of 17 hydrocephalus patients 
(23.5%) had bruxism. Even though awake bruxism occurred early after stroke 
onset, it occurred late after AD and FTD onset. This occurred in a far advanced 
stage of AD, while it occurred in a moderately advanced stage of FTD. SPM 
analysis in AD and FTD patients with awake bruxism revealed significant 
hypoperfusion in frontotemporal and other subcortical structures. Surface 
electromyography recordings from the masseter muscle showed rhythmic regular 
motor activity at a rate of 1-2/s.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that awake bruxism is encountered not 
infrequently in various diseases in geriatric hospitals. It is frequently 
observed in FTD and normal pressure hydrocephalus, which characteristically 
shows frontal lobe dysfunction. These facts and SPM analysis show that awake 
bruxism can be regarded as a frontal neurological sign of various neurological 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1447-0594.2009.00538.x
PMID: 20002758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2224. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2010 Jan;69(1):53-9. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181c6b84d.

Clinical, neuropathologic, and biochemical profile of the amyloid precursor 
protein I716F mutation.

Guardia-Laguarta C(1), Pera M, Clarimón J, Molinuevo JL, Sánchez-Valle R, Lladó 
A, Coma M, Gómez-Isla T, Blesa R, Ferrer I, Lleó A.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Spain.

We report the clinical, pathologic, and biochemical characteristics of the 
recently described amyloid precursor protein (APP) I716F mutation. We present 
the clinical findings of individuals carrying the APP I716F mutation and the 
neuropathologic examination of the proband. The mutation was found in a patient 
with Alzheimer disease with onset at the age of 31 years and death at age 36 
years and who had a positive family history of early-onset Alzheimer disease. 
Neuropathologic examination showed abundant diffuse amyloid plaques mainly 
composed of amyloid-beta42 and widespread neurofibrillary pathology. Lewy bodies 
were found in the amygdala. Chinese hamster ovary cells transfected with this 
mutation showed a marked increase in the amyloid-beta42/40 ratio and APP 
C-terminal fragments and a decrease in APP intracellular domain production, 
suggesting reduced APP proteolysis by gamma-secretase. Taken together, these 
findings indicate that the APP I716F mutation is associated with the youngest 
age of onset for this locus and strengthen the inverse association between 
amyloid-beta42/40 ratio and age of onset. The mutation leads to a protein that 
is poorly processed by gamma-secretase. This loss of function may be an 
additional mechanism by which some mutations around the gamma-secretase cleavage 
site lead to familial Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181c6b84d
PMID: 20010303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2225. Neurosci Behav Physiol. 2010 Jan;40(1):61-7. doi: 10.1007/s11055-009-9223-6.

Cognitive impairments in progression of Parkinson's disease.

Stepkina DA(1), Zakharov VV, Yakhno NN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nervous Diseases, I. M. Sechenov Moscow Medical Academy, 
Moscow, Russia.

A total of 88 patients with progression of Parkinson's disease (PD) were 
studied. Cognitive impairments (CI) in PD were in most cases progressive in 
nature, predominantly because of increases in the severity of dysregulatory and 
neurodynamic disorders, impairments to visuospatial functions, and, in some 
cases, deficits in nominative speech function. A high frequency of 
transformation of moderate cognitive impairments to dementia was demonstrated 
over periods of 2-5 years. Predictors of the progression of CI in PD were 
identified: elderly age, later onset of disease, and the severity of PD. The 
greatest rate of progression of CI was seen in patients with initially more 
severe impairments of regulatory and visuospatial functions.

DOI: 10.1007/s11055-009-9223-6
PMID: 20012495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2226. Neurobiol Aging. 2011 Nov;32(11):1990-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.11.019. Epub 2009 Dec 16.

LRRK2 variant associated with Alzheimer's disease.

Zhao Y(1), Ho P, Yih Y, Chen C, Lee WL, Tan EK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Clinical Research and Health Screening, Singapore 
General Hospital, Singapore.

Overlapping neurodegenerative pathologies (including Alzheimer's disease, AD) 
have been described in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients with leucine-rich 
repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) mutations. We analyzed a LRRK2 PD (R1628P) risk variant 
in a group of 885 subjects comprising of AD and controls. The frequency of the 
R1628P allele was higher in AD compared to controls (3.5% vs. 1.6%, OR 2.3, 95 
CI 1.2-4.4, p=0.018). In vitro, the mean percentage of apoptosis and cell death 
observed for the R1628P transfected human cell lines was higher compared to wild 
type 21.8 ± 1.9, vs. 17.1 ± 1.3, p<0.05, 30.2 ± 2.2 vs. 25.7 ± 1.3, p<0.05). The 
LRRK2 R1628P variant increases the risk of AD in our population and our in vitro 
findings suggest that it is a functional variant and predisposes to apoptosis.

Copyright © 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2009.11.019
PMID: 20018409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2227. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2010 Jan;81(1):5-12. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.157370.

The role of DAT-SPECT in movement disorders.

Kägi G(1), Bhatia KP, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, Institute of 
Neurology, University College London, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, UK.

Dopamine transporter (DAT) imaging is a sensitive method to detect presynaptic 
dopamine neuronal dysfunction, which is a hallmark of neurodegenerative 
parkinsonism. DAT imaging can therefore assist the differentiation between 
conditions with and without presynaptic dopaminergic deficit. Diagnosis of 
Parkinson disease or tremor disorders can be achieved with high degrees of 
accuracy in cases with full expression of classical clinical features; however, 
diagnosis can be difficult, since there is a substantial clinical overlap 
especially in monosymptomatic tremor (dystonic tremor, essential tremor, 
Parkinson tremor). The use of DAT-SPECT can prove or excludes with high 
sensitivity nigrostriatal dysfunction in those cases and facilitates early and 
accurate diagnosis. Furthermore, a normal DAT-SPECT is helpful in supporting a 
diagnosis of drug-induced-, psychogenic- and vascular parkinsonism by excluding 
underlying true nigrostriatal dysfunction. This review addresses the value of 
DAT-SPECT and its impact on diagnostic accuracy in movement disorders presenting 
with tremor and/or parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.157370
PMID: 20019219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2228. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem. 2009 Mar;9(1):2-11. doi: 
10.2174/187152409787601950.

Creutzfeldt-jakob, Parkinson, lewy body dementia and Alzheimer diseases: from 
diagnosis to therapy.

Dupiereux I(1), Zorzi W, Quadrio I, Perret-Liaudet A, Kovacs GG, Heinen E, 
Elmoualij B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Histology-CRPP, University of Liège, Sart Tilman, 
Belgium.

Depositions of proteins in form of amyloid and non-amyloid plaques are common 
pathogenic signs of more than 20 degenerative diseases affecting the central 
nervous system or a variety of peripheral tissues. Among the neuropathological 
conditions, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and the prion diseases, such as 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), present ambiguities as regarding their 
differential diagnosis. At present, their diagnosis must be confirmed by 
post-mortem examination of the brain. Currently the ante-mortem diagnosis is 
still based on the integration of multiple data (clinical, paraclinical and 
biological analyses) because no unique marker exists for such diseases. The 
detection of specific biomarkers would be useful to develop a differential 
diagnostic, distinguishing not only different neurodegenerative diseases but 
also the disease from the non-pathological effects of aging. Several 
neurodegenerative biomarkers are present at very low levels during the early 
stages of the disease development and their ultra-low detection is needed for 
early diagnosis, which should permit more effective therapeutic interventions, 
before the disease concerned can progress to a stage where considerable damage 
to the brain has already occurred. In the case of prion diseases, there are 
concerns regarding not only patient care, but the wider community too, with 
regard to the risk of transmission of prions, especially during blood 
transfusion, for which, four cases of variant CJD infection associated with 
transfusion of non-leukocyte-depleted blood components have been confirmed. 
Therefore the development of techniques with high sensitivity and specificity 
represent the major challenge in the field of the protein misfolding diseases. 
In this paper we review the current analytical and/or biochemical diagnostic 
technologies used mainly in prion, but also in Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases 
and emphasizing work on the protein detection as a surrogates and specific 
biomarker in the body fluid of patients (urine, CSF and blood). This review 
highlights the urgency of the development of early and sensitive diagnostics in 
terms of therapeutic challenge.

DOI: 10.2174/187152409787601950
PMID: 20021333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2229. Brain Res. 2010 Mar 10;1319:118-30. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.11.085. Epub 
2009 Dec 22.

Clinical utility of copper, ceruloplasmin, and metallothionein plasma 
determinations in human neurodegenerative patients and their first-degree 
relatives.

Arnal N(1), Cristalli DO, de Alaniz MJ, Marra CA.

Author information:
(1)INIBIOLP (Instituto de Investigac]iones Bioquímicas de La Plata), CCT La 
Plata, CONICET-UNLP, Cátedra de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de 
Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, 60 y 120 (1900) La Plata, 
Argentina.

The concentration of plasma copper, ceruloplasmin (CRP), non-ceruloplasmin-bound 
Cu (NCBC), and metallothioneins (MTs) were studied as putative biomarkers for 
neurodegenerative diseases in patients and in their first-degree relatives. We 
found increased levels of Cu in the plasma of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and vascular dementia (VD) patients, and the increase 
observed in VD group was linked to the evolution of the disease. CRP was also 
elevated in response to the inflammatory component of the diseases, however, a 
correlation with illness progression was only observed in VD patients. The level 
of MTs is proportional to the evolution of VD. The Cu/CRP and Cu/MTs ratios are 
both indicative of disease progression for AD patients but not for those with PD 
or VD. Moreover, there is a correlation between the NCBC levels and the 
cognitive impairment estimated through the Mini-mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scale. This dependence is linear for AD and PD patients and non-linear for the 
VD ones. The relative values of NCBC showed dependence on the disease duration, 
especially for AD. Copper measurement and the Cu/CRP ratio may be predictive 
markers of risk for the first-degree relatives of AD patients. We believe that 
these results are valuable as a reliable clinical tool.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.11.085
PMID: 20026314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2230. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2010 Jun;24(5):450-6. doi: 10.1177/1545968309355987. 
Epub 2009 Dec 21.

Incidental encoding strategies did not improve contextual memory in Parkinson's 
disease patients.

dos Santos CM(1), Balardin JB, Irigaray TQ, Schröder N, Rieder CR, Bromberg E.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology and Developmental Biology Laboratory, Pontifical Catholic 
University, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: This study investigated the performance of patients with idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (PD) without dementia for incidental recognition memory and 
the effect of encoding strategies on contextual memory.
METHODS: The authors studied 21 patients with PD (ages 60-85, 12 women; Hoehn 
and Yahr I-III, Activities of Daily Living 70%-100%) and 22 healthy controls 
(ages 60-84, 18 women). Participants completed the vocabulary subtest of the 
Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale and the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST). To 
assess the incidental recognition memory for item (object) and context (location 
of the object), participants of each group were assigned to 1 of 2 encoding 
conditions: ( a) an incidental associative instruction to bind the object to its 
location or (b) a nonassociative, nonspecific instruction.
RESULTS: PD patients showed performance comparable to the control group's on the 
vocabulary subtest and WCST. In contrast to controls, PD patients were unable to 
take advantage of the associative encoding instruction, which also had a 
deleterious effect on item recognition.
CONCLUSION: This sample of participants with PD showed diminished item and 
context recognition memory and an impaired ability to use incidental memory 
encoding strategy, suggesting a compromised cognitive reserve. The fact that 
these alterations occurred in early stages of PD, and prior to more general 
cognitive alterations such as executive dysfunction, should be considered in the 
management of patients by using specific cognitive rehabilitation interventions.

DOI: 10.1177/1545968309355987
PMID: 20026872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2231. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2009 Nov;49(11):968-71. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.49.968.

[History of neurology and education on neurology in Japan].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)National Center Hospital of Neurology and Psychiatry, 4-1-1, Ogawa-Higashi, 
Kodaira, Tokyo 187-8551, Japan.

The first medical society of Japanese neurologists and psychiatrists was founded 
in 1902, but psychiatrists gradually dominated in number. New "Japanese Society 
of Neurology" (JSN) was founded in 1960. The number of members was only 643 in 
1960, while it rose up to 8,555 in 2009, including regular, junior, senior and 
associate members. JSN contributed much to solve the causes and treatment of the 
medicosocial and iatrogenic diseases such as Minamata disease and SMON (subacute 
myelopticoneuropathy) at its early period. In undergraduate education at medical 
school neurology is one of the core subjects in the curriculum, and almost all 
the 80 medical schools have at least one faculty neurologist. The Board of 
neurology of JSN was started in 1975, as the third earliest of the Japanese 
Medical Associations. It takes at least 6 years' clinical training after 
graduating from the medical school to take the neurology Board examinations. By 
2009, 4,000 members passed the Board examinations. In 2002 JSN published 
evidence-based "Treatment Guidelines 2002" of 6 diseases: Parkinson's disease, 
stroke, chronic headache, dementia and ALS. As to the international issues, JSN 
hosted the 12th World Congress of Neurology in 1981, and international 
activities markedly increased after that. The first informal meeting with JSN 
and Korean Neurological Association (KNA) was held at the 48th JSN Annual 
Meeting in Nagoya in May 2007. In May 2008 the KNA-JSN 1st Joint symposium was 
held at the 49th Annual Meeting of JSN in Yokohama on "International comparison 
of neurological disorders: focusing on spinocerebellar atrophies (SCA) and 
epilepsies". In May 2009, KNA-JNS 2 nd Joint Symposium was held at the 50th JSN 
Annual Meeting in Sendai, inviting a speaker from Taiwan Neurological Society, 
on the subject "History and Education of Neurology in Japan, Korea and Taiwan". 
In this symposium, a strategy to make up the Northeast Asian Neurological 
Association was discussed.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.49.968
PMID: 20030263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2232. Neurology. 2010 Jan 12;74(2):106-12. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c91873. Epub 
2009 Dec 23.

Cancer linked to Alzheimer disease but not vascular dementia.

Roe CM(1), Fitzpatrick AL, Xiong C, Sieh W, Kuller L, Miller JP, Williams MM, 
Kopan R, Behrens MI, Morris JC.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Washington University School of Medicine, 
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. cathyr@wustl.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 Jan 12;74(2):100-1.
    Neurology. 2010 Sep 28;75(13):1215; author reply 1216.
    Neurology. 2010 Sep 28;75(13):1216; author reply 1216.
    Neurology. 2010 Sep 28;75(13):1215-6; author reply 1216.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether cancer is associated with Alzheimer disease 
(AD) and vascular dementia (VaD).
METHODS: Cox proportional hazards models were used to test associations between 
prevalent dementia and risk of future cancer hospitalization, and associations 
between prevalent cancer and risk of subsequent dementia. Participants in the 
Cardiovascular Health Study-Cognition Substudy, a prospective cohort study, aged 
65 years or older (n = 3,020) were followed a mean of 5.4 years for dementia and 
8.3 years for cancer.
RESULTS: The presence of any AD (pure AD + mixed AD/VaD; hazard ratio [HR] = 
0.41, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.20-0.84) and pure AD (HR = 0.31, 95% CI = 
0.12-0.86) was associated with a reduced risk of future cancer hospitalization, 
adjusted for demographic factors, smoking, obesity, and physical activity. No 
significant associations were found between dementia at baseline and rate of 
cancer hospitalizations for participants with diagnoses of VaD. Prevalent cancer 
was associated with reduced risk of any AD (HR = 0.72; 95% CI = 0.52-0.997) and 
pure AD (HR = 0.57; 95% CI = 0.36-0.90) among white subjects after adjustment 
for demographics, number of APOE epsilon4 alleles, hypertension, diabetes, and 
coronary heart disease; the opposite association was found among minorities, but 
the sample size was too small to provide stable estimates. No significant 
association was found between cancer and subsequent development of VaD.
CONCLUSIONS: In white older adults, prevalent Alzheimer disease (AD) was 
longitudinally associated with a reduced risk of cancer, and a history of cancer 
was associated with a reduced risk of AD. Together with other work showing 
associations between cancer and Parkinson disease, these findings suggest the 
possibility that cancer is linked to neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181c91873
PMCID: PMC2809029
PMID: 20032288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2233. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2010 Mar;23(1):27-34. doi: 
10.1177/0891988709351833. Epub 2009 Dec 30.

Occurrence risk and structure of depression in Parkinson disease with and 
without dementia: results from the GEPAD Study.

Riedel O(1), Heuser I, Klotsche J, Dodel R, Wittchen HU; GEPAD Study Group.

Collaborators: Deuschl G, Foerstl H, Henn F, Oertel W, Reichmann H, Riederer P, 
Spottke A, Trenkwalder C.

Author information:
(1)Technische Universitaet Dresden, Institute of Clinical Psychology and 
Psychotherapy, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: This study examined the age- and gender-specific risk of depression 
in demented and non-demented participants, its symptom structure, and associated 
clinical factors in a nationwide random sample of n = 1449 outpatients with 
Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: Depression ratings were based on a cross-sectional clinical assessment 
including the clinical Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale (MADRS > or = 
14). Parkinson disease severity was rated according to Hoehn and Yahr (HY) and 
the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Diagnosis of dementia was based on 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (Fourth Edition; DSM-IV) 
criteria.
RESULTS: 25.2% (CI: 22.8-27.5) of all patients met study criteria for 
depression. Additionally, 8.4% of patients did not exceed the MADRS cut-off but 
were currently being treated with antidepressants, possibly suggesting a 
corrected (upper limit) total prevalence of 33.6%. Females were more likely 
depressive than males (29.3% vs 22.4%). In both genders, depression risk was 
elevated 2- to 4-fold depending on HY stage. Overall, highest rates in 
non-demented patients were found in females at stages IV to V (53.7%, CI: 
37.7-69.6). Demented patients were more likely to meet depression criteria than 
non-demented (up to 76.2%, 95% CI: 60.5-87.9). Depression symptom profiles for 
demented PD patients (as compared to non-demented) revealed no structural 
differences but consistently higher symptom scores. Neither age at onset of PD 
nor duration of disease were significantly linked with depression.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression rates are already substantially elevated at early PD 
stages, emphasizing the need for a thorough examination of mood disorders in all 
patients with PD. Depression is associated with PD severity and dementia but not 
with age, age at onset of PD, or disease duration. The differential associations 
with dementia and the statistical independence of dementia and depression also 
suggest that depression could not be regarded as a mere demoralisation syndrome.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988709351833
PMID: 20042544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2234. Front Psychiatry. 2010 Dec 27;1:150. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2010.00150. eCollection 
2010.

A tangled web - tau and sporadic Parkinson's disease.

Wray S(1), Lewis PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College London Institute of 
Neurology London, UK.

Parkinson's disease (PD) represents a major challenge for health care systems 
around the world: it is the most common degenerative movement disorder of old 
age, affecting over 100,000 people in the UK alone (Schrag et al., 2000). 
Despite the remarkable success of treatments directed at potentiating or 
replacing dopamine within the brain, which can relieve symptoms for over a 
decade, PD remains an incurable and invariably fatal disorder. As such, efforts 
to understand the processes that lead to cell death in the brains of patients 
with PD are a priority for neurodegenerative researchers. A great deal of 
progress has been made in this regard by taking advantage of advances in 
genetics, initially by the identification of genes responsible for rare 
Mendelian forms of PD (outlined in Table 1), and more recently by applying 
genome wide association studies (GWAS) to the sporadic form of the disease 
(Hardy et al., 2009). Several such GWAS have now been carried out, with a 
meta-analysis currently under way. Using over 6000 cases and 10,000 controls, 
two of these studies have identified variation at a number of loci as being 
associated with an increased risk of disease (Satake et al., 2009; Simon-Sanchez 
et al., 2009). Three genes stand out as candidates from these studies - the SNCA 
gene, coding for α-synuclein, the LRRK2 gene, coding for leucine rich repeat 
kinase 2, and MAPT, coding for the microtubule-associated protein tau. Mutations 
at all three of these loci have been associated with Mendelian forms of disease 
presenting with the clinical syndrome of Parkinsonism, however only SNCA and 
LRRK2 have been previously associated with pathologically defined PD (Hardy et 
al., 2009). Point mutations in α-synuclein, along with gene multiplication 
events, result in autosomal dominant PD, often with a significant dementia 
component. In addition to this, α-synuclein is the principle component of the 
main pathological hallmark of idiopathic PD, the Lewy body, making it an 
unsurprising hit in the GWAS (Spillantini et al., 1997). Mutations in LRRK2 are 
the most common genetic cause of PD, and so again made this gene a likely 
candidate as a susceptibility locus for the sporadic form of disease (Kumari and 
Tan, 2009). More surprising, perhaps, was the identification of tau as a 
susceptibility factor for Parkinson's. In this review we will outline the role 
of tau in neurodegeneration and in different forms of Parkinsonism, and 
speculate as to what the functional basis of the association between MAPT and PD 
might be.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2010.00150
PMCID: PMC3059613
PMID: 21423457


2235. Int J Mol Epidemiol Genet. 2010 Apr 5;1(3):193-200.

APOE ε2 and ε4 influence the susceptibility for Alzheimer's disease but not 
other dementias.

Lovati C, Galimberti D, Albani D, Bertora P, Venturelli E, Cislaghi G, Guidi I, 
Fenoglio C, Cortini F, Clerici F, Finazzi D, Forloni G, Scarpini E, Mariani C.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotype was determined in a population of patients with 
dementia, including 735 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), 75 with 
Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD), 97 with Vascular Dementia (VaD) and 40 
with Lewy Body Dementia (LBD), as well as in 506 age- and gender-matched 
controls (CON). APOE ε2 allele frequency was lower in patients with AD (2.8%) 
than in CON (6.4%, P≤0.001, OR: 0.41). Similar results were obtained comparing 
AD with FTLD (6.7%, P≤0.01, OR: 0.37), at difference from VaD (5.6%, P>0.05) or 
LBD (5.0%, P>0.05). The frequency of the APOE ε4 allele was increased in 
patients with AD (25.1%) as compared with CON (8.2%, P≤0.001, OR: 4.24), FTLD 
(11.3%, P≤0.001, OR: 2.67), VaD (11.8%, P≤0.001, OR: 3.02), or LBD (13.8%, 
P=0.048, OR: 2.07). The frequency of the ε4/ε4 genotype was increased in AD 
patients compared with controls (6.3 versus 0.8%, P≤0.001, OR: 8.38). The 
presence of the ε2 allele is a protective factor for AD, whereas the ε4 allele 
acts as a risk factor for the disease. Both alleles do not influence the 
susceptibility to FTLD, LBD and VaD.

PMCID: PMC3076771
PMID: 21537391


2236. PET Clin. 2010 Jan;5(1):33-53. doi: 10.1016/j.cpet.2009.12.008. Epub 2010 May 
27.

Amyloid PET Ligands for Dementia.

Villemagne VL(1), Rowe CC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Centre for PET, Austin Health, 145 Studley 
Road, Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia; The Mental Health Research Institute 
of Victoria, 135 Oak Street, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia; Department of 
Medicine, Austin Health, Victoria 3084, Australia. Electronic address: 
villemagne@petnm.unimelb.edu.au.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Centre for PET, Austin Health, 145 Studley 
Road, Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia; Department of Medicine, Austin 
Health, Victoria 3084, Australia.

The progressive nature of neurodegeneration suggests an age-dependent process 
that ultimately leads to synaptic failure and neuronal damage in cortical areas 
of the brain critical for memory and higher mental functions. The increasing age 
of the population in developed countries suggests that, if unchecked, these 
disorders will become increasingly prevalent. In the absence of specific 
biologic markers, direct pathologic examination of brain tissue still is the 
only definitive method for establishing a diagnosis of Alzheimer disease (AD) 
and other types of dementia. Pathologic hallmarks of AD are intracellular 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and extracellular amyloid plaques. NFT are 
intraneuronal bundles of paired helical filaments mainly composed of the 
aggregates of an abnormally phosphorylated form of tau protein; neuritic plaques 
consist of dense extracellular aggregates of β-amyloid (Aβ), surrounded by 
reactive gliosis and dystrophic neurites. To date, all available evidence 
strongly supports the notion that an imbalance between the production and 
removal of Aβ leading to its progressive accumulation is central to the 
pathogenesis of AD. A growing understanding of the molecular mechanisms of Aβ 
formation, degradation, and neurotoxicity is being translated into new 
therapeutic approaches. Whereas AD is the most common cause of dementia in the 
elderly, postmortem studies have found dementia with Lewy Bodies and 
frontotemporal lobe degeneration each to account for about 20% of cases. 
Molecular neuroimaging techniques such as PET have been used for the in vivo 
assessment of molecular processes at their sites of action, permitting detection 
of subtle pathophysiological changes in the brain at asymptomatic stages The 
development of molecular imaging methods for noninvasively assessing 
disease-specific traits such as Aβ burden in AD is allowing early diagnosis at 
presymptomatic stages, more accurate differential diagnosis and, when available, 
the evaluation and monitoring of disease-modifying therapy.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpet.2009.12.008
PMID: 27157482


2237. PET Clin. 2010 Jan;5(1):75-82. doi: 10.1016/j.cpet.2010.02.001. Epub 2010 May 
27.

(18)F-AV-133: A Selective VMAT2-binding Radiopharmaceutical for PET Imaging of 
Dopaminergic Neurons.

Hefti FF(1), Kung HF(2), Kilbourn MR(3), Carpenter AP(1), Clark CM(4), 
Skovronsky DM(5).

Author information:
(1)Avid Radiopharmaceuticals Inc, 3711 Market Street, 7th Floor, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA.
(2)Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, 
USA.
(3)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Avid Radiopharmaceuticals Inc, 3711 Market Street, 7th Floor, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Department of Neurology, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(5)Avid Radiopharmaceuticals Inc, 3711 Market Street, 7th Floor, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA; Department of Radiology, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: skrovronsky@avidrp.com.

The early detection and monitoring of neurodegenerative diseases, including 
Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and other 
dementias, and movement disorders, represent a significant unmet medical need. 
Tools for accurate and early differential diagnosis are necessary to determine 
the appropriate treatment for patients and to minimize inappropriate use of 
potentially harmful treatments. Such diagnostic imaging tools are expected to 
permit monitoring of disease progression and will thus accelerate testing and 
development of disease-modifying drugs. The new imaging tests may be useful as 
prognostic tools by identifying humans with neurodegenerative diseases before 
the clinical manifestations become evident.

Copyright © 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cpet.2010.02.001
PMID: 27157484


2238. J Clin Neurosci. 2010 Feb;17(2):177. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2009.05.042. Epub 2009 
Dec 31.

Comment on "association between mild parkinsonian signs and mortality in an 
elderly male cohort in China".

Williams DR(1).

Author information:
(1)Van Cleef/Roet Centre for Nervous Diseases, Monash University Department of 
Medicine, Alfred Hospital, Prahran, Victoria 3181, Australia. 
david.williams@med.monash.edu

Comment on
    J Clin Neurosci. 2010 Feb;17(2):173-6.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2009.05.042
PMID: 20045335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2239. Eur J Neurol. 2010 Mar;17(3):364-76. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02900.x. Epub 
2009 Dec 30.

Neurotransmission in Parkinson's disease: beyond dopamine.

Barone P(1).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche and IDC-Hermitage-Capodimonte, Naples, 
Italy. barone@unina.it

Parkinson's disease (PD) is most frequently associated with characteristic motor 
symptoms that are known to arise with degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. 
However, patients with this disease also experience a multitude of non-motor 
symptoms, such as sleep disturbances, fatigue, apathy, anxiety, depression, 
cognitive impairment, dementia, olfactory dysfunction, pain, sweating and 
constipation, some of which can be at least as debilitating as the movement 
disorders and have a major impact on patients' quality of life. Many of these 
non-motor symptoms may be evident prior to the onset of motor dysfunction. The 
neuropathology of PD has shown that complex, interconnected neuronal systems, 
regulated by a number of different neurotransmitters in addition to dopamine, 
are involved in the aetiology of motor and non-motor symptoms. This review 
focuses on the non-dopaminergic neurotransmission systems associated with PD 
with particular reference to the effect that their modulation and interaction 
with dopamine has on the non-motor symptoms of the disease. PD treatments that 
focus on the dopaminergic system alone are unable to alleviate both motor and 
non-motor symptoms, particularly those that develop at early stages of the 
disease. The development of agents that interact with several of the affected 
neurotransmission systems could prove invaluable for the treatment of this 
disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02900.x
PMID: 20050885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2240. Age Ageing. 2010 Mar;39(2):156-61. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afp223. Epub 2010 Jan 5.

Ageing, neurodegeneration and Parkinson's disease.

Hindle JV(1).

Author information:
(1)Llandudno Hospital, Care of the Elderly, Hospital Road, Llandudno, LL30 1LB, 
UK.

Age is the largest risk factor for the development and progression of 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Ageing affects many cellular processes that predispose 
to neurodegeneration, and age-related changes in cellular function predispose to 
the pathogenesis of PD. The accumulation of age-related somatic damage combined 
with a failure of compensatory mechanisms may lead to an acceleration of PD with 
age. The formation of Lewy bodies may represent a marker for protective 
mechanisms against age-related dysfunction and degeneration of the nervous 
system. Mild parkinsonian signs may be present in older people, which are 
associated with reduced function. These may be due to age-related decline in 
dopaminergic activity, incidental Lewy body disease, degenerative pathologies 
(early PD and Alzheimer's disease) or vascular pathology. Ageing may affect the 
clinical presentation of PD with altered drug side effects, increased risk of 
developing dementia and an increased likelihood of admission to a nursing home. 
Progression of PD, including the development of dementia, and hallucinations is 
related to the age of the patient rather than the age of disease onset. PD may 
reflect a failure of the normal cellular compensatory mechanisms in vulnerable 
brain regions, and this vulnerability is increased by ageing. PD is one of the 
best examples of an age-related disease.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/afp223
PMID: 20051606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2241. Brain Res. 2010 Mar 19;1321:169-79. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.081. Epub 
2010 Jan 4.

Alterations in regional homogeneity of resting-state brain activity in autism 
spectrum disorders.

Paakki JJ(1), Rahko J, Long X, Moilanen I, Tervonen O, Nikkinen J, Starck T, 
Remes J, Hurtig T, Haapsamo H, Jussila K, Kuusikko-Gauffin S, Mattila ML, Zang 
Y, Kiviniemi V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, University Hospital of Oulu, PO Box 50, 
90029 Oulu, Finland. jyri-johan.paakki@ppshp.fi

Measures assessing resting-state brain activity with blood oxygen level 
dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) can reveal 
cognitive disorders at an early stage. Analysis of regional homogeneity (ReHo) 
measures the local synchronization of spontaneous fMRI signals and has been 
successfully utilized in detecting alterations in subjects with 
attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), depression, schizophrenia, 
Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's dementia. Resting-state brain activity was 
investigated in 28 adolescents with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and 27 
typically developing controls being imaged with BOLD fMRI and analyzed with the 
ReHo method. The hypothesis was that ReHo of resting-state brain activity would 
be different between ASD subjects and controls in brain areas previously shown 
to display functional alterations in stimulus or task based fMRI studies. 
Compared with the controls, the subjects with ASD had significantly decreased 
ReHo in right superior temporal sulcus region, right inferior and middle frontal 
gyri, bilateral cerebellar crus I, right insula and right postcentral gyrus. 
Significantly increased ReHo was discovered in right thalamus, left inferior 
frontal and anterior subcallosal gyrus and bilateral cerebellar lobule VIII. We 
conclude that subjects with ASD have right dominant ReHo alterations of 
resting-state brain activity, i.e., areas known to exhibit abnormal stimulus or 
task related functionality. Our results demonstrate that there is potential in 
utilizing the ReHo method in fMRI analyses of ASD.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2009.12.081
PMID: 20053346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2242. Neuroimage. 2010 Apr 15;50(3):994-1003. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.056. 
Epub 2010 Jan 4.

B-spline-based stereotactical normalization of brain FDG PET scans in suspected 
neurodegenerative disease: impact on voxel-based statistical single-subject 
analysis.

Wenzel F(1), Young S, Wilke F, Apostolova I, Arlt S, Jahn H, Thiele F, Buchert 
R.

Author information:
(1)Digital Imaging Department, Philips Research, Hamburg, Germany. 
fabian.wenzel@philips.com

A b-spline-based method 'Lobster', originally designed as a general technique 
for non-linear image registration, was tailored for stereotactical normalization 
of brain FDG PET scans. Lobster was compared with the normalization methods of 
SPM2 and Neurostat with respect to the impact on the accuracy of voxel-based 
statistical analysis. (i) Computer simulation: Seven representative patterns of 
cortical hypometabolism served as artificial ground truth. They were inserted 
into 26 normal control scans with different simulated severity levels. After 
stereotactical normalization and voxel-based testing, statistical maps were 
compared voxel-by-voxel with the ground truth. This was done at different levels 
of statistical significance. There was a highly significant effect of the 
stereotactical normalization method on the area under the resulting ROC curve. 
Lobster showed the best average performance and was most stable with respect to 
variation of the severity level. (ii) Clinical evaluation: Statistical maps were 
obtained for the normal controls as well as patients with Alzheimer's disease 
(AD, n=44), Lewy-Body disease (LBD, 9), fronto-temporal dementia (FTD, 13), and 
cortico-basal dementia (CBD, 4). These maps were classified as normal, AD, LBD, 
FTD, or CBD by two experienced readers. The stereotactical normalization method 
had no significant effect on classification by of each of the experts, but it 
appeared to affect agreement between the experts. In conclusion, Lobster is 
appropriate for use in single-subject analysis of brain FDG PET scans in 
suspected dementia, both in early diagnosis (mild hypometabolism) and in 
differential diagnosis in advanced disease stages (moderate to severe 
hypometabolism). The computer simulation framework developed in the present 
study appears appropriate for quantitative evaluation of the impact of the 
different processing steps and their interaction on the performance of 
voxel-based single-subject analysis.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.12.056
PMID: 20053378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2243. Mov Disord. 2010 Jan 15;25(1):35-43. doi: 10.1002/mds.22899.

Cognitive-nigrostriatal relationships in de novo, drug-naïve Parkinson's disease 
patients: a [I-123]FP-CIT SPECT study.

Nobili F(1), Campus C, Arnaldi D, De Carli F, Cabassi G, Brugnolo A, Dessi B, 
Morbelli S, Sambuceti G, Abbruzzese G, Rodriguez G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Ophthalmology and Genetics, Clinical 
Neurophysiology Unit, University of Genoa, Genoa 516132, Italy. 
flaviomariano.nobili@hsanmartino.it

To unveil cognitive-nigrostriatal correlations in Parkinson's disease (PD), 30 
de novo, drug-naïve PD patients and 15 patients with essential tremor (Controls, 
CTR) underwent a neuropsychological (NPS) battery and brain SPECT with 
[I-123]Ioflupane, as a biomarker of nigrostriatal function. Automatic extraction 
of uptake at caudate and putamen level was conducted through the BasGan 
software, also allowing partial volume effect correction. Because of the 
multicollinearity among neuropsychological tests and among SPECT variables, 
factor analysis was applied to 16 neuropsychological scores; moreover, the four 
SPECT variables were merged into a mean SPECT value (mSPECT). Factor analysis 
identified four NPS factors: a dys-executive (NPS-EX), a visuospatial (NPS-VS), 
a verbal memory (NPS-VM), and a "mixed" (NPD-MIX) factor. In PD group, there 
were inverse correlations between UPDRS-III score and both NPS-VS (P < 0.01) and 
mSPECT (P < 0.05), and a direct correlation between mSPECT and NPS-EX (P < 
0.05). Post hoc analysis showed a direct correlation between NPS-EX and caudate 
uptake in both hemispheres (P < 0.05). Moreover, inverse correlations were found 
between UPDRS-III and, respectively, putamen uptake in the less affected 
hemisphere (P < 0.01), and putamen and caudate uptake in the more affected 
hemisphere (P < 0.05). In CTR, no correlation was found between mSPECT and 
either NPS or GDS values. Nigro-caudate function affects executive capabilities 
in PD but not in CTR, which appears to be unrelated to the disease motor 
severity at its onset. Instead, PD motor severity is related to nigro-putaminal 
impairment and visuospatial dysfunction. The role of these data as predictive 
features of cognitive decline and eventually dementia remains to be established 
in longitudinal studies.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22899
PMID: 20058228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2244. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Aug 10;221(2):564-73. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.12.048. Epub 
2010 Jan 7.

The cholinergic system and Parkinson disease.

Bohnen NI(1), Albin RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
nbohnen@umich.edu

Although Parkinson disease (PD) is viewed traditionally as a motor syndrome 
secondary to nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation, recent studies emphasize 
non-motor features. Non-motor comorbidities, such as cognitive impairment, are 
likely the result of an intricate interplay of multi-system degenerations and 
neurotransmitter deficiencies extending beyond the loss of dopaminergic nigral 
neurons. The pathological hallmark of parkinsonian dementia is the presence of 
extra-nigral Lewy bodies that can be accompanied by other pathologies, such as 
senile plaques. Lewy first identified the eponymous Lewy body in neurons of the 
nucleus basalis of Meynert (nbM), the source of cholinergic innervation of the 
cerebral cortex. Although cholinergic denervation is recognized as a 
pathological hallmark of Alzheimer disease (AD), in vivo neuroimaging studies 
reveal loss of cerebral cholinergic markers in parkinsonian dementia similar to 
or more severe than in prototypical AD. Imaging studies agree with post-mortem 
evidence suggesting that basal forebrain cholinergic system degeneration appears 
early in PD and worsens coincident with the appearance of dementia. Early 
cholinergic denervation in PD without dementia appears to be heterogeneous and 
may make specific contributions to the PD clinical phenotype. Apart from 
well-known cognitive and behavioral deficits, central, in particular limbic, 
cholinergic denervation may be associated with progressive deficits of odor 
identification in PD. Recent evidence indicates also that subcortical 
cholinergic denervation, probably due to degeneration of brainstem 
pedunculopontine nucleus neurons, may relate to the presence of dopamine 
non-responsive gait and balance impairments, including falls, in PD.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.12.048
PMCID: PMC2888997
PMID: 20060022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2245. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;19(1):221-8. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1220.

Neuropathologic alterations in mild cognitive impairment: a review.

Markesbery WR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Sanders-Brown Center on 
Aging, and Alzheimer's Disease Center, University of Kentucky College of 
Medicine, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536-0230, USA. 
wmark0@email.uky.edu

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI), the earliest clinically detectable phase of the 
trajectory toward dementia and Alzheimer's disease (AD), led to the need for 
even earlier detection and prevention of AD. Although it is a clinical 
diagnosis, its underlying neuropathological findings are just being defined. MCI 
is best studied in longitudinally followed patients in centers that are 
experienced in dementing disorders. In this review of the few major 
clinical-pathological reports of longitudinally followed patients, it appears 
that most autopsied amnestic MCI (aMCI) patients are on a pathway toward AD. 
Neurofibrillary pathology in entorhinal cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala--not 
amyloid plaques--is the major substrate for aMCI and for memory decline. In 
addition, many MCI patients have other concomitant pathological alterations, the 
most common of which are strokes, but also include argyrophilic grains and Lewy 
bodies. These findings are not surprising because most MCI autopsied cases have 
been in the older (80 to 90 year) range where these findings are common. In 
early AD, the phase following MCI, the significant change is an increase in 
neurofibrillary tangles in the neocortex that correlates with an increase in 
Braak score and the observed clinical progression.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1220
PMCID: PMC2872776
PMID: 20061641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2246. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;19(1):291-300. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1224.

Positron emission tomography in at risk patients and in the progression of mild 
cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Rinne JO(1), Någren K.

Author information:
(1)Turku PET Centre, Turku, Finland. juha.rinne@tyks.fi

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is considered a transitional state between the 
cognitive changes of normal aging and the earliest clinical features of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). An important goal is to find features that predict 
which MCI patients will later convert to AD. Identification of such features 
will be increasingly important when treatments slowing down the progression of 
AD become available enabling early intervention. Brain imaging might be one 
possible predictor of conversion to AD. Functional imaging with positron 
emission tomography (PET) has shown that either normal elderly people carrying 
apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele or people with MCI already show reduced 
cerebral glucose metabolism in those brain areas that are typically affected in 
AD. Investigations of different neurotransmitter systems might increase 
specificity and help in the differential diagnosis between dementing disorders. 
Dopamine transporter imaging to aid in the differential diagnosis between AD and 
dementia with Lewy bodies seems promising. Amyloid imaging is an example of 
"pathology specific" imaging that has great potential to enhance early detection 
of AD processes and to help in differential diagnosis. In the future, 
multi-tracer imaging or development of agents enabling imaging of other protein 
aggregations in neurodegenerative diseases could further help in the early and 
differential diagnostics and evaluation of novel treatments.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1224
PMID: 20061645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2247. Mov Disord. 2010 Jan 30;25(2):167-71. doi: 10.1002/mds.22919.

Visual hallucinations and altered visual information processing in Parkinson 
disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Kurita A(1), Murakami M, Takagi S, Matsushima M, Suzuki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Jikei University School of Medicine, Kashiwa 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. a-kurita@jikei.ac.jp

Visual hallucinations (VHs) are common in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD), while auditory hallucinations are rare. 
To neurophysiologically investigate the pathophysiology of VHs in these 
disorders, we studied event-related potentials (ERPs) of DLB, PDD, and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. We compared visual and auditory ERP latencies 
among PDD patients with and without VHs (PDD-H: 11, PDD-N: 6), DLB patients 
(24), and AD patients (21). To elicit visual and auditory ERPs, a facial 
discrimination paradigm and a conventional auditory odd-ball paradigm, 
respectively, were used. The mean visual P3 latencies in the PDD-H and DLB 
groups were significantly longer than that in the AD group, while the mean 
auditory P3 latencies in all four patient groups were comparable. The mean 
visual P2 latencies in the PDD-N, PDD-H, and DLB groups were significantly 
longer than that in the control group. Our findings suggest that visual 
cognitive functions are selectively impaired in hallucinatory patients with DLB 
and PDD. VHs may be associated in part with predominant visual cognitive 
impairments attributable to PDD and DLB pathologies. Our findings also suggest 
that the impairments occur at the early stage of facial information processing.

(c) 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22919
PMID: 20063433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2248. Neuropsychology. 2010 Jan;24(1):35-48. doi: 10.1037/a0016834.

Visual impairments in dementia with Lewy bodies and posterior cortical atrophy.

Metzler-Baddeley C(1), Baddeley RJ, Lovell PG, Laffan A, Jones RW.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for the Care of Older People (RICE), The RICE Centre, 
Royal United Hospital, Bath, BA1 3NG, United Kingdom. 
claudia.baddeley@bristol.ac.uk

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Posterior Cortical Atrophy (PCA), the visual 
variant of Alzheimer's disease, are neurodegenerative diseases that present with 
progressive deterioration in visual perception. However, little is known about 
the precise nature underlying the complex visual deficits associated with both 
conditions. The present study compared DLB, PCA, and healthy control 
participants, in four visual tasks designed to measure the efficiency of the 
visual system at different levels of processing. In ascending order of 
complexity there were tasks of visual acuity, line orientation, contour 
integration, and rotated object comparison. DLB patients did not differ from 
controls in low level visual functions of visual acuity and line orientation, 
suggesting that early visual processing areas including V1 were relatively 
preserved, consistent with pathology evidence (Yamamoto et al., 2006). However, 
higher level visual functions of contour integration, mediated by extrastriatal 
areas, and the most complex task of object rotation, relying on processing 
within inferior temporal (IT), parietal, and frontal cortices, were impaired in 
DLB. In contrast, PCA patients were impaired in all tasks, consistent with 
evidence of widespread pathology within occipital and parietal areas in PCA. The 
latter suggests that both lower and higher level visual impairments contribute 
to the complex visual symptoms associated with PCA.

Copyright 2009 APA, all rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1037/a0016834
PMID: 20063945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2249. Mov Disord. 2010 Jan 30;25(2):172-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.22943.

Mild parkinsonian signs are associated with increased risk of dementia in a 
prospective, population-based study of elders.

Louis ED(1), Tang MX, Schupf N.

Author information:
(1)GH Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York 10032, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

There is some evidence that mild parkinsonian signs (MPSs) are associated with 
increased risk of dementia, suggesting that MPS could be an early biomarker for 
dementia. Our aims, in a new cohort, were to determine whether (1) baseline MPS 
are a predictor of incident dementia and (2) there is an interaction between MPS 
and other baseline risk factors for dementia (i.e., the presence of both 
together greatly elevates the risk of dementia) was the objective. In a 
prospective, longitudinal study of community-dwelling elders in northern 
Manhattan, NY, Parkinsonian signs were rated with an abbreviated Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Risk of incident dementia was assessed using 
Cox proportional hazards models. There were 1,851 participants (mean follow-up = 
3.7 years). Participants with baseline MPS were twice as likely to develop 
dementia as participants without MPS: 16.3% versus 7.7%, unadjusted hazards 
ratio (HR) = 2.24 (P< 0.001), adjusted HR = 1.98 (P < 0.001). MPS were divided 
into three subtypes: adjusted HR(axial dysfunction) = 2.45 (P < 0.001), adjusted 
HR(tremor) = 2.38 (P = 0.006), and adjusted HR(rigidity) = 1.16 (P = 0.58). When 
MPS were treated as a continuous variable, the adjusted HR = 1.15 (P = 0.001). 
There were no interactions between MPS and other baseline risk factors for 
dementia, including gender, education, race, family history of dementia, stroke, 
and apolipoprotein E-e4. Baseline MPS seems to be a predictor of incident 
dementia. These motor signs might, therefore, serve as a useful biomarker for 
emerging dementia.

(c) 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22943
PMCID: PMC2831155
PMID: 20077482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest.


2250. J Nucl Med. 2010 Feb;51(2):210-8. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.109.063701. Epub 2010 Jan 
15.

Movement correction method for human brain PET images: application to 
quantitative analysis of dynamic 18F-FDDNP scans.

Wardak M(1), Wong KP, Shao W, Dahlbom M, Kepe V, Satyamurthy N, Small GW, Barrio 
JR, Huang SC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095-6948, USA. 
mwardak@mednet.ucla.edu

Head movement during a PET scan (especially a dynamic scan) can affect both the 
qualitative and the quantitative aspects of an image, making it difficult to 
accurately interpret the results. The primary objective of this study was to 
develop a retrospective image-based movement correction (MC) method and evaluate 
its implementation on dynamic 
2-(1-{6-[(2-(18)F-fluoroethyl)(methyl)amino]-2-naphthyl}ethylidene)malononitrile 
((18)F-FDDNP) PET images of cognitively intact controls and patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Dynamic (18)F-FDDNP PET images, used for in vivo imaging of 
beta-amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, were obtained from 12 AD 
patients and 9 age-matched controls. For each study, a transmission scan was 
first acquired for attenuation correction. An accurate retrospective MC method 
that corrected for transmission-emission and emission-emission misalignments was 
applied to all studies. No restriction was assumed for zero movement between the 
transmission scan and the first emission scan. Logan analysis, with the 
cerebellum as the reference region, was used to estimate various regional 
distribution volume ratio (DVR) values in the brain before and after MC. 
Discriminant analysis was used to build a predictive model for group membership, 
using data with and without MC.
RESULTS: MC improved the image quality and quantitative values in (18)F-FDDNP 
PET images. In this subject population, no significant difference in DVR value 
was observed in the medial temporal (MTL) region of controls and patients with 
AD before MC. However, after MC, significant differences in DVR values in the 
frontal, parietal, posterior cingulate, MTL, lateral temporal (LTL), and global 
regions were seen between the 2 groups (P < 0.05). In controls and patients with 
AD, the variability of regional DVR values (as measured by the coefficient of 
variation) decreased on average by more than 18% after MC. Mean DVR separation 
between controls and patients with AD was higher in frontal, MTL, LTL, and 
global regions after MC. Group classification by discriminant analysis based on 
(18)F-FDDNP DVR values was markedly improved after MC.
CONCLUSION: The streamlined and easy-to-use MC method presented in this work 
significantly improves the image quality and the measured tracer kinetics of 
(18)F-FDDNP PET images. The proposed MC method has the potential to be applied 
to PET studies on patients having other disorders (e.g., Down syndrome and 
Parkinson's disease) and to brain PET scans with other molecular imaging probes.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.109.063701
PMCID: PMC2929579
PMID: 20080894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2251. Neurology. 2010 Jan 19;74(3):210-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ca017d.

Effect of cognitive fluctuation on neuropsychological performance in aging and 
dementia.

Escandon A(1), Al-Hammadi N, Galvin JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
MO, USA.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive fluctuations are spontaneous alterations in cognition, 
attention, and arousal. Fluctuations are a core feature of dementia with Lewy 
bodies, but the impact of fluctuations in healthy brain aging and Alzheimer 
disease (AD) are unknown.
METHODS: Research participants (n = 511, age 78.1 +/- 8 years, education 14.9 
+/- 3 years) enrolled in a longitudinal study of memory and aging at the 
Washington University Alzheimer Disease Research Center were assessed for the 
presence and severity of dementia with the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) and a 
neuropsychological test battery. Informant assessments of fluctuations with the 
Mayo Fluctuations Questionnaire and daytime level of alertness with the Mayo 
Sleep Questionnaire were completed.
RESULTS: After controlling for age and alertness level, participants with 
cognitive fluctuations (3 or 4 individual symptoms) were 4.6 times more likely 
to have dementia (95% confidence interval: 2.05, 10.40). Participants who 
presented with disorganized, illogical thinking were 7.8 times more likely to be 
rated CDR >0. The risk of being rated CDR 0.5 among those with fluctuations was 
13.4 times higher than among those without fluctuations. The risk of being rated 
CDR 1 increased 34-fold among participants with fluctuations. Compared with 
participants without fluctuations, the presence of cognitive fluctuations 
corresponds to a decrease in performance across individual neuropsychological 
tests as well as composite scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive fluctuations occur in Alzheimer disease and, when 
present, significantly affect both clinical rating of dementia severity and 
neuropsychological performance. Assessment of fluctuations should be considered 
in the evaluation of patients for cognitive disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ca017d
PMCID: PMC2809035
PMID: 20083796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2252. Neurology. 2010 Jan 19;74(3):239-44. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ca0166.

Severity of REM atonia loss in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder predicts 
Parkinson disease.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Rompré S, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Over 50% of persons with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder 
(RBD) will develop Parkinson disease (PD) or dementia. At present, there is no 
way to predict who will develop disease. Since polysomnography is performed in 
all patients with idiopathic RBD at diagnosis, there is an opportunity to 
analyze if baseline sleep variables predict eventual neurodegenerative disease.
METHODS: In a longitudinally studied cohort of patients with idiopathic RBD, we 
identified those who had developed neurodegenerative disease. These patients 
were matched by age, sex, and follow-up duration to patients with RBD who 
remained disease-free and to controls. Polysomnographic variables at baseline 
(i.e., before development of neurodegenerative disease) were compared between 
groups.
RESULTS: Twenty-six patients who developed neurodegenerative disease were 
included (PD 12, multiple system atrophy 1, dementia 13). The interval between 
polysomnogram and disease onset was 6.7 years, mean age was 69.5, and 81% were 
male. There were no differences between groups in sleep latency, sleep time, % 
stages 2-4, % REM sleep, or sleep efficiency. However, patients with idiopathic 
RBD who developed neurodegenerative disease had increased tonic chin EMG 
activity during REM sleep at baseline compared to those who remained 
disease-free (62.7 +/- 6.0% vs 41.0 +/- 6.0%, p = 0.020). This effect was seen 
only in patients who developed PD (72.9 +/- 6.0% vs 41.0 +/- 6.0%, p = 0.002), 
and not in those who developed dementia (54.3 +/- 10.3, p = 0.28). There was no 
difference in phasic submental REM EMG activity between groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with REM sleep behavior disorder initially free of 
neurodegenerative disease, the severity of REM atonia loss on baseline 
polysomnogram predicts the development of Parkinson disease.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181ca0166
PMCID: PMC2872606
PMID: 20083800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2253. Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr. 2009 Sep;40(4):168-72. doi: 10.1007/BF03079582.

[The possible value of diagnosing MCI-DLB and treatment options].

[Article in Dutch]

Feitsma MT(1), van Laar T, Dautzenberg PL.

Author information:
(1)Klinisch Geriater, Amphia Ziekenhuis, Breda. Tfeitsma@amphia.nl

Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) is a well-described clinical entity. DLB 
patients can be treated with acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEI's). However, 
should we also treat patients who have but part of the symptoms and who are 
currently described as MCI-DLB? Will these MCI-DLB patients benefit from AChEI's 
in terms of direct effect on cognition and behaviour and final outcome? Two 
cases are presented to demonstrate the clinical features of MCI-DLB and the 
effect of treatment with rivastigmine (AChEI). The discussion then focuses on 
the possible value of diagnosing MCI-DLB and if this diagnosis should result in 
a different medication treatment than the diagnosis MCI-AD, for which AChEI 
medication is not recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03079582
PMID: 20088343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2254. Mt Sinai J Med. 2010 Jan-Feb;77(1):32-42. doi: 10.1002/msj.20157.

Neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease.

Perl DP(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Division, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA. 
daniel.perl@mssm.edu

Alois Alzheimer first pointed out that the disease which would later bear his 
name has a distinct and recognizable neuropathological substrate. Since then, 
much has been added to our understanding of the pathological lesions associated 
with the condition. The 2 primary cardinal lesions associated with Alzheimer's 
disease are the neurofibrillary tangle and the senile plaque. The 
neurofibrillary tangle consists of abnormal accumulations of abnormally 
phosphorylated tau within the perikaryal cytoplasm of certain neurons. The 
senile plaque consists of a central core of beta-amyloid, a 4-kD peptide, 
surrounded by abnormally configured neuronal processes or neurites. Other 
neuropathological lesions are encountered in cases of Alzheimer's disease, but 
the disease is defined and recognized by these 2 cardinal lesions. Other lesions 
include poorly understood changes such as granulovacuolar degeneration and 
eosinophilic rodlike bodies (Hirano bodies). The loss of synaptic components is 
a change that clearly has a significant impact on cognitive function and 
represents another important morphological alteration. It is important to 
recognize that distinguishing between Alzheimer's disease, especially in its 
early stages, and normal aging may be very difficult, particularly if one is 
examining the brains of patients who died at an advanced old age. It is also 
noted that instances of pure forms of Alzheimer's disease, in the absence of 
other coexistent brain disease processes, such as infarctions or Parkinson's 
disease-related lesions, are relatively uncommon, and this must be taken into 
account by researchers who employ postmortem brain tissues for research.

(c) 2010 Mount Sinai School of Medicine.

DOI: 10.1002/msj.20157
PMCID: PMC2918894
PMID: 20101720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2255. Mov Disord. 2010 Feb 15;25(3):357-62. doi: 10.1002/mds.22977.

What features improve the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of progressive 
supranuclear palsy-parkinsonism (PSP-P)?

Williams DR(1), Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Van Cleef Roet Centre for Nervous Diseases, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia. david.williams@med.monash.edu.au

Progressive supranuclear palsy-parkinsonism (PSP-P) is a primary tauopathy 
characterised by neurofibrillary degeneration, which is frequently mistaken for 
Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple system atrophy (MSA), and vascular 
parkinsonism (VP) at presentation. The aim of this study was to identify 
particular clinical features (green flags) that may be helpful in 
differentiating PSP-P from these other disorders. We identified 37 patients with 
PSP-P from 726 patients archived at the Queen Square Brain Bank. Using a 
retrospective case notes review the clinical features were compared between the 
PSP-P group and Lewy body associated parkinsonism (PD, n = 444 and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB), n = 46), MSA (n = 90), and VP (n = 19), using the chi(2)-test 
for proportions for a two-by-two contingency table. The sensitivity, 
specificity, and positive predictive values (PPV) and negative predictive values 
(NPV) were calculated for individual clinical features. A specificity of >0.85 
or a PPV of >0.85 were considered reliable discriminators. No clinical features 
were predictive of PSP-P, but late drug induced dyskinesias (specificity 0.92, 
PPV 0.99), late autonomic dysfunction (specificity 0.94, PPV 0.99) and any 
visual hallucinations (specificity 0.94, PPV 0.99) were better in distinguishing 
PD and PSP-P than predicted using operational diagnostic criteria for PD. PSP-P 
shares many clinical features with PD and DLB, MSA and VP, but visual 
hallucinations, drug induced dyskinesias and autonomic dysfunction are very 
uncommon and may be helpful exclusion criteria.

(c) 2010 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22977
PMID: 20108379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2256. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2009 Dec;15 Suppl 3:S105-9. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(09)70793-X.

Predicting Parkinson's disease - why, when, and how?

Postuma RB(1), Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ronald.postuma@mcgill.ca

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive disorder with a presymptomatic 
interval; that is, there is a period during which the pathologic process has 
begun, but motor signs required for the clinical diagnosis are absent. There is 
considerable interest in discovering markers to diagnose this preclinical stage. 
Current predictive marker development stems mainly from two principles; first, 
that pathologic processes occur in lower brainstem regions before substantia 
nigra involvement and second, that redundancy and compensatory responses cause 
symptoms to emerge only after advanced degeneration. Decreased olfaction has 
recently been demonstrated to predict PD in prospective pathologic studies, 
although the lead time may be relatively short and the positive predictive value 
and specificity are low. Screening patients for depression and personality 
changes, autonomic symptoms, subtle motor dysfunction on quantitative testing, 
sleepiness and insomnia are other potential simple markers. More invasive 
measures such as detailed autonomic testing, cardiac MIBG-scintigraphy, 
transcranial ultrasound, and dopaminergic functional imaging may be especially 
useful in those at high risk or for further defining risk in those identified 
through primary screening. Despite intriguing leads, direct testing of 
preclinical markers has been limited, mainly because there is no reliable way to 
identify preclinical disease. Idiopathic RBD is characterized by loss of normal 
atonia with REM sleep. Approximately 50% of affected individuals will develop PD 
or dementia within 10 years. This provides an unprecedented opportunity to test 
potential predictive markers before clinical disease onset. The results of 
marker testing in idiopathic RBD with its implications for disease prediction 
will be detailed.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(09)70793-X
PMID: 20082967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2257. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2009 Dec;15 Suppl 3:S135-8. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(09)70800-4.

Huntington disease: pathogenesis, biomarkers, and approaches to experimental 
therapeutics.

Ross CA(1), Shoulson I.

Author information:
(1)Professor of Psychiatry, Neurology, Pharmacology and Neuroscience, Johns 
Hopkins University School of Medicine, CMSC 8-121, 600 North Wolfe Street, 
Baltimore, MD 21287, USA. caross@jhu.edu

Huntington disease (HD) is characterized by motor, cognitive and behavioral 
abnormalities that typically emerge in adulthood in persons who have inherited 
the mutant gene. HD has a single genetic cause, a well-defined neuropathology, 
and informative pre-manifest predictive genetic testing. Thus, it has been 
possible to develop imaging biomarkers of HD progression, not just in the period 
of manifest illness, but also in the prodromal or "premanifest" period. Striatal 
atrophy is the most studied, and shows steady progression beginning in the 
prodromal period beginning up to 15 years before predicted onset, and continuing 
through the period of manifest illness. Therapeutic targets for HD include the 
huntingtin protein itself, either by reducing its levels with antisense 
oligonucleotides or siRNA, or potentially by intervening via posttranslational 
modifications such as phosphorylation, acetylation, SUMOylation, or proteolytic 
cleavage. Other strategies involve bolstering the cell's ability to deal with 
abnormal proteins, either via chaperones or protein degradation machinery. It 
may be possible to counteract the abnormal transcription caused by mutant 
huntingtin, with histone deacetylase inhibitors, or to enhance relevant gene 
products such as Brain Derived Neurotrophic Factor (BDNF). Another tactic is to 
enhance cellular metabolic defenses, such as with creatine or Coenzyme Q10. 
Strategies are being devised to use biomarkers, and administer therapeutic 
agents which can be given safely for long periods of time during the proodromal 
period, with a goal not just to slow progression, but to delay, or conceivably 
even prevent, the onset of clinical HD.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(09)70800-4
PMID: 20082975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2258. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2010 Mar;117(3):353-67. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-010-0370-2. Epub 2010 Jan 30.

Sharpening the boundaries of Parkinson-associated dementia: recommendation for a 
neuropsychological diagnostic procedure.

Bothe MR(1), Uttner I, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Neurologie, Universitätsklinikum Ulm, Ulm, Germany. marc.bothe@uni-ulm.de

Older adults suffering from Parkinson's disease (PD) frequently present with an 
additional form of severe neurodegenerative and/or vascular pathology. Findings 
of differential clinical manifestations of cognitive impairment, depending on 
presence and nature of such coexisting brain pathology, raise the question for 
neuropsychological procedures that are capable not only of distinguishing 
between non-demented PD patients and patients with Parkinson-associated dementia 
(PDD), but also of detecting other types of cognitive decline, most likely 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) or vascular dementia (VD), superimposing PD. The aim of 
this article is to review the literature on neuropsychological processes at risk 
in developing PDD, to introduce comorbid causes of cognitive decline in the 
presence of PD, to discuss the scope of the "cortical versus subcortical 
dementia"-concept in view of its capability of differentiating dementias, and to 
scrutinize existing diagnostic criteria concerning the toleration of 
comorbidity. Additionally, we derive an evidence-based neuropsychological 
diagnostic procedure for assessing PDD under special consideration of these 
comorbid aspects.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-010-0370-2
PMID: 20119649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2259. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009 Nov;57(11):2146-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02521.x.

High blood pressure and microinfarcts: a link between vascular risk factors, 
dementia, and clinical Alzheimer's disease.

Schneider JA.

Comment on
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009 Nov;57(11):1975-81.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02521.x
PMID: 20121957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2260. Med Care. 2010 Mar;48(3):267-72. doi: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181ca2824.

Characteristics of Medicare Part D beneficiaries who reach the drug benefit 
threshold in both of the first two years of the Part D benefit.

Bayliss EA(1), Ellis JL, Delate T, Steiner JF, Raebel MA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health Research, Kaiser Permanente, Denver, CO, USA. 
elizabeth.bayliss@kp.org

BACKGROUND: Medicare Part D beneficiaries who reach the drug benefit threshold 
(DBT) risk adverse health outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: We explore clinical characteristics of beneficiaries who repeatedly 
reach the DBT during the first 2 years of Medicare Part D and may benefit from 
proactive identification for medication and care management.
RESEARCH DESIGN: Retrospective cohort.
SUBJECTS: 25,320 Medicare Advantage beneficiaries of whom 536 reached the DBT in 
2006 only, ("2006 only"); 961 reached the DBT in 2006 and 2007 ("both years"); 
and 23,823 in neither year.
MEASURES: We assessed repeatedly reaching the DBT (relative to 2006 only) as a 
function of demographics, morbidity (specific conditions and overall burden), 
medication use (specific classes and overall burden), utilization, and use of 
catastrophic and/or additional pharmacy benefits.
RESULTS: Those who reached the DBT in both years had higher morbidity and 
utilization. In multivariate analyses, they were more likely than the 2006 only 
group to have one or more of 5 conditions (chronic pulmonary disease, dementia, 
depression, incontinence, and Parkinson disease), and within these conditions 
were more likely to use categories of trade-name medications for which there are 
limited available generic alternatives.
CONCLUSIONS: Repeatedly reaching the DBT is a function of the extent and 
chronicity of disease burden and is characterized by conditions for which there 
is limited availability of generic medications, and associated common 
comorbidities. If these findings are confirmed, strategies at practice and 
policy levels may help such Medicare beneficiaries avoid unnecessary out of 
pocket expenditures on medications from prematurely reaching the DBT.

DOI: 10.1097/MLR.0b013e3181ca2824
PMID: 20125044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2261. PLoS One. 2010 Feb 2;5(2):e9002. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009002.

A neurotoxic phosphoform of Elk-1 associates with inclusions from multiple 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Sharma A(1), Callahan LM, Sul JY, Kim TK, Barrett L, Kim M, Powers JM, Federoff 
H, Eberwine J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.

Neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by a number of features including 
the formation of inclusions, early synaptic degeneration and the selective loss 
of neurons. Molecules serving as links between these shared features have yet to 
be identified. Identifying candidates within the diseased microenvironment will 
open up novel avenues for therapeutic intervention. The transcription factor 
Elk-1 resides within multiple brain areas both in nuclear and extranuclear 
neuronal compartments. Interestingly, its de novo expression within a single 
dendrite initiates neuronal death. Given this novel regionalized function, we 
assessed whether extranuclear Elk-1 and/or phospho-Elk-1 (pElk-1) protein might 
be associated with a spectrum of human neurodegenerative disease cases including 
Lewy body Disease (e.g. Parkinson's), Alzheimer's disease, and Huntington's 
Disease. We first determined the importance of Elk-1 post-translational 
modifications on its ability to initiate regionalized cell death. We next 
screened human cases from three major neurodegenerative diseases to look for 
remarkable levels of Elk-1 and/or pElk-1 protein as well as their association 
with inclusions characteristic of these diseases. We compared our findings to 
age-matched control cases. We find that the ability of Elk-1 to initiate 
regionalized neuronal death depends on a specific phosphosite, T417. 
Furthermore, we find that T417(+) Elk-1 uniquely associates with several types 
of inclusions present in cases of human Lewy body Disease, Alzheimer's disease, 
and Huntington's Disease. These results suggest a molecular link between the 
presence of inclusions and neuronal loss that is shared across a spectrum of 
neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009002
PMCID: PMC2814869
PMID: 20126313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2262. Lancet Neurol. 2010 Feb;9(2):215-26. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70332-1.

gamma-secretases: from cell biology to therapeutic strategies.

Bergmans BA(1), De Strooper B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Developmental Genetics, VIB, Leuven, Belgium; 
Center for Human Genetics, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Presenilins form the catalytic part of the gamma-secretases, protein complexes 
that are responsible for the intramembranous cleavage of transmembrane proteins. 
The presenilins are involved in several biological functions, but are best known 
for their role in the generation of the beta-amyloid (Abeta) peptide in 
Alzheimer's disease and are therefore thought to be important drug targets for 
this disorder. Mutations in the presenilin genes cause early-onset familial 
Alzheimer's disease, but mutation carriers have substantial phenotypic 
heterogeneity. Recent evidence implicating presenilin mutations in 
non-Alzheimer's dementias, including frontotemporal dementia and Lewy body 
dementia, warrants further investigation. An increased understanding of the 
diversity of the molecular cell biology of the gamma-secretase complex and the 
effects of clinical mutations in the presenilin genes might help pave the way 
for improved development of drugs that are designed to target gamma-secretase 
enzymatic activity in Alzheimer's disease and potentially in other neurological 
diseases.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(09)70332-1
PMID: 20129170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2263. Ther Umsch. 2010 Feb;67(2):84-6. doi: 10.1024/0040-5930/a000016.

[Delirium and dementia].

[Article in German]

Ehrensperger MM(1), Monsch AU.

Author information:
(1)Memory Clinic, Akutgeriatrie, Universitätsspital Basel. ehrenspergerm@uhbs.ch

Dementia and delirium are nosologic entities with overlapping presenting 
symptoms. The diagnostic criteria of dementia and of mild cognitive 
impairment-conceptualized as prodromal state of dementia-are discussed here and 
the importance of very early diagnosis of cognitive decline and the integration 
of information from informants in the diagnostic process is highlighted. 
Prominent features of vascular dementia and of dementia with Lewy bodies which 
are important for differential diagnosis and therapy are described.

DOI: 10.1024/0040-5930/a000016
PMID: 20131217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2264. Psychiatry Investig. 2009 Dec;6(4):233-40. doi: 10.4306/pi.2009.6.4.233. Epub 
2009 Nov 21.

Imaging improves diagnosis of dementia with lewy bodies.

Tateno M(1), Kobayashi S, Saito T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine, 
Sapporo, Japan.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common cause of degenerative 
dementia after Alzheimer's disease (AD), and is clinically characterized by the 
progressive cognitive decline with fluctuations in cognition and alertness, 
recurrent visual hallucinations and Parkinsonism. Once these characteristic 
symptoms of DLB emerge, discriminating it from AD is relatively easy. However, 
in the early disease stages, the clinical symptoms of various types of dementias 
largely overlap and it is difficult to distinguish DLB from other 
neurodegenerative dementias based on clinical manifestations alone. To increase 
the accuracy of antemortem diagnosis of DLB, the latest diagnostic criteria 
incorporate findings from 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial 
scintigraphy, or from neuroimaging such as computed tomography (CT), magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI), single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), and 
positron emission tomography (PET). In the present guidelines, decreased 
dopamine transporter uptake revealed by SPECT or PET receives the greatest 
importance among various neuroimaging findings and is listed as one of the 
suggestive features. Supportive features that commonly present but are not 
proven to have diagnostic specificity include relatively-preserved 
medial-temporal-lobe structures, occipital hypoperfusion, and abnormal MIBG 
myocardial scintigraphy. In this paper, we review the major findings on various 
neuroimaging modalities and discuss the clinical usefulness of them for the 
diagnosis of DLB. Although there is not enough evidence to reach the conclusion, 
considering the accessibility in clinical practice, in our personal views, we 
recommend the use of brain-perfusion SPECT and MIBG myocardial scintigraphy to 
improve the diagnosis of DLB.

DOI: 10.4306/pi.2009.6.4.233
PMCID: PMC2808791
PMID: 20140120


2265. J Neurol. 2010 Jul;257(7):1073-82. doi: 10.1007/s00415-010-5465-z. Epub 2010 Feb 
6.

Frequency of dementia, depression, and other neuropsychiatric symptoms in 1,449 
outpatients with Parkinson's disease.

Riedel O(1), Klotsche J, Spottke A, Deuschl G, Förstl H, Henn F, Heuser I, 
Oertel W, Reichmann H, Riederer P, Trenkwalder C, Dodel R, Wittchen HU.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Technical University of 
Dresden, Chemnitzer Strasse 46, Dresden, Germany.

Neuropsychiatric symptoms (NPS) of Parkinson's disease (PD) are of growing 
diagnostic and therapeutic importance. Data on their prevalence and 
characteristics have been primarily derived from highly selective clinical 
populations. We have conducted a national study in the outpatient care sector to 
provide a fuller characterization of the frequency of dementia, depression, and 
other NPS in PD outpatients. We also examined associations with biosocial and 
neurological variables. A nationwide representative sample of 1,449 PD 
outpatients was examined with a standardized clinical interview. PD severity was 
rated with the Hoehn and Yahr (HY) scale and the Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale. Depression was measured with the Montgomery-Asberg Depression 
Rating Scale. Cognitive impairment and dementia were assessed with the 
Mini-Mental State Exam and according to diagnostic criteria. Logistic regression 
analyses were used to investigate associations. At least one NPS occurred in 71% 
of all patients with PD. The estimated prevalences (ranges) by age group and 
HY-stage were: depression, 25% (13.2-47.9%), dementia, 29% (12.2-59.4%), and 
psychotic syndromes, 12.7% (3.1-40.9%). Other frequent complications were sleep 
disturbances (49%) and anxiety (20%). Depression was associated with gender but 
not with age. Dementia was associated with age. The rates and comorbidity of 
depression and dementia were driven by PD severity. NPS were highly prevalent in 
our comprehensive patient sample, largely representative of management problems 
occurring in an outpatient setting. PD outpatients are at an increased risk for 
all neuropsychiatric conditions, increasing with PD severity but not with age or 
age of onset (except dementia), revealing challenging symptom patterns.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-010-5465-z
PMID: 20140443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2266. Arch Neurol. 2010 Feb;67(2):171-7. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.113.

Alzheimer disease-like phenotype associated with the c.154delA mutation in 
progranulin.

Kelley BJ(1), Haidar W, Boeve BF, Baker M, Shiung M, Knopman DS, Rademakers R, 
Hutton M, Adamson J, Kuntz KM, Dickson DW, Parisi JE, Smith GE, Petersen RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize a kindred with a familial neurodegenerative disorder 
associated with a mutation in progranulin (PGRN), with emphasis on the unique 
clinical features in this kindred.
DESIGN: Antemortem and postmortem characterization of a kindred with a familial 
neurodegenerative disorder.
SETTING: Multispecialty group academic medical center.
PATIENTS: Affected members of a kindred with dementia with or without 
parkinsonism associated with a unique mutation in PGRN.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Genotype-phenotype correlation.
RESULTS: Of 10 affected individuals identified, 6 presented with early amnestic 
symptoms which resulted in initial diagnoses of Alzheimer disease or amnestic 
mild cognitive impairment. Some individuals presented with features 
characteristic of frontotemporal dementia. Mean age at onset was substantially 
younger in generation III (75.8 years; range, 69-80 years) than in generation II 
(60.7 years; range, 55-66 years). The pattern of cerebral atrophy varied widely 
in the affected individuals. Neuropathologic features in 6 individuals included 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-positive neuronal cytoplasmic 
and intranuclear inclusions (FTLD-U with NII). PGRN analysis revealed a single 
base pair deletion in exon 2 (c.154delA), which caused a frameshift 
(p.Thr52HisfsX2) and, therefore, creation of a premature termination codon and a 
likely null allele.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large kindred, most affected individuals had clinical 
presentations that resembled Alzheimer disease or amnestic mild cognitive 
impairment associated with a mutation in PGRN and underlying FTLD-U with NII 
neuropathologic abnormalities. This finding is in distinct contrast to 
previously reported kindreds, in which clinical presentations have typically 
been within the spectrum of FTLD. The basis for the large difference in age at 
onset between generations requires further study.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2010.113
PMCID: PMC2902004
PMID: 20142525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2267. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2010 Jun;67(11):1817-29. doi: 10.1007/s00018-010-0277-y. Epub 
2010 Feb 11.

Oxidative damage to RNA: mechanisms, consequences, and diseases.

Kong Q(1), Lin CL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Ohio State University, 4198 Graves Hall, 333 
W. 10th Avenue, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

Overproduction of free radicals can damage cellular components resulting in 
progressive physiological dysfunction, which has been implicated in many human 
diseases. Oxidative damage to RNA received little attention until the past 
decade. Recent studies indicate that RNA, such as messenger RNA and ribosomal 
RNA, is very vulnerable to oxidative damage. RNA oxidation is not a consequence 
of dying cells but an early event involved in pathogenesis. Oxidative 
modification to RNA results in disturbance of the translational process and 
impairment of protein synthesis, which can cause cell deterioration or even cell 
death. In this review, we discuss the mechanisms of oxidative damage to RNA and 
the possible biological consequences of damaged RNA. Furthermore, we review 
recent evidence suggesting that oxidative damage to RNA may contribute to 
progression of many human diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-010-0277-y
PMCID: PMC3010397
PMID: 20148281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2268. J Hand Ther. 2010 Apr-Jun;23(2):158-71; quiz 172. doi: 
10.1016/j.jht.2009.11.003. Epub 2010 Feb 13.

Screening for medical disease--nervous system disorders.

Cameron MH(1), Klein EL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon 
97239, USA. cameromi@ohsu.edu

NARRATIVE REVIEW: In general, nervous system disorders present with changes in 
sensation, strength, and cognitive function that must be recognized early for 
the timely referral often needed for optimal outcome. This article summarizes 
screening for nervous system disorders in patients who present to the hand 
therapist and the typical findings associated with common neurologic disorders. 
Recommendations for referral by the hand therapist of patients with a screening 
examination consistent with a nervous system disorder are also presented. 
Central nervous system (CNS) disorders discussed in this article include stroke, 
traumatic brain and spinal cord injury, CNS tumors, Parkinson disease, dementia, 
epilepsy, and multiple sclerosis. This is followed by a discussion of the 
peripheral nervous system (PNS) disorders of acquired and hereditary 
polyneuropathies, Guillain-Barré syndrome and myasthenia gravis. Lastly, there 
is a brief discussion of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, a disorder affecting 
both the CNS and PNS.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: 5.

Copyright 2010 Hanley & Belfus. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jht.2009.11.003
PMID: 20153950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2269. Neurol Sci. 2010 Jun;31(3):403-6. doi: 10.1007/s10072-010-0218-4. Epub 2010 Feb 
13.

Myocardial MIBG scintigraphy: a useful clinical tool? : A retrospective study in 
50 parkinsonian patients.

Fröhlich I(1), Pilloy W, Vaillant M, Diederich NJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois (CHUV), 46 Rue de Bougnon, 1011, 
Lausanne, Switzerland. ines.frohlich@chuv.ch

Erratum in
    Neurol Sci. 2010 Jun;31(3):409.

Meta-iodbenzylguanidine scintigraphy (MIBG scintigraphy) shows reduced uptake in 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD), idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder 
(IRBD) and Lewy body dementia (LBD), but not in other parkinsonian or dementia 
syndromes. We retrospectively reevaluated 50 patients. Concordance rate between 
last clinical diagnosis and scintigraphy diagnosis was only given in two-thirds 
of the patients. Confounding factors were: decreasing heart/mediastinum ratio 
(HMR) with progressive age, higher HMR in women and possibly interference with 
antihypertensive medication. Standardization of the methods and precise clinical 
guidelines are warranted for better clinical use.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-010-0218-4
PMID: 20155379 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2270. Neurology. 2010 Feb 16;74(7):536-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181d26982.

Pure autonomic failure: a restricted Lewy body synucleinopathy or early 
Parkinson disease?

Kaufmann H, Goldstein DS.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2010 Feb 16;74(7):608-10.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181d26982
PMID: 20157156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2271. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;19(3):873-84. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1292.

Clinical-genetic correlations in familial Alzheimer's disease caused by 
presenilin 1 mutations.

Gómez-Tortosa E(1), Barquero S, Barón M, Gil-Neciga E, Castellanos F, Zurdo M, 
Manzano S, Muñoz DG, Jiménez-Huete A, Rábano A, Sainz MJ, Guerrero R, Gobernado 
I, Pérez-Pérez J, Jiménez-Escrig A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. 
egomezt@fjd.es

We describe the clinical phenotype of nine kindred with presenile Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) caused by different presenilin 1 (PS1) point mutations, and compare 
them with reported families with mutations in the same codons. Mutations were in 
exon 4 (Phe105Val), exon 5 (Pro117Arg, Glu120Gly), exon 6 (His163Arg), exon 7 
(Leu226Phe), exon 8 (Val261Leu, Val272Ala, Leu282Arg), and exon 12 (Ile439Ser). 
Three of these amino acid changes (Phe105Val, Glu120Gly, and Ile439Ser) had not 
been previously reported. Distinct clinical features, including age of onset, 
symptoms and signs associated with the cortical-type dementia and aggressiveness 
of the disease, characterized the different mutations and were quite homogeneous 
across family members. Age of onset fell within a consistent range: some 
mutations caused the disease in the thirties (P117R, L226F, V272A), other in the 
forties (E120G, H163R, V261L, L282R), and other in the fifties (F105V, I439S). 
Associated features also segregated with specific mutations: early epileptic 
activity (E120G), spastic paraparesis (V261L), subcortical dementia and 
parkinsonism (V272A), early language impairment, frontal signs, and myoclonus 
(L226F), and late myoclonus and seizures (H163R, L282R). Neurological 
deterioration was particularly aggressive in PS1 mutations with earlier age of 
onset such as P117R, L226F, and E120G. With few exceptions, a similar clinical 
phenotype was found in families reported to have either the same mutation or 
different amino acid changes in the same codons. This series points to a strong 
influence of the specific genetic defect in the development of the clinical 
phenotype.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1292
PMID: 20157243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2272. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;19(3):937-42. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1289.

The CST3 BB genotype and low cystatin C cerebrospinal fluid levels are 
associated with dementia in Lewy body disease.

Maetzler W(1), Schmid B, Synofzik M, Schulte C, Riester K, Huber H, Brockmann K, 
Gasser T, Berg D, Melms A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, University of Tuebingen, Germany. 
walter.maetzler@uni-tuebingen.de

A large proportion of demented Lewy body disease patients have Alzheimer's 
disease (AD)- like pathology, in particular amyloid-beta (Abeta) plaques. 
Cystatin C (CysC) is a carrier of soluble Abeta (42) in the cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) and reduces Abeta plaque formation. The CST3 BB genotype leads to a 
reduced secretion of the protein in vitro and increases the risk for AD, 
suggesting that variability in the CST3 gene and CysC protein concentration may 
be associated with dementia in Lewy body disease. We therefore determined the 
CST3 genotype in 51 demented and 71 nondemented Lewy body disease patients, and 
in 52 controls, as well as CSF CysC and Abeta (42) levels from 132 of these 
subjects. The CST3 BB genotype was associated with lowered CSF CysC levels and 
with dementia. Demented Lewy body disease patients had decreased CSF CysC 
levels. The correlation between CSF CysC and Abeta (42) levels was high in 
non-demented subjects, but poor in demented patients. We conclude that, in Lewy 
body disease, the CST3 BB genotype and low CSF CysC levels are associated with 
dementia, possibly through a disturbed elimination of soluble Abeta(42).

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1289
PMID: 20157249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2273. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2010 Winter;22(1):8-18. doi: 
10.1176/jnp.2010.22.1.8.

Psychopharmacological neuroprotection in neurodegenerative disease: assessing 
the preclinical data.

Lauterbach EC(1), Victoroff J, Coburn KL, Shillcutt SD, Doonan SM, Mendez MF.

Author information:
(1)Mercer University Center for Translational Studies in Alzheimer's, 
Parkinson's, and Neurodegenerative Diseases, Macon, GA 31201, USA. 
eclbgnp@earthlink.net

This manuscript reviews the preclinical in vitro, ex vivo, and nonhuman in vivo 
effects of psychopharmacological agents in clinical use on cell physiology with 
a view toward identifying agents with neuroprotective properties in 
neurodegenerative disease. These agents are routinely used in the symptomatic 
treatment of neurodegenerative disease. Each agent is reviewed in terms of its 
effects on pathogenic proteins, proteasomal function, mitochondrial viability, 
mitochondrial function and metabolism, mitochondrial permeability transition 
pore development, cellular viability, and apoptosis. Effects on the metabolism 
of the neurodegenerative disease pathogenic proteins alpha-synuclein, 
beta-amyloid, and tau, including tau phosphorylation, are particularly 
addressed, with application to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. Limitations 
of the current data are detailed and predictive criteria for translational 
clinical neuroprotection are proposed and discussed. Drugs that warrant further 
study for neuroprotection in neurodegenerative disease include pramipexole, 
thioridazine, risperidone, olanzapine, quetiapine, lithium, valproate, 
desipramine, maprotiline, fluoxetine, buspirone, clonazepam, diphenhydramine, 
and melatonin. Those with multiple neuroprotective mechanisms include 
pramipexole, thioridazine, olanzapine, quetiapine, lithium, valproate, 
desipramine, maprotiline, clonazepam, and melatonin. Those best viewed 
circumspectly in neurodegenerative disease until clinical disease course 
outcomes data become available, include several antipsychotics, lithium, 
oxcarbazepine, valproate, several tricyclic antidepressants, certain SSRIs, 
diazepam, and possibly diphenhydramine. A search for clinical studies of 
neuroprotection revealed only a single study demonstrating putatively positive 
results for ropinirole. An agenda for research on potentially neuroprotective 
agent is provided.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.2010.22.1.8
PMID: 20160205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2274. J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;20(1):301-11. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1362.

Effects of rivastigmine in Alzheimer's disease patients with and without 
hallucinations.

Cummings J(1), Emre M, Aarsland D, Tekin S, Dronamraju N, Lane R.

Author information:
(1)Mary S. Easton Center for Alzheimer's Disease Research at UCLA, Los Angeles, 
CA 90095-7226, USA. jcummings@mednet.ucla.edu

Hallucinations in Alzheimer's disease (AD) may indicate greater cortical 
cholinergic deficits. Rivastigmine has shown larger treatment benefits versus 
placebo in dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease dementia patients 
with hallucinations. In this retrospective, hypothesis-generating analysis, we 
investigated whether hallucinations in AD were associated with greater treatment 
benefits with rivastigmine. Data were pooled from two randomized, double-blind, 
6-month, mild-to-moderate AD trials comparing rivastigmine with placebo. 
Co-primary efficacy parameters were the Alzheimer Disease Assessment 
Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog) and Clinician's Interview-Based Impression 
of Change plus Caregiver Input (CIBIC-plus). Efficacy data were analyzed for two 
sub-populations: those with and those without hallucinations at baseline. Of 927 
patients, 194 (21%) reported hallucinations at baseline. Hallucinators tended to 
have greater decline on placebo on all outcome measures. On the ADAS-cog, mean 
rivastigmine - placebo differences of 3.7 points in hallucinators and 2.2 points 
in non-hallucinators were reported at 6 months (both p < 0.001). In 
hallucinators, a significant rivastigmine - placebo difference of -1.0 points (a 
beneficial effect) was seen on the CIBIC-plus at 6 months (p< 0.001). 
Non-hallucinators showed a smaller significant treatment difference of -0.3 
points (p< 0.05). Interaction testing suggested that differences in treatment 
effects were significant between hallucinators and non-hallucinators. 
Hallucinations predicted greater treatment responses to oral rivastigmine.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2010-1362
PMID: 20164585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2275. Neurodegener Dis. 2010;7(1-3):80-3. doi: 10.1159/000285511. Epub 2010 Feb 18.

Impaired neurotransmitter release in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Shen J(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Program in 
Neuroscience, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
jshen@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

Mutations in several causative genes have been linked to monogenic forms of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) or Parkinson's disease (PD). To look for possible 
common pathogenic mechanisms underlying age-related neurodegeneration in AD and 
PD, we employed genetic approaches to investigate systematically the roles of 
these gene products (e.g. presenilins (PS) for AD; Parkin, DJ-1, PINK1 and LRRK2 
for PD) in the mouse brain, especially in neural circuits that are particularly 
vulnerable in AD or PD. Our series of genetic studies revealed that PS play cell 
type-specific roles in the developing brain with the most prominent function in 
the maintenance of neural progenitor cells. In the adult cerebral cortex, where 
the pathogenesis of AD occurs, loss of PS results in progressive memory 
impairment and age-related neurodegeneration. Specifically, PS are involved in 
the regulation of long-term potentiation and NMDA receptor functions. 
Interestingly, our further genetic dissection in the hippocampal Schaeffer 
collateral pathway highlighted the importance of presynaptic PS in the 
activity-dependent regulation of glutamate release and long-term potentiation 
induction via modulation of calcium release from intracellular stores. 
Intriguingly, our independent genetic analysis of Parkin, DJ-1, PINK1 and LRRK2 
showed a common defect in activity-dependent dopamine release caused by 
PD-linked mutations in these genes. Together, our genetic studies suggest that 
presynaptic dysfunction might be a converging early pathogenic event before 
neurodegeneration in AD and PD.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000285511
PMCID: PMC2859234
PMID: 20173332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2276. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2010 Aug;32(7):775-9. doi: 10.1080/13803390903521018. 
Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Self-report of cognitive impairment and mini-mental state examination 
performance in PRKN, LRRK2, and GBA carriers with early onset Parkinson's 
disease.

Alcalay RN(1), Mejia-Santana H, Tang MX, Rakitin B, Rosado L, Ross B, Verbitsky 
M, Kisselev S, Louis ED, Comella CL, Colcher A, Jennings D, Nance MA, Bressman 
S, Scott WK, Tanner C, Mickel SF, Andrews HF, Waters CH, Fahn S, Cote LJ, Frucht 
SJ, Ford B, Rezak M, Novak K, Friedman JH, Pfeiffer R, Marsh L, Hiner B, 
Siderowf A, Ottman R, Clark LN, Marder KS, Caccappolo E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.

While little is known about risk factors for cognitive impairment in early onset 
Parkinson disease (EOPD), postmortem studies have shown an association between 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and glucocerebrosidase (GBA) mutation. We 
compared Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) performance and self-reported 
cognitive impairment in 699 EOPD participants genotyped for mutations in parkin 
(PRKN), leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2), and GBA. Logistic regression was 
used to assess the association between reported cognitive impairment and MMSE 
score, as well as between GBA group membership and self-reported impairment and 
MMSE. GBA carriers reported more impairment, but MMSE performance did not differ 
among genetic groups. Detailed neuropsychological testing is required to explore 
the association between cognitive impairment and GBA mutations.

DOI: 10.1080/13803390903521018
PMCID: PMC2911493
PMID: 20182943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest.


2277. Mov Disord. 2010;25 Suppl 1:S110-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.22787.

Cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Marder K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA. 
ksm1@columbia.edu

Over the last decade, the importance of cognitive impairment and dementia in 
Parkinson's disease (PDD) has been increasingly recognized. Investigators have 
proposed criteria for PD dementia, and mild cognitive impairment. Risk profiles 
associated with the development of dementia based on demographic, neurological, 
neuropsychological, imaging, and genetic investigations have been delineated. 
The FDA has approved a treatment for PDD, and efforts now are directed toward 
intervention at earlier stages of cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22787
PMID: 20187235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2278. Mov Disord. 2010;25 Suppl 1:S15-20. doi: 10.1002/mds.22723.

Clinical implications of gene discovery in Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism.

Wider C(1), Foroud T, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Over the past decade, major progress has been achieved in the identification of 
genes associated with Parkinson's disease (PD) and parkinsonism. Five genes have 
now been shown conclusively to play a role in PD susceptibility. Mutations in 
three of these genes, PRKN, PINK1, and DJ1, are important in early onset, 
recessively inherited PD, while mutations in LRRK2 and SNCA result in 
autosomal-dominant PD. LRRK2 has emerged as the most prevalent genetic cause of 
PD and has been implicated in both familial and sporadic forms of disease. In 
addition, autosomal-dominant dementia and Parkinsonism has been shown to be 
caused by mutations in the MAPT and PGRN genes. Molecular tests are now 
commercially available for several of these genes; however, in some of them, 
positive results need to be interpreted with caution until penetrance is better 
understood. In addition, clinical treatment of PD remains largely unaltered by 
the results of genetic testing.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22723
PMID: 20187245 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2279. J Nutr Health Aging. 2010 Mar;14(3):212-7. doi: 10.1007/s12603-010-0052-7.

Sleep disorders in aging and dementia.

Bombois S(1), Derambure P, Pasquier F, Monaca C.

Author information:
(1)Center for Memory Resources and Research, EA2691, Lille University Hospital, 
University of Lille Nord de France, Lille cedex, France. 
stephanie.bombois@chru-lille.fr

This paper reviews the characteristics of sleep disorders found in people at a 
greater risk of dementia: the elderly adult, patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and those with neurodegenerative diseases. The frequency of 
sleep architecture modifications and circadian rhythm sleep disturbances 
increases with age. Although around 40% of older adults complain of poor sleep, 
true sleep disorders are far less prevalent in healthy older adults and are 
frequently associated with comorbidities. The sleep disorders observed in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients are often similar to (but more intense than) 
those found in non-demented elderly people. Poor sleep results in an increased 
risk of significant morbidities and even mortality in demented patients and 
constitutes a major source of stress for caregivers. The prevalence of primary 
sleep disorders such as rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorders 
(RBDs), restless legs syndrome (RLS), periodic limb movements (PLMs) and 
sleep-disordered breathing increases with age. There are no published data on 
RLS and PLMs in demented persons but RBDs and sleep apnea syndrome have been 
studied more extensively. In fact, RBDs are suggestive of Lewy body dementia 
(LBD) and are predictive for neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease. 
Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) shares common risk factors with AD and may even be 
an integral part of the pathological process in AD. In MCI patients, the 
hypotheses in which (i) sleep disorders may represent early predictive factors 
for progression to dementia and (ii) MCI is symptomatic of a non-diagnosed sleep 
disorder remain to be elucidated. Guidelines for drug and non-drug treatments of 
sleep disorders in the elderly and in demented patients are also considered in 
this review. In healthy but frail elderly people and in early-stage AD patients, 
sleep should be more thoroughly characterized (notably by using standardized 
interviews and polysomnographic recording).

DOI: 10.1007/s12603-010-0052-7
PMID: 20191256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2280. Eur J Neurol. 2010 Aug;17(8):1068-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.02973.x. 
Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Autonomic symptoms in patients and pre-manifest mutation carriers of 
Huntington's disease.

Aziz NA(1), Anguelova GV, Marinus J, van Dijk JG, Roos RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. N.A.Aziz@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Although autonomic function tests have revealed 
abnormalities of the autonomic nervous system in Huntington's disease (HD), 
autonomic symptoms and their association with other symptoms and signs of HD 
have not yet been assessed in large groups of patients or pre-manifest mutation 
carriers. Therefore, we aimed at delineating the characteristics and correlates 
of autonomic symptoms in HD.
METHODS: Using the scales for outcomes in Parkinson's disease-autonomic symptoms 
(SCOPA-AUT) and Beck Depression Inventory questionnaires, autonomic symptoms and 
depressed mood were assessed in 63 patients with HD, 21 pre-manifest mutation 
carriers, and 85 controls. The Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale was 
used to assess other HD symptoms and signs.
RESULTS: Relative to controls, patients with HD experienced significantly more 
gastrointestinal, urinary, cardiovascular and, in men, sexual problems. The most 
prevalent symptoms were swallowing difficulties, erection and ejaculation 
problems, dysphagia, sialorrhea, early abdominal fullness, straining for 
defecation, fecal and urinary incontinence, urgency, incomplete bladder 
emptying, and light-headedness whilst standing. Pre-manifest mutation carriers 
experienced significantly more swallowing difficulties and light-headedness on 
standing up compared with controls. In patients with HD, autonomic symptoms were 
associated with a greater degree of functional disability, more severe 
depression, and antidepressant drugs use. However, depression was the only 
independent predictor of autonomic dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Autonomic symptoms are highly prevalent in patients with HD and may 
even precede the onset of motor signs. Moreover, autonomic dysfunction is 
related to functional disability and depression in HD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.02973.x
PMID: 20192977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2281. Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2009 Dec;7 Spec No 1:21-7. doi: 
10.1684/pnv.2009.0193.

[Brain functional imaging in Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in French]

Ravasi L(1), Semah F.

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine nucléaire et d'imagerie fonctionnelle, EA 1049, Hôpital 
Roger Salengro, CHU, Université de Lille Nord de France. 
laura.ravasi@chru-lille.fr

Alzheimer's disease is nowadays the leading cause of dementia. It affects more 
than a third of people over 85 years old. The gold standard diagnostic proof is 
currently based upon pathology examination. It seems rather crucial to find 
methodologies that make an early and accurate in vivo diagnosis so as to offer 
the patient the most suitable treatment. We hereby go over several available 
neuro-imaging techniques used in nuclear medicine that increase the diagnostic 
accuracy of Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1684/pnv.2009.0193
PMID: 20061230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2282. Acta Neuropathol. 2010 Apr;119(4):421-33. doi: 10.1007/s00401-010-0654-5. Epub 
2010 Mar 4.

Prevalence of dementia disorders in the oldest-old: an autopsy study.

Jellinger KA(1), Attems J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Kenyongasse 18, 1070, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

The prevalence of Alzheimer disease (AD) and vascular dementia (VD) increases 
with advancing age, but less so after age 90 years. A retrospective 
hospital-based study of the relative prevalence of different disorders was 
performed in 1,110 consecutive autopsy cases of demented elderly in Vienna, 
Austria (66% females, MMSE <20; mean age 83.3 +/- 5.4 SD years). It assessed 
clinical, general autopsy data and neuropathology including 
immunohistochemistry. Neuropathologic diagnosis followed current consensus 
criteria. Four age groups (7-10th decade) were evaluated. In the total cohort AD 
pathology was seen in 82.9% ("pure" AD 42.9%; AD + other pathologies 39.9%), VD 
in 10.8% (mixed dementia, MIX, i.e. AD + vascular encephalopathy in 5.5%); other 
disorders in 5.7%, and negative pathology in 0.8%. The relative prevalence of AD 
increased from age 60 to 89 years and decreased slightly after age 90+, while 
"pure" VD diagnosed in the presence of vascular encephalopathy of different 
types with low neuritic AD pathology (Braak stages <3; mean 1.2-1.6) decreased 
progressively from age 60 to 90+; 85-95% of these patients had histories of 
diabetes, morphologic signs of hypertension, 65% myocardial infarction/cardiac 
decompensation, and 75% a history of stroke(s). Morphologic subtypes, 
subcortical arteriosclerotic (the most frequent), multi-infarct encephalopathy, 
and strategic infarct dementia showed no age-related differences. The relative 
prevalence of AD + Lewy pathology remained fairly constant with increasing age. 
Mixed dementia and AD with minor cerebrovascular lesions increased significantly 
with age, while other dementias decreased. This retrospective study using strict 
morphologic criteria confirmed increased prevalence of AD with age, but mild 
decline at age 90+, and progressive decline of VD, while AD + vascular 
pathologies including MIX showed considerable age-related increase, confirming 
that mixed pathologies account for most dementia cases in very old persons. A 
prospective clinicopathologic study in oldest-old subjects showed a significant 
increase in both AD and cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), but decrease in VD 
over age 85, while in a small group of old subjects CAA without considerable AD 
pathology may be an independent risk factor for cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-010-0654-5
PMID: 20204386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2283. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2010 Feb;7(1):74-83. doi: 10.2174/156720510790274437.

Protein conformational pathology in Alzheimer's and other neurodegenerative 
diseases; new targets for therapy.

Zerovnik E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular and Structural Biology, Jo ef Stefan 
Institute, Jamova 39, 1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. eva.zerovnik@ijs.si

The whole set of so-called >>conformational<< disorders, among them systemic 
amyloidoses, various dementias and other neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Parkinson's, Alzheimer's and amyotropic lateral sclerosis, may have similar 
molecular backgrounds: changes in protein conformation and aggregation lead to 
toxic amyloid oligomers and fibrils. The so called aggresomes in eukaryotes 
(equivalent to inclusion bodies in prokaryotes), located at the centriole by the 
nucleus and composed of aggregated proteins, are believed to sequester the toxic 
material. They eventually get cleared from the cell by autophagy. When the cell 
defence system fails due to continuous production of a mutated protein or to 
other damage to the cell such as oxidative stress or protein modification as 
part of normal aging, familial or sporadic neurodegenerative diseases develop. 
Initially - for years - they are silent with no or mild symptoms. It could well 
be that aggregates represent a response to some other trigger or even a means of 
defence. However, the inherited cases with mutations leading to increased 
aggregation suggest the opposite to be the case. Evidence has accumulated that 
the soluble oligomers of amyloidogenic proteins are themselves cytotoxic and 
trigger a cascade of detrimental events in the cell, as summarized in the 
"amyloid cascade hypothesis". Among other plausible hypotheses for the mechanism 
of toxicity is the "channel hypothesis", which states that the soluble oligomers 
interact with cell membranes, causing influx of Ca2+ ions, which is an early 
sign of pathology and contributes to uncontrolled neurotransmission. Another 
factor are metal ions, such as Zn(2+), Cu(2+), Fe(3+), Al(3+), etc., leading to 
the "metal hypothesis". The delicate balance of metal ions in the brain is 
important to prevent oxidative stress, which can itself modify proteins and make 
them aggregation-prone. The advances in molecular and cellular studies will 
hopefully lead to novel therapies and eventually to a cure.

DOI: 10.2174/156720510790274437
PMID: 20205673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2284. Neurobiol Dis. 2010 Jun;38(3):386-94. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2010.02.008. Epub 2010 
Mar 2.

Genes regulated in MPTP-treated macaques and human Parkinson's disease suggest a 
common signature in prefrontal cortex.

Storvik M(1), Arguel MJ, Schmieder S, Delerue-Audegond A, Li Q, Qin C, Vital A, 
Bioulac B, Gross CE, Wong G, Nahon JL, Bezard E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Department of Neurobiology, Department of 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kuopio, Kuopio, Finland.

The presymptomatic phase of Parkinson's disease (PD) is now recognized as a 
prodromal phase, with compensatory mechanism masking its progression and 
non-motor early manifestations, such as depression, cognitive disturbances and 
apathy. Those mechanisms were thought to be strictly dopamine-mediated until 
recent advances have shed light upon involvement of putative outside-basal 
ganglia, i.e. cortical, structures. We took advantage of our progressive 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-treated macaque model to 
monitor whole genome transcriptional changes in several brain areas. Our data 
reveals that transcriptomic activity changes take place from early stages, 
suggesting very early compensatory mechanisms or pathological activity outside 
the basal ganglia, including the PFC. Specific transcriptomic changes occurring 
in the PFC of fully parkinsonian MPTP-treated macaques have been identified. 
Interestingly, a large part of these transcriptomic changes were also observed 
in human post-mortem samples of patients with neurodegenerative diseases 
analysed by quantitative PCR. These results suggest that the PFC is able to 
detect the progression of dopamine denervation even at very early time points. 
There are therefore mechanisms, within the PFC, leading to compensatory 
alterations and/or participating to pathophysiology of prodromal PD 
manifestations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2010.02.008
PMID: 20206263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2285. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2010 Jun-Jul;166(6-7):653-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2010.01.005. Epub 2010 Mar 10.

[Parkinson's disease dementia: correlations between clinical, neuropsychological 
and neuropathological features].

[Article in French]

Kiesmann M(1), Vogel T, Kaltenbach G, Mohr M.

Author information:
(1)Pôle de gériatrie, HUS, rue Himmerich, Strasbourg, France. 
Michele.kiesmann@chru-strasbourg.fr

INTRODUCTION: Cognitive disorders such as deficit of attention and executive and 
visuoconstructive dysfunctions occur in Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). 
Memory impairment is not an early feature and statement not well delimited.
CASE REPORT: A 78-year-old man with PDD underwent neuropsychological assessment 
and moreover demonstrated memory decline. After death, pathology examination of 
the brain and immunohistochemy analysis confirmed PD and showed Lewy body 
pathology (LBP) in the insula, limbic and especially in CA3 hippocampus areas. 
Hippocampus and gyrus parahippocampic also exhibited neurofibrillary tangles. 
Lack of senile plaque and lack of beta A4 amyloid deposition were noticeable in 
the whole brain examination.
CONCLUSION: Severe executive dysfunctions are probably related to LBP and 
dysfunction in memory process may be related to DNF lesions in medial temporal 
area.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2010.01.005
PMID: 20219224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2286. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2010 Mar;78 Suppl 1:S34-6. doi: 
10.1055/s-0029-1245166. Epub 2010 Mar 1.

[On the role of MAO B inhibitors and NMDA antagonists in the therapy of 
Parkinson's disease].

[Article in German]

Kassubek J(1), Büttner T, Reichmann H, Riederer P, Schulz JB, Wüllner U, Csoti 
I.

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Klinik, Universität Ulm, Ulm. jan.kassubek@uni-ulm.de

In this workshop report, the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonists 
and the monoamine oxidase (MAO) type B inhibitors are discussed with respect to 
their role in the pharmacotherapy of Parkinson's Disease (PD). For the NMDA 
antagonist amantadine, studies demonstrated beneficial effects in various 
symptoms of the PD complex, while memantine seems to be beneficial in the 
treatment of cognitive deficits in PD-associated dementia. The MAO B inhibitors 
selegiline and rasagiline are in use for PD pharmacotherapy; for rasagiline, 
studies have demonstrated a possible disease-modifying effect. Although not 
supported by specific controlled studies, a "triple" early therapy is discussed 
which consists of a dopamine agonist, a MAO B inhibitor and amantadine, in order 
to try to delay the start of levodopa therapy.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1245166
PMID: 20195940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2287. J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2010 Mar-Apr;17(2):161-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.jmig.2009.12.016.

Bilateral oophorectomy versus ovarian conservation: effects on long-term women's 
health.

Parker WH(1).

Author information:
(1)John Wayne Cancer Institute at Saint John's Health Center, Santa Monica, 
California 90401, USA. wparker@prrgyn.com

Comment in
    J Minim Invasive Gynecol. 2010 Mar-Apr;17(2):141-2.

Bilateral oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy for benign disease is 
commonly practiced to prevent the subsequent development of ovarian cancer. 
Currently, bilateral oophorectomy is performed in 55% of all U.S. women having a 
hysterectomy, with approximately 300,000 prophylactic oophorectomies performed 
every year. Observational studies show that estrogen deficiency, resulting from 
premenopausal or postmenopausal oophorectomy, is associated with higher risks of 
coronary artery disease, stroke, hip fracture, Parkinsonism, dementia, cognitive 
impairment, depression, and anxiety. These studies suggest that bilateral 
oophorectomy may do more harm than good. In women not at high risk for 
development of ovarian or breast cancer, removing the ovaries at the time of 
hysterectomy should be approached with caution.

Copyright 2010. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmig.2009.12.016
PMID: 20226402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2288. Rev Neurol. 2010 Feb 8;50 Suppl 2:S33-9.

[Cognitive and neuropsychiatric disorders in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Rodríguez-Constenla I(1), Cabo-López I, Bellas-Lamas P, Cebrián E.

Author information:
(1)Centro Hospitalario POVISA, Pontevedra, España.

INTRODUCTION: In Parkinson's disease there are patients with isolated and 
multiple cognitive impairment, and their cognitive performance ranges from 
normal to an advanced degree of dementia. Most patients present an executive 
deficit, either in isolation or combined with other cognitive disorders, which 
is considered to be the most characteristic aspect of the disease, and 30-40% of 
those affected will end up with a clinically-defined dementia.
DEVELOPMENT: The presence of a mild cognitive disorder in patients with 
Parkinson means that the risk of dementia appearing at some time during the 
development of the disease is high. The dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease is specifically related with neuropsychiatric signs and symptoms, which 
may have three possible explanations: disorders affecting the mesolimbic 
pathways, diffuse limbic and cortical compromise, or associated Alzheimer-type 
phenomenology. Psychotic episodes tend to present more often in patients with 
dopaminergic treatment and the clinical spectrum of Parkinson-related psychosis 
covers visual illusions, visual-audio-olfactory hallucinations, delirium and 
severe paranoid hallucinatory psychosis. All the antiparkinsonian drugs can give 
rise to hallucinations and psychosis, but the dopamine agonists are the ones 
with the greatest capacity to do so.
CONCLUSIONS: In managing these problems, it is crucial for prevention as well as 
diagnosis and treatment to be carried out as soon as they are detected. Doses of 
antiparkinsonian drugs must be reduced, although this is not usually enough, and 
so it will be necessary to associate atypical antipsychotics, which act mainly 
on 5-HT receptors and, in most cases, do not produce D2 blockage.

PMID: 20205140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2289. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2010 Mar;50(3):156-62. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.156.

[Autopsy case of SCA2 with Parkinsonian phenotype].

[Article in Japanese]

Yomono HS(1), Kurisaki H, Hebisawa A, Sakiyama Y, Saito Y, Murayama S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Tokyo Hospital.

This is the first autopsy case of SCA2 with parkinsonian phenotype. At the age 
of 46, the patient got symptoms of parkinsonism to which anti-parkinsonian drugs 
were effective. He had mosaic 38, 40 CAG repeat expansions on chromosome 
12q23-24, being diagnosed as SCA2, and his mother and his son also had CAG 
expansions on the same locus. In addition to parkinsonism, he also exhibited 
autonomic disturbance, dementia, and mild cerebellar ataxia Brain images 
revealed severe atrophy of pons and medulla oblongata, resembling MSA-C. HVA and 
5-HIAA were reduced in the cerebrospinal fluid, and the heart-mediastinum (H/M) 
ratio in myocardial 123I-MIBG cintigram was decreased, which suggested Lewy body 
pathology. He died at the age of 75 and the autopsy revealed atrophy of the 
olivo-ponto-cerebellar (OPC) system and substantia nigra which was compatible to 
SCA2, although the OPC system atrophy was less severe than formerly reported 
SCA2 cases. The degrees of atrophy of the OPC system and substantia nigra might 
explain the predominancy of clinical symptoms. Anti-1C2 positive inclusions in 
the pontine nuclei, inferior olive nuclei, cerebellum and substantia nigra 
confirmed a polyglutamine disease. In addition, there were the 
anti-phosphorylated alpha-synuclein positive, Lewy body related pathological 
changes in the substantia nigra, the locus ceruleus, the dorsal motor nuclei of 
vagus, and the sympathetic nerve in the myocardium. Major genetic abnormalities 
related to Parkinson disease were not detected. As another case of SCA2 with 
Lewy body pathology was reported in Japan, the coexistence of SCA2 and Lewy body 
pathology may not be accidental. Since myocardial MIBG scincigram can predict 
Lewy body pathology, we should seek more clinical cases of SCA2 with Lewy body 
pathology.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.156
PMID: 20235484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2290. Eur J Neurol. 2010 Jun 1;17(6):871-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.02974.x. 
Epub 2010 Mar 17.

Familial associations of Alzheimer disease and essential tremor with Parkinson 
disease.

Costello S(1), Bordelon Y, Bronstein J, Ritz B.

Author information:
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, Schools of Public Health and Medicine, 
Los Angeles, CA, USA. sadie@berkeley.edu

Comment in
    Eur J Neurol. 2010 Jun 1;17(6):765-6.

BACKGROUND: We constructed a cohort of first-degree relatives of participants in 
a population-based case-control study of Parkinson disease (PD) and compared the 
occurrence of Alzheimer disease (AD) and essential tremor (ET) in relatives of 
PD cases and controls.
METHODS: We relied on proband interviews to assess family history in 372 
probands with incident PD confirmed by a movement disorder specialist and 404 
controls from three rural California counties.
RESULTS: Overall, for the 2980 first-degree relatives of PD cases, the risk of 
AD was not increased compared with the 2981 relatives of controls. But relatives 
of younger onset PD cases (<or=60 years of age) were three times more likely to 
have received an AD diagnosis [hazard ratios (HR): 2.86; 95%CI: 1.44, 5.71]. Our 
data also suggest that some relatives of PD probands might be at a slightly 
increased risk of receiving an ET diagnosis, especially relatives of tremor 
dominant cases (HR: 1.69; 95%CI 0.99, 2.88), younger onset cases (HR: 2.03; 
95%CI 0.93, 4.44), and male relatives (HR: 2.31; 95%CI 1.13, 4.73). In addition, 
fathers of cases were almost 15 years younger than fathers of controls when 
diagnosed with ET. Results were stable in sensitivity analyses.
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests a familial susceptibility to AD amongst 
first-degree relatives of younger onset PD cases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2010.02974.x
PMCID: PMC2895681
PMID: 20236304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2291. Alzheimers Dement. 2010 Mar;6(2):104-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2009.12.005.

Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker results in relation to neuropathological dementia 
diagnoses.

Brunnström H(1), Rawshani N, Zetterberg H, Blennow K, Minthon L, Passant U, 
Englund E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Institution of Clinical Sciences, Lund University, 
Sweden. hans.brunnstrom@med.lu.se

BACKGROUND: Clinical dementia diagnoses are not always consistent with 
neuropathological findings. As correct diagnosis is important for treatment and 
care, new diagnostic possibilities for dementia are in demand. Cerebrospinal 
fluid biomarkers should ideally be able to identify ongoing processes in the 
brain, but need to be further compared with neuropathological findings for 
evaluation of their diagnostic validity.
METHODS: This study included 43 patients with a clinical dementia disorder. All 
patients were neuropathologically examined at the University Hospital in Lund, 
Sweden, during the years 2001-2008, and all had a lumbar puncture carried out as 
part of the clinical investigation during the time of cognitive impairment.
RESULTS: Of eight patients, five with Alzheimer's disease had elevated total tau 
protein (T-tau) and decreased amyloid beta 1-42 protein (Abeta42), while both 
values for the other three patients were normal. Slightly elevated T-tau and/or 
decreased Abeta42 were also seen in several patients with other dementia 
diagnoses such as Lewy body disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration and 
vascular dementia. Furthermore, T-tau levels did not differ markedly between 
patients with morphologically tau-positive and tau-negative frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration. Also, seven of nine patients with Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease 
exhibited pronounced elevation in T-tau concentration.
CONCLUSION: From this rather limited study, being the first of its kind in 
Sweden, we may conclude that there is no perfect concordance between 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarker levels and pathological findings, which should be 
taken into account in the clinical diagnostic setting.

2010 The Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2009.12.005
PMID: 20298970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2292. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jun;16(5):307-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.02.015. Epub 2010 Mar 24.

Biomarkers: Parkinson disease with dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Johansen KK(1), White LR, Sando SB, Aasly JO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Norwegian University of Science and Technology 
(NTNU), Trondheim, Norway.

Dementia is a common feature in Parkinson disease (PD), the time of onset 
determining how patients are classified. Those patients where dementia develops 
prior to parkinsonism or during the first year of disease are designated as 
having dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). In those where dementia develops over a 
year after the onset of motor signs, the condition is known as Parkinson's 
disease with dementia (PDD). While this seems at first sight to be a definitive 
way to distinguish these conditions, reality is rather different. The overlap 
between them is considerable, and there is much uncertainty associated with 
patients who have both motor symptoms and early cognitive impairment. The 
diagnosis is still based on medical history and clinical evaluation. It is not 
even certain that they can be accurately distinguished at autopsy. For this 
reason, the data concerning these entities have been reviewed, to examine 
various markers employed or measured in clinical, neuropathological, 
neuroimaging, and biochemical investigations. The concept of PDD and DLB being 
separate conditions is comparatively new, and the most promising tools with 
which to separate them at present are cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers and 
positron emission tomography (PET) scanning that indicate increased amyloid-beta 
burden in DLB compared to PDD. However as yet there are no markers that 
unequivocally distinguish between PDD and DLB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2010.02.015
PMID: 20338799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2293. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Feb;33(2):226-33. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.02.016. Epub 2010 Mar 31.

Increased tissue factor pathway inhibitor and homocysteine in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Piazza F(1), Galimberti G, Conti E, Isella V, Perlangeli MV, Speranza T, Borroni 
B, Pogliani EM, Padovani A, Ferrarese C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Biomedical Technologies, University of 
Milano-Bicocca, Monza (MI), Italy. fabrizio.piazza@unimib.it

We investigated the possible involvement of vascular damage in the pathogenesis 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD), by assessment of plasma levels of tissue factor 
pathway inhibitor (TFPI), a serine protease inhibitor induced by endothelial 
injury, and homocysteine (Hcy), a known risk factor for cerebrovascular 
disorders, folate levels were also measured. 110 probable AD, 38 mild cognitive 
impairment, 31 patients affected by idiopathic Parkinson's disease (without 
dementia) and 100 healthy controls, who displayed no vascular disorders were 
enrolled. TFPI and Hcy were significantly higher in AD patients with respect to 
other groups. The levels of TFPI and Hcy were positively correlated in 
hyperhomocysteinemic AD and mild cognitive impairment subjects, and were 
negatively correlated with folate levels. Our findings suggest that an 
impairment of endothelial function associated with high Hcy levels may occur in 
AD patients, despite the absence of manifest cerebrovascular lesions. Therefore, 
TFPI may represent a candidate marker of endothelial damage in AD and might be 
used for the identification and monitoring of patients that would benefit from 
folate supplementation treatment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2010.02.016
PMID: 20359777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2294. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2010 Mar 24;6:47-58. doi: 10.2147/ndt.s6411.

Antipsychotic treatments for the elderly: efficacy and safety of aripiprazole.

Kohen I(1), Lester PE, Lam S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Ambulatory Care Pavilion, Zucker-Hillside 
Hospital, Glen Oaks, NY, USA. ikohen@nshs.edu

Delusions, hallucinations and other psychotic symptoms can accompany a number of 
conditions in late life. As such, elderly patients are commonly prescribed 
antipsychotic medications for the treatment of psychosis in both acute and 
chronic conditions. Those conditions include schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, 
depression and dementia. Elderly patients are at an increased risk of adverse 
events from antipsychotic medications because of age-related pharmacodynamic and 
pharmacokinetic changes as well as polypharmacy. Drug selection should be 
individualized to the patient's previous history of antipsychotic use, current 
medical conditions, potential drug interactions, and potential side effects of 
the antipsychotic. Specifically, metabolic side effects should be closely 
monitored in this population. This paper provides a review of aripiprazole, a 
newer second generation antipsychotic agent, for its use in a variety of 
psychiatric disorders in the elderly including schizophrenia, bipolar disorder, 
dementia, Parkinson's disease and depression. We will review the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of aripiprazole as well as dosing, 
diagnostic indications, efficacy studies, and tolerability including its 
metabolic profile. We will also detail patient focused perspectives including 
quality of life, patient satisfaction and adherence.

DOI: 10.2147/ndt.s6411
PMCID: PMC2846120
PMID: 20361061


2295. CNS Drugs. 2010 May;24(5):375-98. doi: 10.2165/11533100-000000000-00000.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: epidemiology, pathophysiology, diagnosis and 
management.

Rabinovici GD(1), Miller BL.

Author information:
(1)Memory & Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, California, USA. grabinovici@memory.ucsf.edu

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) is a clinically and pathologically 
heterogeneous syndrome, characterized by progressive decline in behaviour or 
language associated with degeneration of the frontal and anterior temporal 
lobes. While the seminal cases were described at the turn of the 20th century, 
FTLD has only recently been appreciated as a leading cause of dementia, 
particularly in patients presenting before the age of 65 years. Three distinct 
clinical variants of FTLD have been described: (i) behavioural-variant 
frontotemporal dementia, characterized by changes in behaviour and personality 
in association with frontal-predominant cortical degeneration; (ii) semantic 
dementia, a syndrome of progressive loss of knowledge about words and objects 
associated with anterior temporal neuronal loss; and (iii) progressive nonfluent 
aphasia, characterized by effortful language output, loss of grammar and motor 
speech deficits in the setting of left perisylvian cortical atrophy. The 
majority of pathologies associated with FTLD clinical syndromes include either 
tau-positive (FTLD-TAU) or TAR DNA-binding protein 43 (TDP-43)-positive 
(FTLD-TDP) inclusion bodies. FTLD overlaps clinically and pathologically with 
the atypical parkinsonian disorders corticobasal degeneration and progressive 
supranuclear palsy, and with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The majority of 
familial FTLD cases are caused by mutations in the genes encoding 
microtubule-associated protein tau (leading to FTLD-TAU) or progranulin (leading 
to FTLD-TDP). The clinical and pathological heterogeneity of FTLD poses a 
significant diagnostic challenge, and in vivo prediction of underlying 
histopathology can be significantly improved by supplementing the clinical 
evaluation with genetic tests and emerging biological markers. Current 
pharmacotherapy for FTLD focuses on manipulating serotonergic or dopaminergic 
neurotransmitter systems to ameliorate behavioural or motor symptoms. However, 
recent advances in FTLD genetics and molecular pathology make the prospect of 
biologically driven, disease-specific therapies for FTLD seem closer than ever.

DOI: 10.2165/11533100-000000000-00000
PMCID: PMC2916644
PMID: 20369906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest that 
are directly relevant to the content of this review. Dr. Rabinovici has received 
personal compensation for serving on scientific advisory boards for General 
Electric Healthcare and Novartis Diagnostics. Dr Miller has received personal 
compensation for participating in the speaker’s bureau for Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals and Pfizer.


2296. Brain. 2010 Jun;133(Pt 6):1755-62. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq059. Epub 2010 Apr 5.

Relationships between age and late progression of Parkinson's disease: a 
clinico-pathological study.

Kempster PA(1), O'Sullivan SS, Holton JL, Revesz T, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, University College 
London, 1 Wakefield Street, London WC1N 1PJ, UK.

To investigate the relationships between age, the advanced clinical stages of 
Parkinson's disease and neuropathology, we surveyed 129 case records from donors 
with pathologically proven Parkinson's disease at the Queen Square Brain Bank 
for Neurological Disorders. Cases were separated into five groups according to 
age at death, thus comparing patients who reached the advanced stage of the 
disease at different ages. Four milestones of advanced disease (frequent falls, 
visual hallucinations, dementia and need for residential care) occurred at a 
similar time from death in each group. There were no significant differences in 
disease duration across these age groupings, nor were there differences in the 
severity and distribution of Lewy body and other pathologies. The milestones of 
dementia (P < 0.0005) and visual hallucinations (P = 0.02) as well as the 
accumulation of multiple milestones (P < 0.0005) were associated with high 
cortical Lewy body scores. Demented cases also had significantly more Alzheimer 
neurofibrillary and amyloid-beta plaque pathology. Correlation analysis showed 
that the time intervals between disease onset and recording of milestones were 
strongly influenced by age at onset (P < 0.0001) and by total disease duration 
(P < 0.0001). The advanced disease phase plays out in a similar fashion at 
whatever age it occurs, with a common pathological endpoint. The 
clinico-pathological comparisons for the final stage of Parkinson's disease do 
support a staging system based on the rostral extent and severity of Lewy body 
pathology, although other pathologies may play a synergistic role in causing 
cognitive disability. The chief effects of age on the rate of progression are 
seen over the early-middle part of the disease. An exponential curve for 
clinical progression provides the best explanation for these observations about 
age and the disease course.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq059
PMID: 20371510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2297. Ann Neurol. 2010 Mar;67(3):415-6. doi: 10.1002/ana.21892.

Predicted pathogenic missense mutation of PGRN found in a normal control.

Kim HJ, Seong MW, Yun JY, Park SS, Lee JY, Jeon BS.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2010 Jul;68(1):119.

Comment on
    Ann Neurol. 2009 May;65(5):603-9.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21892
PMID: 20373362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2298. Brain. 2010 Apr;133(Pt 4):1143-54. doi: 10.1093/brain/awq033.

Alzheimer's disease phenotypes and genotypes associated with mutations in 
presenilin 2.

Jayadev S(1), Leverenz JB, Steinbart E, Stahl J, Klunk W, Yu CE, Bird TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, 1660 S Columbian Way, 
182-GRECC, Seattle, WA 98108, USA.

Mutations in presenilin 2 are rare causes of early onset familial Alzheimer's 
disease. Eighteen presenilin 2 mutations have been reported, although not all 
have been confirmed pathogenic. Much remains to be learned about the range of 
phenotypes associated with these mutations. We have analysed our unique 
collection of 146 affected cases in 11 Volga German families, 101 who are likely 
to have the same N141I mutation in presenilin 2 (54 genotyped confirmed). We 
have also assessed the detailed neuropathologic findings in 18 autopsies from 
these families and reviewed the world's literature on other presenilin 2 
mutations; presenting a novel mutation that is predicted to lead to a premature 
truncation codon. Seven presenilin 2 mutations reported in the literature have 
strong evidence for pathogenicity whereas others may be benign polymorphisms. 
One hundred and one affected persons, with sufficient historical information 
from the Volga German pedigrees (N141I mutation), had a mean onset age of 53.7 
years+/-7.8 (range 39-75) and mean age at death of 64.2 years+/-9.8 (range 
43-88). These figures overlap with and generally fall between the results from 
the subjects in our centre who have late onset familial Alzheimer's disease or 
mutations in presenilin 1. Seizures were noted in 20 (30%) of 64 subjects with 
detailed medical records. Two mutation carriers lived beyond age 80 without 
developing dementia, representing uncommon examples of decreased penetrance. Two 
persons had severe amyloid angiopathy and haemorrhagic stroke. Eighteen cases 
had detailed histopathology available and analysed at our institution. Braak 
stage was five or six, amyloid angiopathy and neuritic plaques were common and 
more than 75% had Lewy bodies in the amygdala. TAR DNA-binding protein-43 
inclusions were uncommon. In addition, a 58-year-old female with a 2 year course 
of cognitive decline and no family history of dementia has abnormal 
fludeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography imaging and a novel 2 base pair 
deletion in presenilin 2 at nucleotide 342/343, predicted to produce a 
frame-shift and premature termination. We conclude that mutations in presenilin 
2 are rare with only seven being well documented in the literature. The best 
studied N141I mutation produces an Alzheimer's disease phenotype with a wide 
range of onset ages overlapping both early and late onset Alzheimer's disease, 
often associated with seizures, high penetrance and typical Alzheimer's disease 
neuropathology. A novel premature termination mutation supports loss of function 
or haploinsufficiency as pathogenic mechanisms in presenilin 2 associated 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awq033
PMCID: PMC2850581
PMID: 20375137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2299. Neuroepidemiology. 2010;35(1):28-35. doi: 10.1159/000306055. Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Factors affecting survival of patients with neurodegenerative disease.

Steenland K(1), MacNeil J, Seals R, Levey A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Occupational Health, Rollins School of Public 
Health, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. nsteenl@sph.emory.edu

BACKGROUND: Survival varies widely among different neurodegenerative diseases. 
Data on the role of the Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) and apolipoprotein 
E (APOE) in survival are sparse except for Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: We studied mortality of 3,581 patients in an academic clinic from 1993 
to 2004. Average follow-up was 4.1 years. We studied patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) (n = 174), possible AD (n = 206), probable AD (n = 
1,175), Parkinson's disease (PD) (n = 661), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (n = 
357), frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (n = 94), Lewy body disease (LBD) (n = 64), 
and controls (n = 850). We compared patients' mortality to the US population and 
to controls.
RESULTS: Mortality ranged from 7% for controls to 58% for ALS patients. The 
median survival times from initial visit for PD, FTD, probable AD, possible AD, 
LBD, and ALS were 8.9, 7.0, 5.9, 5.6, 5.3, and 2.7 years, respectively. 
Mortality rate ratios comparing each disease to controls were 39.43, 7.25, 3.70, 
3.51, 2.47, 2.73, and 1.61 for ALS, FTD, LBD, PD, probable AD, possible AD, and 
MCI, respectively. A lower initial MMSE score was associated with higher 
mortality for probable AD, PD, and MCI, while APOE4 predicted mortality for PD 
and LBD. Non-whites had 20% lower mortality rates than whites for all dementias 
combined, adjusting for education.
CONCLUSIONS: All neurologic diseases, including MCI, had increased mortality 
versus controls. A lower MMSE score and APOE4 presence predicted higher 
mortality for some patient groups.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000306055
PMCID: PMC2919432
PMID: 20389122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2300. Neurotox Res. 2011 Feb;19(2):211-34. doi: 10.1007/s12640-010-9190-2.

Staging neurodegenerative disorders: structural, regional, biomarker, and 
functional progressions.

Archer T(1), Kostrzewa RM, Beninger RJ, Palomo T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Gothenburg, Box 500, SE-405 30 
Gothenburg, Sweden. trevor.archer@psy.gu.se

The notion of staging in the neurodegenerative disorders is modulated by the 
constant and progressive loss of several aspects of brain structural integrity, 
circuitry, and neuronal processes. These destructive processes eventually remove 
individuals' abilities to perform at sufficient and necessary functional 
capacity at several levels of disease severity. The classification of (a) 
patients on the basis of diagnosis, risk prognosis, and intervention outcome, 
forms the basis of clinical staging, and (b) laboratory animals on the basis of 
animal model of brain disorder, extent of insult, and dysfunctional expression, 
provides the components for the clinical staging and preclinical staging, 
respectively, expressing associated epidemiological, biological, and genetic 
characteristics. The major focus of clinical staging in the present account 
stems from the fundamental notions of Braak staging as they describe the course 
and eventual prognosis for Alzheimer's disease, Lewy Body dementia, and 
Parkinson's disease. Mild cognitive impairment, which expresses the decline in 
episodic and semantic memory performance below the age-adjusted normal range 
without marked loss of global cognition or activities of daily living, and the 
applications of longitudinal magnetic resonance imaging, major instruments for 
the monitoring of either disease progression in dementia, present important 
challenges for staging concepts. Although Braak notions present the essential 
basis for further developments, current staging conceptualizations seem 
inadequate to comply with the massive influx of information dealing with 
neurodegenerative processes in brain, advanced both under clinical realities, 
and discoveries in the laboratory setting. The contributions of various 
biomarkers of disease progression, e.g., amyloid precursor protein, and 
neurotransmitter system imbalances, e.g., dopamine receptor supersensitivity and 
interactive propensities, await their incorporation into the existing staging 
models thereby underlining the ongoing, dynamic feature of the staging of brain 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-010-9190-2
PMID: 20393891 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


