1601. Lancet Neurol. 2007 Apr;6(4):305-13. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70057-1.

Sensitivity and specificity of dopamine transporter imaging with 123I-FP-CIT 
SPECT in dementia with Lewy bodies: a phase III, multicentre study.

McKeith I(1), O'Brien J, Walker Z, Tatsch K, Booij J, Darcourt J, Padovani A, 
Giubbini R, Bonuccelli U, Volterrani D, Holmes C, Kemp P, Tabet N, Meyer I, 
Reininger C; DLB Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK. i.g.mckeith@ncl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2007 Apr;6(4):288-9.
    Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007 Nov;3(11):602-3.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) needs to be distinguished from other 
types of dementia because of important differences in patient management and 
outcome. Current clinically based diagnostic criteria for DLB have limited 
accuracy. Severe nigrostriatal dopaminergic degeneration occurs in DLB, but not 
in Alzheimer's disease or most other dementia subtypes, offering a potential 
system for a biological diagnostic marker. The primary aim of this study was to 
investigate the sensitivity and specificity, in the ante-mortem differentiation 
of probable DLB from other causes of dementia, of single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) brain imaging with the ligand 
(123)I-2beta-carbometoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane 
((123)I-FP-CIT), which binds to the dopamine transporter (DAT) reuptake site. 
Diagnostic accuracy, positive and negative predictive values, and inter-reader 
agreement were the secondary endpoints and a subgroup of possible DLB patients 
was also included.
METHODS: We did a phase III study in which we used a (123)I-FP-CIT SPECT scan to 
assess 326 patients with clinical diagnoses of probable (n=94) or possible 
(n=57) DLB or non-DLB dementia (n=147) established by a consensus panel (in 28 
patients no diagnosis could be made). Three readers, unaware of the clinical 
diagnosis, classified the images as normal or abnormal by visual inspection. The 
study had 90% power to detect the differences between our anticipated 
sensitivity (0.80) and specificity (0.85) targets and prespecified lower 
thresholds (sensitivity 0.65, specificity 0.73) using one-sided binomial tests 
with a significance level of alpha=0.025.
FINDINGS: Abnormal scans had a mean sensitivity of 77.7% for detecting clinical 
probable DLB, with specificity of 90.4% for excluding non-DLB dementia, which 
was predominantly due to Alzheimer's disease. A mean value of 85.7% was achieved 
for overall diagnostic accuracy, 82.4% for positive predictive value, and 87.5% 
for negative predictive value. Inter-reader agreement for rating scans as normal 
or abnormal was high (Cohen's kappa=0.87). The procedure was well tolerated with 
few adverse events.
INTERPRETATION: A revision of the International Consensus Criteria for DLB has 
recommended that low DAT uptake in the basal ganglia, as shown by SPECT or PET 
imaging, be a suggestive feature for diagnosis. Our findings confirm the high 
correlation between abnormal (low binding) DAT activity measured with 
(123)I-FP-CIT SPECT and a clinical diagnosis of probable DLB. The diagnostic 
accuracy is sufficiently high for this technique to be clinically useful in 
distinguishing DLB from Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(07)70057-1
PMID: 17362834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1602. Neurologia. 2007 Apr;22(3):138-46.

[Prevalence of vascular risk factors among Spanish populations aged 70 years and 
over, as reported in door-to-door studies on neurological diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

del Barrio JL(1), Medrano MJ, Arce A, Bergareche A, Bermejo F, Díaz J, Gascón J, 
García FJ, Garré J, Gómez C, Lobo A, Martínez A, Otero A, Reñé R, Sánchez MI, 
Saz P, Vega S, Vilalta-Franch J, Zunzunegui MV, de Pedro J.

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro Nacional de Epidemiología, Madrid, 
Spain. jlbarrio@isciii.es

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to re-analyze door-to-door studies on 
neurological diseases among the elderly, in which vascular risk factors (VRF) 
were studied, describing methodological characteristics and prevalence of VRF.
METHODS: The surveys were identified in two phases. They were aimed at 
ascertaining prevalence of stroke, dementias or Parkinsonisms and, at the time 
of individual screening, had collected data on at least three of the following 
VRF: arterial hypertension (AHT), smoking habit, diabetes mellitus and 
hypercholesterolemia. A questionnaire was drawn up to collect the data reported 
in each study, and a database was constructed. VRF prevalences were quantified 
and analyzed using logistic regression.
RESULTS: The total of the re-analyzed population was 12,510 persons aged 70 
years and over, residents in seven geographic areas during the period 1994-2002. 
Information available on VRF was essentially self-reported. The prevalence of 
self-reported AHT was 25.7 % in men and 44.2 % in women, and that of measured 
AHT was 61 % and 71.9 %, respectively. Populations with arterial pressure 
obtained by direct measurement registered 138 higher risks (OR: 1.74; 95 % CI: 
1.51-2.01, and OR: 1.48; 95% CI: 1.33-1.64). Reported prevalence of diabetes, 
hypercholesterolemia and smoking habit were 14.3 %, 23.3% and 8.5 %, 
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: There was a high prevalence of VRF among the Spanish elderly 
population. However, its relationship with dementia, Parkinsonisms and 
cerebrovascular disease could not be studied due to the poor quality of the VRF 
data. The differences between measured and self-reported arterial pressure 
suggest the existence of undetected AHT and wide scope for prevention.

PMID: 17364251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1603. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007 May;3(5):250-1. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0471. Epub 2007 
Mar 20.

Visual hallucinations predict increased benefits from rivastigmine in 
Parkinson's disease dementia.

Williams-Gray CH(1), Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2007 May;3(5):239.

Comment on
    Mov Disord. 2006 Nov;21(11):1899-907.

DOI: 10.1038/ncpneuro0471
PMID: 17375057


1604. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007 Apr;15(4):314-27. doi: 
10.1097/01.JGP.0000239263.52621.97.

Predictive validity of neuropsychiatric subgroups on nursing home placement and 
survival in patients with Alzheimer disease.

Tun SM(1), Murman DL, Long HL, Colenda CC, von Eye A.

Author information:
(1)From Departments of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to conceptualize neuropsychiatric symptoms 
in patients with Alzheimer disease as distinct symptom profiles with 
differential disease outcomes. Two outcomes of interest in the study were 
nursing home placement and survival.
METHOD: Cluster analysis was used to categorize 122 patients with Alzheimer 
disease based on their neuropsychiatric symptoms as assessed by the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory. Both the presence as well as the severity and 
frequency of symptoms were considered. After identification of the subgroups, 
the predictive validity of the categorization was tested on time to nursing home 
placement and time to death over a three-year period. Cox proportional hazard 
models were used to perform survival analysis. Important covariates such as 
severity of cognitive and functional impairments, comorbid medical conditions, 
presence of parkinsonism, and marital status were adjusted at baseline.
RESULTS: Based on the presence of neuropsychiatric symptoms, three subgroups 
were identified: minimally symptomatic, highly symptomatic, and 
affective/apathetic. Over a three-year period, the highly symptomatic group had 
an increased risk of nursing home placement. In addition, the rates of survival 
were significantly lower for the highly symptomatic and the affective/apathetic 
subgroups. Based on the severity and frequency of symptoms, two-cluster and 
four-cluster solutions were produced. The groupings based on severity and 
frequency of symptoms predicted significant differential outcomes in survival 
and nursing home placement.
CONCLUSIONS: Neuropsychiatric subgroups were able to predict differential 
outcomes and identify those with an increased risk for a worse prognosis. The 
findings were discussed through their research and clinical implications.

DOI: 10.1097/01.JGP.0000239263.52621.97
PMID: 17384314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1605. Prague Med Rep. 2006;107(3):290-6.

Medical factors of falling asleep behind the wheel.

Volná J(1), Sonka K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University, 
General Teaching Hospital, Prague, Czech Republic.

Drivers' sleepiness and falling asleep while driving account for a considerable 
proportion of vehicle accidents (studies show different results from 1% to 30%). 
Sleepiness is rarely well recognised as a causing factor of traffic accidents. 
2.5% up to 20% people suffer from excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) with sleep 
deprivation as its most frequent cause. There is a strong association between 
sleep deprivation and medical problems--especially sleep disturbances. The sleep 
apnoea syndrome (SAS) has been identified as the most common cause of habitual 
drowsy driving. Patients with SAS (apart from other health problems) are 6 times 
more likely to have accidents. After adequate treatment of severe SAS with 
continuous positive airway pressure the risk of accident lowered 5 x. Other 
important sleep disturbances include chronic insomnia, narcolepsy, restless legs 
syndrome and periodic limb movement in sleep. Sleepiness was described in 
Parkinson's disease, dementia, epilepsy, in chronic cardiacs and in people with 
complex internal health problems. Regular or single intake of drugs 
(benzodiazepines, antidepressants, antihistaminics, antipsychotics and others) 
can itself induce sleep problems. Sleepiness in persons without sleep disorder 
may occur due to preventable causes such as poor sleep habits which lead to 
sleep deprivation.

PMID: 17385401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1606. Semin Neurol. 2007 Apr;27(2):170-82. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-971175.

Deep brain stimulation in movement disorders.

Uc EY(1), Follett KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa 52242, USA.

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is used for advanced and medically intractable 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), essential tremor (ET), and dystonia who 
meet strict criteria after a detailed motor, cognitive, and psychiatric 
evaluation. The potential targets are the ventral intermediate nucleus (VIM) of 
the thalamus for tremor, the globus pallidus interna (GPI) and the subthalamic 
nucleus (STN) for PD, and GPI for dystonia. The optimal target for PD has not 
been determined yet, although STN DBS has been performed more frequently in 
recent years. The mechanism of DBS effect is believed to be associated with 
disruption of pathological network activity in the cortico-basal 
ganglia-thalamic circuits by affecting the firing rates and bursting patterns of 
neurons and synchronized oscillatory activity of neuronal networks. Good 
candidates should be free of dementia, major psychiatric disorders, structural 
brain lesions, and important general medical problems. Although the risk for 
complications with DBS is less than with lesioning techniques, there is still a 
small risk for major complications associated with surgery. Bilateral procedures 
are more likely to cause problems with speech, cognition, and gait.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-971175
PMID: 17390262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1607. Neurosci Lett. 2007 May 11;418(1):72-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.02.077. Epub 
2007 Mar 3.

Iron, copper, and iron regulatory protein 2 in Alzheimer's disease and related 
dementias.

Magaki S(1), Raghavan R, Mueller C, Oberg KC, Vinters HV, Kirsch WM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurosurgery Research, Loma Linda University, Loma Linda, CA 
92350, USA.

Accumulating evidence implicates a role for altered iron and copper metabolism 
in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). However, imbalances in the levels of the various forms of iron at 
different stages of AD have not been examined. In this pilot study we extracted 
and measured the levels of loosely bound, non-heme and total iron and copper in 
the frontal cortex and hippocampus of patients with mild-moderate AD (n=3), 
severe AD (n=8) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB, n=6), using graphite furnace 
atomic absorption spectrometry (GFAAS). Additionally, the expression of iron 
regulatory protein 2 (IRP2) was examined in relation to the pathological 
hallmarks of AD and DLB, amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), and 
Lewy bodies, by immunohistochemistry. We found significantly decreased loosely 
bound iron in the hippocampal white matter of mild-moderate and severe AD 
patients and a trend towards increased non-heme iron in the hippocampal gray 
matter of severe AD patients. Furthermore, decreased levels of total copper were 
seen in severe AD and DLB frontal cortex compared to controls, suggesting an 
imbalance in brain metal levels in both AD and DLB. The decrease in loosely 
bound iron in mild-moderate AD patients may be associated with myelin breakdown 
seen in the beginning stages of AD and implicates that iron dysregulation is an 
early event in AD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.02.077
PMCID: PMC1955223
PMID: 17408857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1608. J Neurosci. 2007 Apr 4;27(14):3650-62. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0587-07.2007.

Accumulation of pathological tau species and memory loss in a conditional model 
of tauopathy.

Berger Z(1), Roder H, Hanna A, Carlson A, Rangachari V, Yue M, Wszolek Z, Ashe 
K, Knight J, Dickson D, Andorfer C, Rosenberry TL, Lewis J, Hutton M, Janus C.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) are a pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's 
disease and other tauopathies, but recent studies in a conditional mouse model 
of tauopathy (rTg4510) have suggested that NFT formation can be dissociated from 
memory loss and neurodegeneration. This suggests that NFTs are not the major 
neurotoxic tau species, at least during the early stages of pathogenesis. To 
identify other neurotoxic tau protein species, we performed biochemical analyses 
on brain tissues from the rTg4510 mouse model and then correlated the levels of 
these tau proteins with memory loss. We describe the identification and 
characterization of two forms of tau multimers (140 and 170 kDa), whose 
molecular weight suggests an oligomeric aggregate, that accumulate early in the 
pathogenic cascade in this mouse model. Similar tau multimers were detected in a 
second mouse model of tauopathy (JNPL3) and in tissue from patients with 
Alzheimer's disease and FTDP-17 (frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked 
to chromosome 17). Moreover, levels of the tau multimers correlated consistently 
with memory loss at various ages in the rTg4510 mouse model. Our findings 
suggest that accumulation of early-stage aggregated tau species, before the 
formation of NFT, is associated with the development of functional deficits 
during the pathogenic progression of tauopathy.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0587-07.2007
PMCID: PMC6672413
PMID: 17409229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1609. Brain. 2007 Nov;130(Pt 11):2770-88. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm056. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Pathophysiology of REM sleep behaviour disorder and relevance to 
neurodegenerative disease.

Boeve BF(1), Silber MH, Saper CB, Ferman TJ, Dickson DW, Parisi JE, Benarroch 
EE, Ahlskog JE, Smith GE, Caselli RC, Tippman-Peikert M, Olson EJ, Lin SC, Young 
T, Wszolek Z, Schenck CH, Mahowald MW, Castillo PR, Del Tredici K, Braak H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, 6Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. bboeve@mayo.edu

REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia characterized by the loss of 
normal skeletal muscle atonia during REM sleep with prominent motor activity 
accompanying dreaming. The terminology relating to RBD, and mechanisms 
underlying REM sleep without atonia and RBD based on data in cat and rat are 
presented. Neuroimaging data from the few published human cases with RBD 
associated with structural lesions in the brainstem are presented, in which the 
dorsal midbrain and pons are implicated. Pharmacological manipulations which 
alter RBD frequency and severity are reviewed, and the data from human 
neuropathological studies are presented. An anatomic framework and new schema 
for the pathophysiology of RBD are proposed based on recent data in rat 
regarding the putative flip-flop switch for REM sleep control. The structure in 
man analogous to the subcoeruleus region in cat and sublaterodorsal nucleus in 
rat is proposed as the nucleus (and its associated efferent and afferent 
pathways) crucial to RBD pathophysiology. The association of RBD with 
neurological disease ('secondary RBD') is presented, with emphasis on RBD 
associated with neurodegenerative disease, particularly the synucleinopathies. 
The hypothesized pathophysiology of RBD is presented in relation to the Braak 
staging system for Parkinson's disease, in which the topography and temporal 
sequence of synuclein pathology in the brain could explain the evolution of 
parkinsonism and/or dementia well after the onset of RBD. These data suggest 
that many patients with 'idiopathic' RBD are actually exhibiting an early 
clinical manifestation of an evolving neurodegenerative disorder. Such patients 
may be appropriate for future drug therapies that affect synuclein 
pathophysiology, in which the development of parkinsonism and/or dementia could 
be delayed or prevented. We suggest that additional clinicopathological studies 
be performed in patients with dementia or parkinsonism, with and without RBD, as 
well as in patients with idiopathic RBD, to further elucidate the 
pathophysiology and also characterize the clinical and pathophysiological 
relevance of RBD in neurodegenerative disease. Furthermore, longitudinal studies 
in patients with idiopathic RBD are warranted to characterize the natural 
history of such patients and prepare for future therapeutic trials.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm056
PMID: 17412731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1610. Brain. 2007 Jul;130(Pt 7):1847-60. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm034. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Slowing of oscillatory brain activity is a stable characteristic of Parkinson's 
disease without dementia.

Stoffers D(1), Bosboom JL, Deijen JB, Wolters EC, Berendse HW, Stam CJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical and Experimental Neurosciences, Department of 
Neurology, VU University Medical Center, P.O. box 7057, 1007 MB, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. d.stoffers@vumc.nl

Extensive changes in resting-state oscillatory brain activity have recently been 
demonstrated using magnetoencephalography (MEG) in moderately advanced, 
non-demented Parkinson's disease patients relative to age-matched controls. The 
aim of the present study was to determine the onset and evolution of these 
changes over the disease course and their relationship with clinical parameters. 
In addition, we evaluated the effects of dopaminomimetics on resting-state 
oscillatory brain activity in levodopa-treated patients. MEG background 
oscillatory activity was studied in a group of 70 Parkinson's disease patients 
with varying disease duration and severity (including 18 de novo patients) as 
well as in 21 controls that were age-matched to the de novo patients. Whole head 
151-channel MEG recordings were obtained in an eyes-closed resting-state 
condition. Levodopa-treated patients (N = 37) were examined both in a 
practically defined 'OFF' as well as in the 'ON' state. Relative spectral power 
was calculated for delta, theta, low alpha, high alpha, beta and gamma frequency 
bands and averaged for 10 cortical regions of interest (ROIs). Additionally, 
extensive clinical and neuropsychological testing was performed in all subjects. 
De novo Parkinson's disease patients showed widespread slowing of background MEG 
activity relative to controls. Changes included a widespread increase in theta 
and low alpha power, as well as a loss of beta power over all but the frontal 
ROIs and a loss of gamma power over all but the right occipital ROI. 
Neuropsychological assessment revealed abnormal perseveration in de novo 
patients, which was associated with increased low alpha power in centroparietal 
ROIs. In the whole group of Parkinson's disease patients, longer disease 
duration was associated with reduced low alpha power in the right temporal and 
right occipital ROI, but not with any other spectral power measure. No 
association was found between spectral power and disease stage, disease severity 
or dose of dopaminomimetics. In patients on levodopa therapy, a change from the 
'OFF' to the 'ON' state was associated with decreases in right frontal theta, 
left occipital beta and left temporal gamma power and an increase in right 
parietal gamma power. Widespread slowing of oscillatory brain activity is a 
characteristic of non-demented Parkinson's disease patients from the earliest 
clinical stages onwards that is (largely) independent of disease duration, stage 
and severity and hardly influenced by dopaminomimetic treatment. Some early 
cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease appear to be associated with increased 
low alpha power. We postulate a role for hypofunctional non-dopaminergic 
ascending neurotransmitter systems in spectral power changes in non-demented 
Parkinson's disease patients.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm034
PMID: 17412733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1611. Can J Aging. 2007 Spring;26(1):19-32. doi: 10.3138/1457-2411-v402-62l1.

The potential of gait analysis to contribute to differential diagnosis of early 
stage dementia: current research and future directions.

Morgan D(1), Funk M, Crossley M, Basran J, Kirk A, Dal Bello-Haas V.

Author information:
(1)Canadian Centre for Health and Safety in Agriculture, Institute of 
Agricultural Rural and Environmental Health, Royal University Hospital, 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK. debra.morgan@usask.ca

Early differential diagnosis of dementia is becoming increasingly important as 
new pharmacologic therapies are developed, as these treatments are not equally 
effective for all types of dementia. Early detection and differential diagnosis 
also facilitates informed family decision making and timely access to 
appropriate services. Information about gait characteristics is informative in 
the diagnostic process and may have important implications for discriminating 
among dementia subtypes. The aim of this review paper is to summarize existing 
research examining the relationships between gait and dementia, including gait 
classification systems and assessment tools, gait patterns characteristic of 
different dementias (Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, dementia with Lewy 
Bodies, and fronto-temporal dementia), and the utility of gait analysis in 
early-stage diagnosis. The paper concludes with implications for future 
research.

DOI: 10.3138/1457-2411-v402-62l1
PMID: 17430801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1612. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2006 Nov;46(11):928-30.

[Animal models of tauopathies].

[Article in Japanese]

Higuchi M(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of Radiological Sciences.

Accumulation of intraneuronal amyloid comprised of tau proteins occurs in a 
group of neurodegenerative disorders, collectively termed tauopathies, and 
pathological alterations of tau proteins alone are sufficient to cause 
degeneration of neurons, as compellingly evidenced by discovery of tau gene 
mutations in kindreds of familial tauopathy known as frontotemporal dementia 
with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). Mice modeling tauopathies 
have been generated by overexpression of human tau with FTDP-17 mutations, in 
order to gain more profound insights into molecular links between tau 
abnormalities and neurodegeneration. A subset of these mice were reported to 
exhibit abundant tau amyloid lesions resembling neurofibrillary changes in human 
tauopathies, and pronounced neuronal loss notable as progressive brain atrophy. 
Significantly, formation of mature amyloid fibrils is not tightly associated 
with neuron death, while deposition of microtubule-unbound phosphorylated tau, 
which conceivably emerges early in tau fibrillogenesis, appears to critically 
contribute to disruption of neuronal integrity. In addition to such mechanistic 
elucidation, mouse models of tauopathies are currently being applied to 
exploitation of imaging agents for visualization of tau pathologies in living 
brains. This technology would greatly facilitate diagnostic workup of patients 
with suspected tauopathies when combined with appropriate imaging modalities.

PMID: 17432223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1613. Int Psychogeriatr. 2007 Jun;19(3):509-24. doi: 10.1017/S1041610207005273. Epub 
2007 Apr 16.

Outcome measures in clinical trials on medicinal products for the treatment of 
dementia: a European regulatory perspective.

Broich K(1).

Author information:
(1)Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices, Bonn, Germany. 
k.broich@bfarm.de

Based on efficacy and safety data, several drugs have been approved for 
symptomatic improvement of dementia of the Alzheimer type and one for the 
symptomatic improvement of dementia associated with Parkinson's disease. 
However, established treatment effects must be considered as modest. Randomized 
clinical trials in other subtypes of dementia (e.g. vascular dementia) have not 
been able to demonstrate clinically relevant symptomatic improvement, nor has it 
yet been possible to establish disease-modifying effects in any dementia 
syndrome or its subtypes. Recent progress in basic science and molecular biology 
of the dementias has now fostered new interest for more efficacious symptomatic 
treatments as well as for disease-modifying approaches in the degenerative 
dementias. For regulatory purposes this requires better standardization and 
refinement of diagnostic criteria, which allow the study of homogeneous disease 
populations in specialized academic centers as well as in the general community 
setting. Depending on the disease stages (early versus late, mild to moderate to 
severe impairment) and disease entities, distinct assessment tools for 
cognitive, functional and global endpoints should be used or newly developed. 
The typical design to show symptomatic improvement is a randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled, parallel group study comparing change in two 
primary endpoints, one of them reflecting the cognitive domain and the second 
preferably reflecting the functional domain of impairment. The changes must be 
robust and clinically meaningful in favor of active treatment versus placebo. If 
a treatment claim for prevention of the emergence, slowing or stabilizing 
deterioration is strived for, it has to be shown that the treatment has an 
impact on the underlying neurobiology and pathophysiology of the process of 
dementia. Establishing such an effect in a highly variable progressing syndrome 
is complex and difficult; however, a variety of trial designs has been provided, 
including baseline designs, survival designs, randomized start or randomized 
withdrawal designs, with or without incorporation of biomarkers as surrogate 
endpoints (e.g. magnetic resonance tomography, emission tomography, 
cerebrospinal fluid markers). To be accepted as a surrogate endpoint such a 
biomarker ideally should respond to treatment, predict clinical response and be 
compellingly related to the pathophysiological process of the dementia. However, 
careful and sufficient validation of proposed biomarkers as a potential 
surrogate endpoint is a prerequisite for acceptance by regulatory bodies. This 
review outlines the regulatory requirements for approval of a new medicinal 
product for symptomatic improvement or disease-modifying effects in patients 
with dementia, with special emphasis on the importance of validation of the 
assessment tools and potential surrogate endpoints based on recent experience 
and discussion regarding anti-dementia drugs in the European framework.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610207005273
PMID: 17433121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1614. Hum Mutat. 2007 Sep;28(9):846-55. doi: 10.1002/humu.20520.

Progranulin null mutations in both sporadic and familial frontotemporal 
dementia.

Le Ber I(1), van der Zee J, Hannequin D, Gijselinck I, Campion D, Puel M, 
Laquerrière A, De Pooter T, Camuzat A, Van den Broeck M, Dubois B, Sellal F, 
Lacomblez L, Vercelletto M, Thomas-Antérion C, Michel BF, Golfier V, Didic M, 
Salachas F, Duyckaerts C, Cruts M, Verpillat P, Van Broeckhoven C, Brice A; 
French Research Network on FTD/FTD-MND.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, UMR679, Paris, France.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the second most frequent type of 
neurodegenerative dementias. Mutations in the progranulin gene (GRN, PGRN) were 
recently identified in FTDU-17, an FTD subtype characterized by 
ubiquitin-immunoreactive inclusions and linkage to chromosome 17q21. We looked 
for PGRN mutations in a large series of 210 FTD patients (52 familial, 158 
sporadic) to accurately evaluate the frequency of PGRN mutations in both 
sporadic and familial FTD, and FTD with associated motoneuron disease (FTD-MND), 
as well as to study the clinical phenotype of patients with a PGRN mutation. We 
identified nine novel PGRN null mutations in 10 index patients. The relative 
frequency of PGRN null mutations in FTD was 4.8% (10/210) and 12.8% (5/39) in 
pure familial forms. Interestingly, 5/158 (3.2%) apparently sporadic FTD 
patients carried a PGRN mutation, suggesting the possibility of de novo 
mutations or incomplete penetrance. In contrast, none of the 43 patients with 
FTD-MND had PGRN mutations, supporting that FTDU-17 and FTD-MND are genetically 
distinct. The clinical phenotype of PGRN mutation carriers was particular 
because of the wide range in onset age and the frequent occurrence of early 
apraxia (50%), visual hallucinations (30%), and parkinsonism (30%) during the 
course of the disease. This study supports that PGRN null mutations represent a 
more frequent cause of FTD than MAPT mutations (4.8% vs. 2.9%) but are not 
responsible for FTD-MND. It also demonstrates that half of the patients with a 
PGRN mutation in our series had no apparent family history of dementia. Taking 
this into account, genetic testing should be now considered more systematically, 
even in patients without obvious familial history of FTD.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20520
PMID: 17436289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1615. Mov Disord. 2007 May 15;22(7):974-81. doi: 10.1002/mds.21478.

Long-term cognitive profile and incidence of dementia after STN-DBS in 
Parkinson's disease.

Aybek S(1), Gronchi-Perrin A, Berney A, Chiuvé SC, Villemure JG, Burkhard PR, 
Vingerhoets FJ.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, CHUV, Lausanne, Switzerland.

An effect of subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS) on cognition 
has been suspected but long-term observations are lacking. The aim of this study 
was to evaluate the long-term cognitive profile and the incidence of dementia in 
a cohort of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients treated by STN-DBS. 57 consecutive 
patients were prospectively assessed by the mean of a neuropsychological battery 
over 3 years after surgery. Dementia (DSM-IV) and UPDRS I to IV were recorded. 
24.5% of patients converted to dementia over 3 years (incidence of 89 of 1,000 
per year). This group of patients cognitively continuously worsened over 3 years 
up to fulfilling dementia criteria (PDD). The rest of the cohort remained 
cognitively stable (PD) over the whole follow-up. Preoperative differences 
between PDD and PD included older age (69.2 +/- 5.8 years; 62.6 +/- 8 years), 
presence of hallucinations and poorer executive score (10.1 +/- 5.9; 5.5 +/- 
4.4). The incidence of dementia over 3 years after STN-DBS is similar to the one 
reported in medically treated patients. The PDD presented preoperative risk 
factors of developing dementia similar to those described in medically treated 
patients. These observations suggest dementia being secondary to the natural 
evolution of PD rather than a direct effect of STN-DBS.

(c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21478
PMID: 17443691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1616. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2007 May;13(3):539-43. doi: 10.1017/S1355617707070671.

Motor timing variability increases in preclinical Huntington's disease patients 
as estimated onset of motor symptoms approaches.

Hinton SC(1), Paulsen JS, Hoffmann RG, Reynolds NC, Zimbelman JL, Rao SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, 
USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a neurodegenerative disorder diagnosed clinically 
with the development of choreiform movements. However, neuropsychological 
studies have demonstrated cognitive and psychiatric changes during the 
preclinical phase (pre-HD) prior to formal diagnosis. Previous studies have 
demonstrated the sensitivity of time reproduction tasks to basal ganglia 
pathology, as seen in clinical HD and Parkinson's disease. In this study, 29 
pre-HD participants, ranging from 3 to 39 years from estimated onset (YEO) of HD 
based on genetic testing and chronological age, were administered the paced 
finger-tapping task using target intervals of 600 and 1200 ms. Mean 
inter-response interval, a measure of timing accuracy, did not systematically 
deviate from the target interval as a function of YEO. In contrast, timing 
variability increased curvilinearly as a function of YEO, but not with 
chronological age alone. Motor timing variability, but not accuracy, may serve 
as a marker to define the earliest behavioral changes in HD. The present study 
is among the first to examine the relationship between behavioral measures and 
YEO in pre-HD.

DOI: 10.1017/S1355617707070671
PMID: 17445303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1617. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007 Nov;22(11):1120-6. doi: 10.1002/gps.1799.

Cerebral white matter changes and rate of progression of dementia during 
cholinesterase inhibitor treatment: a retrospective cohort study.

Devine ME(1), Fonseca JA, Walker RW, Sikdar T, Stevens T, Walker Z.

Author information:
(1)North East London Mental Health Trust, Older People's CMHT, Dagenham, Essex, 
UK. mike.devine@haveringpct.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: Cerebral white matter changes (WMC) represent cerebrovascular 
disease (CVD) and are common in dementia. Cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) are 
effective in Alzheimer's Disease (AD) with or without CVD, and in Dementia with 
Lewy Bodies (DLB). Predictors of treatment response are controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of WMC severity on rate of progression of 
dementia during treatment with ChEIs.
METHODS: CT or MRI brain scans were rated for WMC severity in 243 patients 
taking ChEIs for dementia. Raters were blind to patients' clinical risk factors, 
dementia subtype and course of illness. Effects of WMC severity on rates of 
decline in cognition, function and behaviour were analysed for 140 patients 
treated for 9 months or longer. Analysis was performed for this group as a whole 
and within diagnostic subgroups AD and DLB. The main outcome measure was rate of 
change in Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE) score. Secondary measures were 
rates of change in scores on the Cambridge Cognitive Examination (CAMCOG), 
Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) and Clifton Assessment Procedures 
for the Elderly - Behaviour Rating Scale (CAPE-BRS).
RESULTS: There was no significant association between severity of WMC and any 
specified outcome variable for the cohort as a whole or for patients with AD. In 
patients with DLB, higher WMC scores were associated with more rapid cognitive 
decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased WMC severity does not influence clinical response to ChEI 
treatment in AD, but may hasten deterioration in ChEI-treated patients with DLB.

Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1799
PMID: 17457951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1618. Acta Neuropathol. 2007 Jul;114(1):49-54. doi: 10.1007/s00401-007-0223-8. Epub 
2007 Apr 26.

The neuropathology and clinical phenotype of FTD with progranulin mutations.

Mackenzie IR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Vancouver General Hospital, 855 West 12th Avenue, 
Vancouver, BC, Canada. ian.mackenzie@vch.ca

Mutations in the progranulin gene (PGRN), on chromosome 17q21, have recently 
been identified as a major cause of familial frontotemporal dementia (FTD). 
These cases have a characteristic pattern of neuropathology that is a distinct 
subtype of frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitinated inclusions 
(FTLD-U), with lentiform neuronal intranuclear inclusions being a consistent 
feature. There is no abnormal accumulation of PGRN protein in the brain and 
immunohistochemical and biochemical analysis indicates that the ubiquitinated 
pathological protein is TDP-43. In these families, FTD is inherited in an 
autosomal dominant fashion with high penetrance. The clinical phenotype is 
usually a combination of behavioural abnormality and language disturbance that 
is most often a form of primary progressive aphasia. Mild parkinsonism is common 
but motor neuron disease is notably rare. Marked variation in the disease course 
and clinical features are common, not only between families with different 
mutations, but also within individual families. This degree of clinical 
variability makes it difficult to predict which cases of familial FTD will turn 
out to have a PGRN mutation.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-007-0223-8
PMID: 17458552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1619. J Neurol Sci. 2007 Sep 15;260(1-2):33-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.03.016. Epub 
2007 Apr 24.

Diagnostic markers for diagnosing dementia with Lewy bodies: CSF and MIBG 
cardiac scintigraphy study.

Wada-Isoe K(1), Kitayama M, Nakaso K, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. kewada@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: This study examined the diagnostic value of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
markers and iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine ((123)I-MIBG) cardiac 
scintigraphy in distinguishing dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).
METHODS: CSF levels of amyloid beta1-42 (Abeta42) and 181-Thr phosphorylated tau 
(p-tau) were measured using enzyme linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) kits. 
(123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy was performed in patients with AD and DLB, and 
control (CTL) subjects.
RESULTS: Increased CSF levels of p-tau in AD were found compared to DLB patients 
and CTL subjects (P<0.01), but there was no significant difference in CSF levels 
of Abeta42 between AD and DLB patients. The early and delayed heart to 
mediastinum (H/M) ratios of (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy were significantly 
decreased in patients with DLB compared to AD patients and CTL subjects 
(P<0.01). The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis revealed that the 
diagnostic value of (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy was superior to that of CSF 
markers.
CONCLUSIONS: (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy may be useful for discriminating 
between DLB and AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.03.016
PMID: 17459416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1620. Nucl Med Commun. 2007 Jun;28(6):451-6. doi: 10.1097/MNM.0b013e328155d143.

Limitations of the HMPAO SPECT appearances of occipital lobe perfusion in the 
differential diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Kemp PM(1), Hoffmann SA, Tossici-Bolt L, Fleming JS, Holmes C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and Medical Physics, Southampton University 
Hospitals Trust, Southampton, UK. paul.kemp@suht.swest.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: To assess the utility of the appearances of occipital lobe perfusion 
on HMPAO SPECT in the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) using the 
123I-FP-CIT findings as the diagnostic 'gold standard'.
METHODS: Eighty-four consecutive patients underwent both HMPAO SPECT and 
123I-FP-CIT as part of their routine investigations for suspected DLB.
RESULTS: Thirty-nine of the 84 FP-CIT scans were abnormal indicating a 
prevalence of 44% of patients with DLB in this series. In those patients 
classified as DLB, 28% of HMPAO SPECT scans demonstrated occipital 
hypoperfusion. In those patients with a dementia other than DLB 31% of patients 
demonstrated occipital hypoperfusion (P=0.8).
CONCLUSION: Occipital lobe hypoperfusion as demonstrated by HMPAO SPECT in 
patients with suspected Lewy body dementia does not appear to be able to either 
rule in, or rule out, the diagnosis of DLB.

DOI: 10.1097/MNM.0b013e328155d143
PMID: 17460535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1621. Can J Neurol Sci. 2007 Mar;34 Suppl 1:S11-8. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100005497.

Diagnostic criteria of dementia.

Bouchard RW(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinique de mémoire et unité de recherche Alzheimer, CHA Hôpital de 
I'Enfant-Jésus, Québec, QC, Canada.

In the past two decades there has been a tremendous effort among clinicians and 
searchers to improve the diagnostic criteria of the dementias on the basis of 
the differential neurological and neuropsychological profiles. This was an 
obligatory requirement for clinical trials and the development of treatments. 
Over the years it became rapidly evident that the cohorts of patients in studies 
had some degree of heterogeneity, making it difficult to interpret the results 
of some studies, particularly in the vascular dementias and the mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) group. For example, many sub-types of the vascular group were 
included in clinical trials, such as the cortical strokes, the lacunar states 
and the diffuse white matter disease cases, and some of the patients might have 
had also mixed pathology. In addition, the standard DSM IV criteria for dementia 
no longer represent our present knowledge of the clinical profile of some of the 
dementias such as vascular dementia (VaD) and fronto-temporal dementia where the 
memory impairment is not necessarily the first requirement. To improve the 
validity of clinical trials and eventually help developing more appropriate 
treatments, we revised the present diagnostic criteria and made recommendations 
for some changes in the context of the 2nd Canadian Conference on the 
Development of Antidementia Therapies, held in 2004 and reviewed in the light of 
the recent literature as of early 2006. It is expected that in the near future, 
these dementia criteria for clinical trials will have to be revised again in 
order to include specific subtypes of the dementias as well as biomarkers, 
structural and functional imaging.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100005497
PMID: 17469675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1622. Can J Neurol Sci. 2007 Mar;34 Suppl 1:S42-6. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100005552.

Target symptoms and outcome measures: cognition.

Kirk A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, University of Saskatchewan, Royal University Hospital, 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Canada.

The Cognitive section of the Alzheimer's Disease Assessment Scale (ADAS-Cog) 
remains the most widely used cognitive measure in dementia trials although it 
does not assess attention, executive function, or agnosia. Designed for use in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), it may not be ideal in assessing patients with other 
diagnoses. The ADAS-Cog differentiates between AD patients, patients with Mild 
Cognitive Impairment, and normal controls. It has been used in trials of drugs 
for vascular and mixed dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies. It is not clear 
that the ADAS-Cog is adequate for assessing cognition in frontotemporal 
dementia. Well-validated aphasia batteries, such as the Western Aphasia Battery, 
can be used to assess language. Brief tests of frontal function such as the 
Frontal Assessment Battery or the Executive Interview might be useful additions 
in frontotemporal dementia trials. The most widely used assessment tool for 
patients with advanced dementia is the Severe Impairment Battery. The domains 
tested are analogous to those assessed by the ADAS-Cog. The Mini-Mental State 
Exam and the Modified Mini-Mental State Examination are useful in stratifying 
patients for trial entry. Cognitive measures better tailored to the diseases in 
question are needed for non-Alzheimer dementias.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100005552
PMID: 17469681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1623. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2007 May;8(7):1011-23. doi: 10.1517/14656566.8.7.1011.

Donepezil: an update.

Seltzer B(1).

Author information:
(1)V.A. Boston Healthcare System, Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical 
School, Geriatric Research Center, Boston, MA 02130, USA. bseltzer@partners.org

Donepezil hydrochloride is the most widely prescribed drug for Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The main mechanism of action through which it influences cognition 
and function is presumed to be the inhibition of acetylcholinesterase enzyme in 
the brain; however, donepezil may also impact the pathophysiology of AD at 
several other points. Officially approved for mild-to-moderate and severe AD, 
donepezil has also been shown to be effective in early-stage AD, vascular 
dementia, Parkinson's disease dementia/Lewy body disease and cognitive symptoms 
associated with multiple sclerosis. In addition, one study suggested that 
donepezil may delay the onset of AD in subjects with mild cognitive impairment, 
a prodrome to AD. The pharmacokinetics, pharmacodynamics, safety/tolerability 
profile and drug interaction properties of donepezil make it an easy and safe 
agent to use. However, in general, the efficacy of donepezil is limited, and 
ongoing studies are investigating other agents that may ultimately overtake its 
present position as the mainstay of anti-AD therapy.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.8.7.1011
PMID: 17472546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1624. J Neurosci Nurs. 2007 Apr;39(2):107-11. doi: 10.1097/01376517-200704000-00007.

Diagnosis and treatment of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus.

Vacca V(1).

Author information:
(1)ICU, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA. vmvacca@partners.org

Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (INPH) is characterized by a classic 
triad of symptoms including dementia, urinary incontinence, and gait 
disturbance. INPH is clinically diagnosed in most patients during the sixth or 
seventh decade of life. Many older adults are incorrectly diagnosed with 
disorders such as Parkinson's disease and dementia when their symptoms are 
actually caused by INPH. As life expectancy increases, the necessity of 
accurately diagnosing and effectively treating these affected individuals will 
become more challenging. The diagnosis of INPH is challenging and requires a 
combination of clinical signs and symptoms, radiographic findings, and 
diagnostic testing. The purpose of evaluation and testing of individuals with 
suspected INPH is to determine if surgical implantation of a 
ventriculoperitoneal (VP) shunt will be beneficial. VP shunting is now a common 
neurosurgical procedure, but it is one associated with risks and complications, 
which makes evaluation of "shunt-responsiveness" essential.

DOI: 10.1097/01376517-200704000-00007
PMID: 17477225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1625. J Neurol Sci. 2007 Jul 15;258(1-2):115-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.03.017. Epub 
2007 May 3.

Neuropsychological and 18FDG-PET studies in a family with idiopathic basal 
ganglia calcifications.

Le Ber I(1), Marié RM, Chabot B, Lalevée C, Defer GL.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire, 14 000 Caen, France.

Comment in
    J Neurol Sci. 2008 Mar 15;266(1-2):190-1.

Idiopathic basal ganglia calcification (FIBGC) is a rare autosomal dominant 
neurodegenerative disease, the main clinical signs of which are parkinsonism, 
cognitive deterioration and/or psychiatric troubles. Familial forms are rare. 
The underlying basis is not known. We performed detailed neurological, 
neuropsychological, brain CT scans and MRI evaluations in 15 patients of a large 
FIBGC family. Three patients also underwent a (18)FDG-PET scan study not 
previously performed in patients with FIBGC. Basal ganglia calcifications were 
present in 8 individuals, 3 of which had schizophrenia-like psychosis, cognitive 
and/or extrapyramidal signs. The mean age at disease onset was 34.0+/-3.6 years. 
Two patients had moderate executive dysfunction, whereas the proband had more 
severe dementia. (18)FDG uptake was significantly reduced in striatal or 
cortical areas, including the precuneus, posterior cingulate and superior 
temporal gyri. This study shows that calcifications and striatal neuronal 
degeneration can occur independently, and that functional changes in cortical 
areas can be observed early in FIBGC. Hypometabolism in the precuneus and 
posterior cingulate gyrus, which are involved in episodic memory processing, 
could be responsible for the episodic memory deficit found in the patients. 
Whether the underlying mechanism involves a neuronal loss or a functional 
alteration remains to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.03.017
PMID: 17481663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1626. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007 Jun;22(5):631-5. doi: 10.1016/j.acn.2007.04.004. 
Epub 2007 May 3.

The use of the Color Trails Test in the assessment of driver competence: 
preliminary report of a culture-fair instrument.

Elkin-Frankston S(1), Lebowitz BK, Kapust LR, Hollis AM, O'Connor MG.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, 330 Brookline 
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Studies have shown that the Trail Making Test (TMT) predicts real-world driving 
performance in individuals who have cognitive deficits. However, because this 
test requires knowledge of the Latin alphabet, the TMT may not be appropriate 
for individuals who are illiterate or for those whom English is not their 
primary language. Because the Color Trails Test (CTT) is not influenced by 
knowledge of the alphabet, the CTT may be a culture-fair alternative to the TMT. 
To date, the utility of the CTT in the evaluation of driver competence has not 
been established. In the current study, individuals referred for a comprehensive 
driving assessment underwent testing with the TMT and CTT. The results suggest 
that the CTT and the TMT provide similar information regarding road-test 
outcome. Thus, the CTT may be a culture-fair alternative to the TMT in the 
assessment of driver competence.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acn.2007.04.004
PMID: 17481851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1627. Mov Disord. 2007 Jul 15;22(9):1229-38. doi: 10.1002/mds.21505.

Role of DAT-SPECT in the diagnostic work up of parkinsonism.

Scherfler C(1), Schwarz J, Antonini A, Grosset D, Valldeoriola F, Marek K, 
Oertel W, Tolosa E, Lees AJ, Poewe W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2008 Apr 15;23(5):774; author reply 774-5.

The diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) can be achieved with high 
degrees of accuracy in cases with full expression of classical clinical 
features. However, diagnostic uncertainty remains in early disease with subtle 
or ambiguous signs. Functional imaging has been suggested to increase the 
diagnostic yield in parkinsonian syndromes with uncertain clinical 
classification. Loss of striatal dopamine nerve terminal function, a hallmark of 
neurodegenerative parkinsonism, is strongly related to decreases of dopamine 
transporter (DAT) density, which can be measured by single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT). The use of DAT-SPECT facilitates the differential 
diagnosis in patients with isolated tremor symptoms not fulfilling PD or 
essential tremor criteria, drug-induced, psychogenic and vascular parkinsonism 
as well as dementia when associated with parkinsonism. This review addresses the 
value of DAT-SPECT in early differential diagnosis, and its potential as a 
screening tool for subjects at risk of developing PD as well as issues around 
the assessment of disease progression.

2007 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21505
PMID: 17486648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1628. Brain Pathol. 2007 Jan;17(1):24-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2006.00032.x.

Degeneration of cardiac sympathetic nerve begins in the early disease process of 
Parkinson's disease.

Orimo S(1), Takahashi A, Uchihara T, Mori F, Kakita A, Wakabayashi K, Takahashi 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. 
orimo@kanto-ctr-hsp.com

Decreased cardiac uptake of meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) on [(123)I] MIBG 
myocardial scintigraphy has been reported in the early stages of Parkinson's 
disease (PD), which suggests involvement of the cardiac sympathetic nerve in the 
early disease process of PD. For confirmation, we immunohistochemically examined 
cardiac tissue, sympathetic ganglia and medulla oblongata of 20 patients with 
incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD), which is thought to be a presymptomatic 
stage of PD, and 10 control subjects, using antibodies against tyrosine 
hydroxylase (TH) and neurofilament (NF). Immunoreactive nerve fibers of 
fascicles in the epicardium were well preserved in 10 of the 20 patients with 
ILBD and in the control subjects. In contrast, TH-immunoreactive nerve fibers 
had nearly disappeared in six subjects and were moderately decreased in four of 
the 20 patients with ILBD. Neuronal cell loss in the dorsal vagal nucleus and 
the sympathetic ganglia was not detectable in any of the ILBD patients examined. 
These findings suggest that degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve begins 
in the early disease process of PD and that it occurs before neuronal cell loss 
in the dorsal vagal nucleus.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2006.00032.x
PMCID: PMC8095543
PMID: 17493034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1629. J Neurol Sci. 2007 Sep 15;260(1-2):57-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.03.027. Epub 
2007 May 9.

Evaluation of brain perfusion SPECT using an easy Z-score imaging system (eZIS) 
as an adjunct to early-diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases.

Waragai M(1), Yamada T, Matsuda H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, JR Tokyo General Hospital, 2-1-3, Yoyogi, Shibuya-ku, 
Tokyo 151-8528, Japan. warawaram2002@aol.com

The eZIS allows computer-assisted statistical analysis of brain perfusion SPECT 
images. We evaluated the diagnostic value of brain perfusion SPECT using eZIS in 
patients with various neurodegenerative diseases at a very early stage, within 
one year from onset.
METHODS: SPECT using eZIS was performed for patients with Alzheimer disease 
(AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), frontotemporal dementia (FTD,), 
idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD) and vascular Parkinsonism (VP), multiple 
systemic atrophy of the cerebellar type (MSA-C), cortical cerebellar atrophy 
(CCA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS).
RESULTS: Decreased rCBF was observed in the posterior cingulate cortex, 
precuneus and parietal cortex in AD; in the frontal gyrus and insula in FTD; in 
the occipital lobe, precuneus gyrus and posterior cingulate cortex in DLB; in 
the striatum and the thalamus in VP; in the cerebellum in CCA; in the cerebellum 
and pons in MSA-C and in the frontal cortex including the central sulcus in ALS. 
Increased rCBF in the striatum, thalamus and cerebellar dentate nuclei were 
observed in PD.
CONCLUSIONS: A specific rCBF pattern was observed for each disease using eZIS 
analysis, consistent with previous reports. Our results showed eZIS can be 
easily used as an adjunct to early-diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases in 
any hospital.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.03.027
PMID: 17493637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1630. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;24(1):42-7. doi: 10.1159/000102596. Epub 2007 
May 10.

Frequency and clinical characteristics of early-onset dementia in consecutive 
patients in a memory clinic.

Shinagawa S(1), Ikeda M, Toyota Y, Matsumoto T, Matsumoto N, Mori T, Ishikawa T, 
Fukuhara R, Komori K, Hokoishi K, Tanabe H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Neuroscience, Ehime University, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Ehime, Japan.

AIMS: To investigate the frequency, rate of causes of dementia, and clinical 
characteristics of early-onset dementia in consecutive patients of a memory 
clinic.
METHODS: A total of 668 consecutive demented patients were involved in this 
study. We examined the distribution of patients' diagnosis, differences in sex, 
education, dementia severity and cognitive function at the first visit, and the 
duration from onset to consultation. We also examined the changes in the 
proportion of subjects during the research period.
RESULTS: There were 185 early-onset patients, 28% of all demented patients. No 
significant differences were observed between the early-onset and late-onset 
dementia groups in Clinical Dementia Rating and Mini-Mental State Examination 
score at the first consultation, but the duration from onset to consultation was 
significantly longer in the early-onset group. In the early-onset group, the 
rates of patients with Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies were 
relatively low and the rate of patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
was relatively high. There were no significant differences in the proportion 
between either demented subjects and nondemented subjects or early-onset 
dementia patients and late-onset dementia patients during the research period.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that early-onset dementia is not rare and its clinical 
characteristics and causes are different from late-onset dementia.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000102596
PMID: 17495475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1631. J Med Genet. 2007 Sep;44(9):606-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2006.048470. Epub 2007 May 
11.

Insulin-degrading enzyme is genetically associated with Alzheimer's disease in 
the Finnish population.

Vepsäläinen S, Parkinson M, Helisalmi S, Mannermaa A, Soininen H, Tanzi RE, 
Bertram L, Hiltunen M.

The gene for insulin-degrading enzyme (IDE), which is located at chromosome 
10q24, has been previously proposed as a candidate gene for late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) based on its ability to degrade amyloid beta-protein. 
Genotyping of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the IDE gene in Finnish 
patients with AD and controls revealed SNPs rs4646953 and rs4646955 to be 
associated with AD, conferring an approximately two-fold increased risk. Single 
locus findings were corroborated by the results obtained from haplotype 
analyses. This suggests that genetic alterations in or near the IDE gene may 
increase the risk for developing AD.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.2006.048470
PMCID: PMC2597950
PMID: 17496198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


1632. C R Biol. 2007 Apr;330(4):318-28. doi: 10.1016/j.crvi.2007.02.018. Epub 2007 Apr 
9.

Interaction between genes and environment in neurodegenerative diseases.

Elbaz A(1), Dufouil C, Alpérovitch A.

Author information:
(1)Inserm, U708 Neuroépidémiologie & université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie (Paris-6), 
groupe hospitalier Pitié-Salpêtrière, 75651 Paris cedex 13, France.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are highly prevalent 
disorders that account for a large part of the global burden of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Most AD and PD cases occur sporadically and it is 
generally agreed that they could arise through interactions among genetic and 
environmental factors. Candidate genes involved in the metabolism of 
xenobiotics, neurodegeneration and functioning of dopaminergic neurons were 
found to be associated with PD. Some of these genes interact with environmental 
factors that could modify PD risk. Thus, we found that the inverse association 
between smoking and the risk of PD depended on a polymorphism of the iNOS 
(inducible NO synthase) gene. We also found that the cytochrome P450 2D6 gene 
could have a modifying effect on the risk of PD among persons exposed to 
pesticides. Both interactions have biological plausibility supported by 
laboratory studies and could contribute to better understand the aetiology of 
PD. A single susceptibility gene has been identified in sporadic AD. The 
epsilon4 allele of epsilon polymorphism of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) is 
strongly associated with AD, the risk of AD being multiplied by 5 in persons 
carrying two epsilon4 alleles. The mechanism of the association between APOE and 
AD is poorly understood. A few interactions between the epsilon polymorphism and 
possible risk factors for AD have been described. However, these interactions 
had no biological plausibility and were likely due to chance.

DOI: 10.1016/j.crvi.2007.02.018
PMID: 17502288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1633. J Neurol. 2007 Jan;254(1):38-45. doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-0234-8. Epub 2007 Feb 
14.

The effect of age of onset of PD on risk of dementia.

Aarsland D(1), Kvaløy JT, Andersen K, Larsen JP, Tang MX, Lolk A, Kragh-Sørensen 
P, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, Arm 
Hansen v 20, N-4005, Stavanger, Norway. daa@sir.no

BACKGROUND: Dementia occurs in the majority of patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD). Late onset of PD has been reported to be associated with a higher risk for 
dementia. However, age at onset (AAO) and age at baseline assessment are often 
correlated. The aim of this study was to explore whether AAO of PD symptoms is a 
risk factor for dementia independent of the general effect of age.
METHODS: Two community-based studies of PD in New York (n=281) and Rogaland 
county, Norway (n=227) and two population-based groups of healthy elderly from 
New York (n=180) and Odense, Denmark (n=2414) were followed prospectively for 
3-4 years and assessed for dementia according to DSM-IIIR. All PD and control 
cases underwent neurological examination and were followed with neurological and 
neuropsychological assessments. We used Cox proportional hazards regression 
based on three different time scales to explore the effect of AAO of PD on risk 
of dementia, adjusting for age at baseline and other demographic and clinical 
variables.
FINDINGS: In both PD groups and in the pooled analyses, there was a significant 
effect of age at baseline assessment on the time to develop dementia, but there 
was no effect of AAO independent of age itself. Consistent with these results, 
there was no increased relative effect of age on the time to develop dementia in 
PD cases compared with controls.
INTERPRETATION: This study shows that it is the general effect of age, rather 
than AAO that is associated with incident dementia in subjects with PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-006-0234-8
PMID: 17508138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1634. Neurochem Res. 2007 Oct;32(10):1640-5. doi: 10.1007/s11064-007-9360-7. Epub 2007 
May 17.

Iron: the Redox-active center of oxidative stress in Alzheimer disease.

Castellani RJ(1), Moreira PI, Liu G, Dobson J, Perry G, Smith MA, Zhu X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Maryland, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Although iron is essential in maintaining the function of the central nervous 
system, it is a potent source of reactive oxygen species. Excessive iron 
accumulation occurs in many neurodegenerative diseases including Alzheimer 
disease (AD), Parkinson's disease, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, raising the 
possibility that oxidative stress is intimately involved in the 
neurodegenerative process. AD in particular is associated with accumulation of 
numerous markers of oxidative stress; moreover, oxidative stress has been shown 
to precede hallmark neuropathological lesions early in the disease process, and 
such lesions, once present, further accumulate iron, among other markers of 
oxidative stress. In this review, we discuss the role of iron in the progression 
of AD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-007-9360-7
PMID: 17508283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1635. Acta Neurol Scand. 2007 Jun;115(6):385-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00818.x.

Irreversible motor impairment in young addicts--ephedrone, manganism or both?

Sikk K(1), Taba P, Haldre S, Bergquist J, Nyholm D, Zjablov G, Asser T, 
Aquilonius SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, University of Tartu, L. Puusepa 2, 
Tartu 51014, Estonia. katrin.sikk@regionaalhaigla.ee

BACKGROUND: Parkinsonian syndrome related to intravenous use of a "designer" 
psychostimulant, derived from pseudoephedrine using potassium permanganate as 
the oxidant, has been observed in drug addicts in Estonia.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the symptomatology of four young patients, history of 
drug administration and chemical analysis of a drug batch.
METHODS: Mental and motor function and quality of life were scored and ephedrone 
was analyzed using electrospray mass spectrometry. Manganese content of the 
final synthetic mixture was analyzed using Inductively Coupled Plasma-Atomic 
Emission Spectrometry.
RESULTS: None of the four cases scored below the dementia threshold in MMSE, 
while other ratings (UPDRS, H&Y, PDQ-39) corresponded to disabilities seen in 
relatively advanced Parkinson's disease. The ephedrone yield of the reaction was 
approximately 44% and the mixture was found to contain 0.6 g/l of manganese.
CONCLUSIONS: The cases were exposed to extreme manganese load. Their 
symptomatology is probably identical to manganism. The role of ephedrone is 
presently unknown. Physicians must be aware of early signs of manganism in 
patients within social risk groups.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00818.x
PMID: 17511846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1636. Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1759-61. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000266867.20409.1c.

Tales of Pacific tangles: Cycad exposure and Guamanian neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Friedland RP, Armon C.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1764-71.
    Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1772-81.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000266867.20409.1c
PMID: 17515536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1637. Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1764-71. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000262027.31623.b2.

Cycad exposure and risk of dementia, MCI, and PDC in the Chamorro population of 
Guam.

Borenstein AR(1), Mortimer JA, Schofield E, Wu Y, Salmon DP, Gamst A, Olichney 
J, Thal LJ, Silbert L, Kaye J, Craig UL, Schellenberg GD, Galasko DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, College of Public Health, 
University of South Florida, Tampa, FL 33612-3805, USA. aborenst@health.usf.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1759-61.

OBJECTIVE: To study cycad-derived products as possible risk factors for 
dementia, mild cognitive impairment (MCI), and parkinsonism-dementia complex 
(PDC) on Guam.
METHODS: Complete risk factor data from in-person interviews of 166 cases of 
Guam dementia, 50 cases of amnestic MCI, and 21 cases of PDC were compared with 
1,581 controls in the base population regarding exposure to cycad-derived 
products from a traditional food (fadang), consumption of fruit bats, and use of 
cycad-derived topical medicine.
RESULTS: Adjusted odds ratios (ORs) and 95% CIs for picking, processing, and 
eating fadang in young adulthood ranged from 1.42 (1.05 to 1.91) to 2.87 (1.48 
to 5.56) and were consistently elevated and significant across all three 
diagnostic outcomes. Associations independent of exposure in young adulthood 
were for picking (OR 0.78, 95% CI 0.64 to 0.96) and processing (OR 0.77, 95% CI 
0.63 to 0.94) fadang in childhood with Guam dementia. Men showed stronger and 
more consistent relations across exposure groups in young adulthood compared 
with women. No associations were found for consumption of fruit bats or exposure 
to cycad used as a topical medicine for any of the outcomes. Estimated adjusted 
population attributable risks suggest that exposure to eating fadang in young 
adulthood incurred the highest attributable risk percent.
CONCLUSIONS: Environmental lifestyle and diet may contribute to the etiology of 
neurodegenerative diseases in the native population of Guam.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000262027.31623.b2
PMID: 17515538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1638. Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1772-81. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000262028.16738.64.

Prevalence of dementia in Chamorros on Guam: relationship to age, gender, 
education, and APOE.

Galasko D(1), Salmon D, Gamst A, Olichney J, Thal LJ, Silbert L, Kaye J, Brooks 
P, Adonay R, Craig UK, Schellenberg G, Borenstein AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA. 
dgalasko@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2007 May 22;68(21):1759-61.

OBJECTIVES: To estimate the prevalence of dementia and its clinical subtypes 
among Chamorros on Guam aged 65 years or older and to examine associations with 
age, gender, education, and APOE genotype.
BACKGROUND: Chamorros, the indigenous people of Guam, had a high incidence of 
ALS and parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC), in the 1950s. Over the next 50 
years, ALS incidence declined markedly, but PDC only slightly. The prevalence of 
late life dementia in Chamorros and its relationship to ALS/PDC are unknown.
METHODS: Island-wide population-based survey of Chamorros aged 65 years or older 
as of January 1, 2003. Two-stage assessment: cognitive and motor screening, 
followed by neurologic and psychometric evaluation. Data were reviewed at 
consensus conference to make clinical diagnoses.
RESULTS: Of 2,789 Chamorros aged 65 years or older, 73% were enrolled; 27% 
declined participation, died before contact or screening, or moved off Guam. The 
point prevalence of all-cause dementia on February 1, 2004, was 12.2%. 
Prevalence data for subtypes were as follows: Guam dementia (clinically 
equivalent to AD), 8.8%; PDC, 1.5%; pure vascular dementia, 1.3%; other, 0.6%. 
The prevalence of dementia rose exponentially with age. Low education was 
significantly associated with dementia, but gender was not. There was a trend 
toward higher PDC prevalence among men. The APOE epsilon4 allele was not 
associated with dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of dementia among elderly Chamorros is relatively 
high. Guam dementia is the most common diagnosis and exceeds 
parkinsonism-dementia complex. Age and low education are strongly associated 
with dementia, but gender and APOE epsilon4 are not. Incidence studies will 
allow risk factors for dementia to be clarified.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000262028.16738.64
PMID: 17515539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1639. Mov Disord. 2007 Aug 15;22(11):1581-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.21560.

Bowel movement frequency in late-life and incidental Lewy bodies.

Abbott RD(1), Ross GW, Petrovitch H, Tanner CM, Davis DG, Masaki KH, Launer LJ, 
Curb JD, White LR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Virginia School of 
Medicine, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908-0717, and Veterans Affairs Pacific 
Islands Health Care System, Honolulu, HI, USA. rda3e@virginia.edu

It is not known if constipation is associated with the preclinical phase of 
Parkinson's disease (PD), often characterized by the presence of incidental Lewy 
bodies (ILB). Such an association could provide evidence that constipation is an 
early symptom of PD. The purpose of this report is to examine the association 
between late-life bowel movement frequency and ILB. Bowel movement frequency was 
assessed from 1991 to 1993 in 245 men aged 71 to 93 years in the Honolulu-Asia 
Aging Study who later received postmortem examinations. All were without 
clinical PD and dementia. Brains were examined for ILB in the substantia nigra 
and locus ceruleus. Among the decedents, 30 men had ILB (12.2%). After 
age-adjustment, the percent of brains with ILB declined with increasing bowel 
movement frequency (P=0.013). For men with <1, 1, and >1 bowel movement/day, 
corresponding percents were 24.1, 13.5, and 6.5%. Findings persisted after 
additional adjustment for time to death, mid-life pack-years of smoking and 
coffee intake, physical activity, and cognitive function. Infrequent bowel 
movements are associated with ILB. Findings provide evidence that constipation 
can predate the extrapyramidal signs of PD. Constipation could be one of the 
earliest markers of the beginning of PD processes.

Copyright (c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21560
PMID: 17523195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1640. Mov Disord. 2007 Aug 15;22(11):1640-3. doi: 10.1002/mds.21568.

A novel LRRK2 mutation in an Austrian cohort of patients with Parkinson's 
disease.

Haubenberger D(1), Bonelli S, Hotzy C, Leitner P, Lichtner P, Samal D, 
Katzenschlager R, Djamshidian A, Brücke T, Steffelbauer M, Bancher C, Grossmann 
J, Ransmayr G, Strom TM, Meitinger T, Gasser T, Auff E, Zimprich A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Vienna, and SMZ-Ost 
Donauspital, Vienna, Austria.

To investigate the frequency of mutations in the Leucine-Rich Repeat Kinase 2 
gene (LRRK2) in a sample of Austrian Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, we 
sequenced the complete coding region in 16 patients with autosomal dominant PD. 
Furthermore, we sequenced exons 31, 35, and 41 additionally in 146 patients with 
idiopathic PD and 30 patients with dementia with Lewy bodies. Furthermore, all 
192 patients were screened for 21 putative LRRK2 mutations. While the most 
common mutation G2019S and the risk variant G2385R were not found in our 
samples, we detected a novel missense mutation (S973N) in a patient with 
familial, late-onset and dopa-responsive PD.

Copyright (c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21568
PMID: 17523199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1641. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2007 Mar-Apr;41(2):113-21.

CYP2D6 gene polymorphism as a probable risk factor for Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia.

Gołab-Janowska M(1), Honczarenko K, Gawrońska-Szklarz B, Potemkowski A.

Author information:
(1)Katedra i Klinika Neurologii, Pomorskiej Akademia Medyczna, Szczecin. 
glissanda1@poczta.onet.pl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The theory of multifactorial inheritance is considered 
in the pathogenesis of sporadic Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease 
(PD); therefore, it makes the genes regulating bioactivation or detoxification 
of exogenous substances candidates of sensitivity to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
diseases. The aims of the study were: 1) to determine the genotypes of CYP2D6 
cytochrome (CYP2D6) in patients with AD and sporadic PD with dementia; 2) to 
evaluate the relationship between the CYP2D6 genotype and the age of onset of 
the disease, the extent of dementia in AD and PD, the dose and side effects of 
L-dopa in PD; 3) to evaluate the usefulness of CYP2D6 genotyping in predicting 
predispositions to PD and AD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 53 patients with AD aged 58-84 (mean age 72.6) and 52 
patients with PD with dementia aged 51-82 (mean age 70.4) were recruited. Each 
AD patient satisfied criteria for probable AD. Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders 4th edition, Mini-Mental State Examination, Clinical 
Dementia Rating Scale and Global Deterioration Scale were used for dementia 
evaluation in PD patients. Clinical scales for PD evaluation were used. Methods 
of molecular biology were used for genetic studies.
RESULTS: There were no differences in CYP2D6 genotype and allele distribution in 
AD and PD patients. There was no relationship between CYP2D6 alleles and the age 
of onset and advancement of dementia in AD and PD. No relationship between 
CYP2D6 alleles and the dose and side effects of L-dopa in patients with sporadic 
PD with dementia was observed.
CONCLUSION: As there were no differences in CYP2D6 polymorphism in AD and PD, 
CYP2D6 does not seem to be a factor predisposing to these diseases.

PMID: 17530572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1642. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2007 Nov;22(11):1154-63. doi: 10.1002/gps.1810.

Diagnosing Alzheimer's disease--non-clinicians and computerised algorithms 
together are as accurate as the best clinical practice.

Foy CM(1), Nicholas H, Hollingworth P, Boothby H, Willams J, Brown RG, Al-Sarraj 
S, Lovestone S.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neurodegeneration Research, King's College London, Institute 
of Psychiatry, London, UK. C.Foy@iop.kcl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: An accurate diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and an exclusion of 
other dementias is important in many clinical studies. Obtaining such a clinical 
diagnosis in epidemiological studies and clinical trials that recruit large 
numbers of patients is time consuming.
OBJECTIVES: To construct an algorithm using a limited number of data points to 
generate a diagnosis of the commonest forms of dementia using information 
collected by non clinicians.
METHODS: We constructed a computer algorithm to generate a diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), vascular dementia or to flag the case as needing a clinical 
review based on a limited number of data points taken from a largely structured 
interview using widely used scales. The diagnosis generated in life by the 
algorithm in a prospective, longitudinal study was compared to definitive 
diagnosis at post mortem.
RESULTS: Post mortem diagnosis was available for 43 cases. The positive 
predictive value of the algorithm was greater than 95%. AD was diagnosed by the 
algorithm and at post mortem in 36 of the cases. Two cases with FTD were wrongly 
diagnosed as having AD by the algorithm, five cases were flagged as needing a 
clinical review due to concomitant medical conditions of whom four had AD and 
one, who had been diagnosed clinically as having AD, was diagnosed on post 
mortem with corticobasal degeneration.
CONCLUSIONS: A combination of non-clinical researchers, a structured interview 
and a computerised algorithm is as effective at identifying AD as highly trained 
and skilled clinicians.

Copyright 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1810
PMID: 17530621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1643. Brain Nerve. 2007 May;59(5):495-501.

[Positron emission tomography with FDG and newly developed tracers for the 
assessment of brain metabolism and synaptic function in neurological disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Momose T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, University of Tokyo, 
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Positron emission tomography has enabled us to measure various fundamental 
parameters of human brain physiology and chemistry, such as cerebral blood flow, 
metabolism and synaptic functions. Blood flow and oxygen metabolism is important 
for the understanding of cerebro-vascular disease. Glucose metabolism is tightly 
coupled with brain function and FDG-PET is useful for the determination of 
epileptic foci and for the evaluation of tumor malignancy. Imaging analysis of 
functional neuroanatomy of these parameters is very promising for the early 
diagnosis of dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease. Measurement of pre- and 
post-synaptic function is applicable to the differential diagnosis of 
parkinsonism. In early stage of Parkinson's disease, only presynaptic 
dopaminergic function is impaired, while in multiple system atrophy with 
striato-nigral degeneration type, both pre-and post dopaminergic function is 
reduced. Development of new radiotracers is expected for detection of early 
specific pathological changes and more previous changes underlying the 
deterioration of neurochemistry, such as genetic abnormalities.

PMID: 17533975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1644. Mov Disord. 2007 Jul 30;22(10):1430-1435. doi: 10.1002/mds.21457.

Controlled study of decision-making and cognitive impairment in Parkinson's 
disease.

Pagonabarraga J(1), García-Sánchez C(1), Llebaria G(1), Pascual-Sedano B(1), 
Gironell A(1), Kulisevsky J(1).

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Autonomous 
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2007 Jul 30;22(10):1371-2.

Impulse control disorders (ICD) related to reward-processing dysfunction have 
been reported in Parkinson's disease (PD). The relationship between clinical 
markers of limbic dysfunction with demographic variables and cognitive status of 
PD is incompletely known. Our objective was to further characterize the 
relationship between limbic and cognitive dysfunction in a representative sample 
of nondemented PD patients without antecedents of ICD, as assessed by a 
risk-taking test of decision-making and a comprehensive neuropsychological 
battery. Prospective, controlled study of 35 nondemented PD patients and 31 
matched controls who received the Iowa gambling task (IGT), the Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale (MDRS) and verbal fluencies for global cognitive function, the 
Stroop and digit span tests for executive function, and the Rey Auditory Verbal 
Learning Test for memory. Compared to controls, PD patients performed 
significantly worse on the IGT. No clear relationship with demographic variables 
including dopaminergic treatment and motor response to levodopa (stable or 
fluctuating) emerged. Performance on the IGT was not related to executive 
function. In contrast, an inverse relationship was found between the IGT and 
memory and global cognitive performance, with patients with the better MDRS and 
memory scores performing significantly worse on the IGT. Our results confirm 
subclinical dysfunction of the limbic system in nondemented PD patients. 
Although impaired decision-making appears unrelated to executive dysfunction, 
patients with the better cognitive status appears more prone to assume risky 
behaviors.

Copyright 2007 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21457
PMID: 17534944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1645. Mov Disord. 2007;22 Suppl 18:S424-30. doi: 10.1002/mds.21600.

Restless legs syndrome in Parkinson's disease and other neurodegenerative 
diseases of the central nervous system.

Iranzo A(1), Comella CL, Santamaria J, Oertel W.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic and Institut D'Investigació Biomèdiques 
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain. airanzo@clinic.ub.es

Erratum in
    Mov Disord. 2008 Jun;23(8):1200-2.

The pathophysiology of restless legs syndrome (RLS) is associated with central 
dopaminergic system dysfunction leading to speculations that RLS may be common 
in those neurodegenerative diseases with dopaminergic cell loss. However, since 
RLS is a very common condition, the co-occurrence with less frequent disorders 
such as the neurodegenerative diseases might be a matter of chance. Currently, 
no data suggests that patients with sporadic and familial RLS are at increased 
risk for developing a neurodegenerative disease. In particular, whether RLS is 
associated with Parkinson's disease has not been established. Only a few studies 
have directly addressed this issue, and these have methodological limitations 
yielding conflicting results. Few studies have assessed the frequency of RLS in 
other neurodegenerative disorders. In several autosomal dominant spinocerebellar 
ataxias, particularly in Machado-Joseph disease, a higher frequency of RLS is 
reported than could be accounted for in the general population. Two anecdotal 
publications have reported the presence of RLS in patients with Huntington's 
disease and hereditary spastic paraparesis. There are no studies that have 
examined the association between RLS and other neurodegenerative diseases, such 
as Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, 
multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal 
degeneration. .

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21600
PMID: 17534950 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1646. Mov Disord. 2007 Sep 15;22(12):1681-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.21433.

Mild Parkinsonian signs: An overview of an emerging concept.

Louis ED(1), Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)G.H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

Mild Parkinsonian signs (MPS) include gait and balance changes, rigidity, 
bradykinesia, and tremor. MPS can occur commonly during the clinical examination 
of older people who do not have known neurological disease, with prevalence 
estimates for MPS as a whole ranging from 15% to 95%. MPS are generally 
progressive and they are coupled with functional difficulties, impaired gait and 
balance, and increased risks of mild cognitive impairment, dementia, and 
mortality. The mechanistic basis for these signs is unclear, but is likely to be 
multifactorial, with possible factors including an age-associated decline in 
dopaminergic nigrostriatal activity, the early development of neurodegenerative 
(Lewy body or Alzheimer's type) pathologies in the basal ganglia, or the 
accumulation of vascular pathology in the brain. It would be valuable to 
identify those individuals with MPS who are at increased risk for the 
development of future Alzheimer's disease, full-blown Parkinson's disease, or 
strokes, and to develop therapeutic strategies to intervene to lessen the 
likelihood of MPS-related morbidity and mortality.

(c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21433
PMID: 17534951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1647. Brain. 2007 Jul;130(Pt 7):1787-98. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm111. Epub 2007 May 29.

Evolution of cognitive dysfunction in an incident Parkinson's disease cohort.

Williams-Gray CH(1), Foltynie T, Brayne CE, Robbins TW, Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 2PY, UK. 
chm27@cam.ac.uk

We have previously performed detailed clinical and neuropsychological 
assessments in a community-based cohort of patients with newly diagnosed 
parkinsonism, and through analysis of a subcohort with idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (PD), we have demonstrated that cognitive dysfunction occurs even at the 
time of PD diagnosis and is heterogeneous. Longitudinal follow-up of the cohort 
has now been performed to examine the evolution of cognitive dysfunction within 
the early years of the disease. One hundred and eighty (79%) eligible patients 
from the original cohort with parkinsonism were available for re-assessment at 
between 3 and 5 years from their initial baseline assessments. PD diagnoses were 
re-validated with repeated application of the UKPDS Brain Bank criteria in order 
to maximize sensitivity and specificity, following which a diagnosis of 
idiopathic PD was confirmed in 126 patients. Thirteen out of 126 (10%) had 
developed dementia at a mean (SD) of 3.5 (0.7) years from diagnosis, 
corresponding to an annual dementia incidence of 30.0 (16.4-52.9) per 1000 
person-years. A further 57% of PD patients showed evidence of cognitive 
impairment, with frontostriatal deficits being most common amongst the 
non-demented group. However, the most important clinical predictors of global 
cognitive decline following correction for age were neuropsychological tasks 
with a more posterior cortical basis, including semantic fluency and ability to 
copy an intersecting pentagons figure, as well as a non-tremor dominant motor 
phenotype at the baseline assessment. This work clarifies the profile of 
cognitive dysfunction in early PD and demonstrates that the dementing process in 
this illness is heralded by both postural and gait dysfunction and cognitive 
deficits with a posterior cortical basis, reflecting probable non-dopaminergic 
cortical Lewy body pathology. Furthermore, given that these predictors of 
dementia are readily measurable within just a few minutes in a clinical setting, 
our work may ultimately have practical implications in terms of guiding 
prognosis in individual patients.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm111
PMID: 17535834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1648. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Jun 15;420(3):257-62. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.05.010. 
Epub 2007 May 10.

Association study of two genetic variants in mitochondrial transcription factor 
A (TFAM) in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Belin AC(1), Björk BF, Westerlund M, Galter D, Sydow O, Lind C, Pernold K, 
Rosvall L, Håkansson A, Winblad B, Nissbrandt H, Graff C, Olson L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, and Karolinska University 
Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden. Andrea.Carmine.Belin@ki.se

Mitochondrial (mt) dysfunction has been implicated in Alzheimer's (AD) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) is needed 
for mtDNA maintenance, regulating mtDNA copy number and is absolutely required 
for transcriptional initiation at mtDNA promoters. Two genetic variants in TFAM 
have been reported to be associated with AD in a Caucasian case-control material 
collected from Germany, Switzerland and Italy. One of these variants was 
reported to show a tendency for association with AD in a pooled Scottish and 
Swedish case-control material and the other variant was reported to be 
associated with AD in a recent meta-analysis. We investigated these two genetic 
variants, rs1937 and rs2306604, in an AD and a PD case-control material, both 
from Sweden and found significant genotypic as well as allelic association to 
marker rs2306604 in the AD case-control material (P=0.05 and P=0.03, 
respectively), where the A-allele appears to increase risk for developing AD. No 
association was observed for marker rs1937. We did not find any association in 
the PD case-control material for either of the two markers. The distribution of 
the two-locus haplotype frequencies (based on rs1937 and rs2306604) did not 
differ significantly between affected individuals and controls in the two sample 
sets. However, the global P-value for haplotypic association testing indicated 
borderline association in the AD sample set. Our data suggests that the 
rs2306604 A-allele could be a moderate risk factor for AD, which is supported by 
the recent meta-analysis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.05.010
PMID: 17537576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1649. Mov Disord. 2007 Sep 15;22(12):1689-707; quiz 1837. doi: 10.1002/mds.21507.

Clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with Parkinson's disease.

Emre M(1), Aarsland D, Brown R, Burn DJ, Duyckaerts C, Mizuno Y, Broe GA, 
Cummings J, Dickson DW, Gauthier S, Goldman J, Goetz C, Korczyn A, Lees A, Levy 
R, Litvan I, McKeith I, Olanow W, Poewe W, Quinn N, Sampaio C, Tolosa E, Dubois 
B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, Istanbul, Turkey. 
muratemre@superonline.com

Dementia has been increasingly more recognized to be a common feature in 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), especially in old age. Specific criteria 
for the clinical diagnosis of dementia associated with PD (PD-D), however, have 
been lacking. A Task Force, organized by the Movement Disorder Study, was 
charged with the development of clinical diagnostic criteria for PD-D. The Task 
Force members were assigned to sub-committees and performed a systematic review 
of the literature, based on pre-defined selection criteria, in order to identify 
the epidemiological, clinical, auxillary, and pathological features of PD-D. 
Clinical diagnostic criteria were then developed based on these findings and 
group consensus. The incidence of dementia in PD is increased up to six times, 
point-prevelance is close to 30%, older age and akinetic-rigid form are 
associated with higher risk. PD-D is characterized by impairment in attention, 
memory, executive and visuo-spatial functions, behavioral symptoms such as 
affective changes, hallucinations, and apathy are frequent. There are no 
specific ancillary investigations for the diagnosis; the main pathological 
correlate is Lewy body-type degeneration in cerebral cortex and limbic 
structures. Based on the characteristic features associated with this condition, 
clinical diagnostic criteria for probable and possible PD-D are proposed.

(c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21507
PMID: 17542011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1650. Biochemistry. 2007 Jun 26;46(25):7325-36. doi: 10.1021/bi700430y. Epub 2007 Jun 
2.

Nitration in neurodegeneration: deciphering the "Hows" "nYs".

Reynolds MR(1), Berry RW, Binder LI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Feinberg School of Medicine, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. 
m-reynolds@md.northwestern.edu

Recent literature has ushered in a new awareness of the diverse 
post-translational events that can influence protein folding and function. Among 
these modifications, protein nitration is thought to play a critical role in the 
onset and progression of several neurodegenerative diseases. While previously 
considered a late-stage epiphenomenon, nitration of protein tyrosine residues 
appears to be an early event in the lesions of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease. The advent of highly specific 
biochemical and immunological detection methods reveals that nitration occurs in 
vivo with biological selectively and site specificity. In fact, nitration of 
only a single Tyr residue is often sufficient to induce profound changes in the 
activity of catalytic proteins and the three-dimensional conformation of 
structural proteins. Presumably, nitration modifies protein function by altering 
the hydrophobicity, hydrogen bonding, and electrostatic properties within the 
targeted protein. Most importantly, however, nitrative injury may represent a 
unifying mechanism that explains how genetic and environmental causes of 
neurological disease manifest a singular phenotype. In this review and 
synthesis, we first examine the pathways of protein nitration in biological 
systems and the factors that influence site-directed nitration. Subsequently, we 
turn our attention to the structural implications of site-specific nitration and 
how it affects the function of several neurodegeneration-related proteins. These 
proteins include Mn superoxide dismutase and neurofilament light subunit in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, alpha-synuclein and tyrosine hydroxylase in 
Parkinson's disease, and tau in Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1021/bi700430y
PMID: 17542619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1651. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2007 Apr-Jun;21(2):144-9. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e31805ba768.

Diabetes and parkinsonian signs in older persons.

Arvanitakis Z(1), Wilson RS, Bienias JL, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush 
Institute for Healthy Aging, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA.

We examined the relation of type 2 diabetes mellitus to parkinsonian signs in 
older persons. Participants were 1030 women and men (mean age 80.3 y, education 
14.5 y, Mini-Mental State Examination 27.9) without dementia or Parkinson 
disease, enrolled in the Rush Memory and Aging Project, an epidemiologic study 
of aging. We used separate linear and logistic regression models, adjusted for 
age, sex, and education, to examine the relation of diabetes, identified by 
history and medication inspection, to each of the scores of global parkinsonian 
signs and 4 separate parkinsonian signs. Diabetes was present in 140 (14%) 
participants. Most participants had mild parkinsonian signs. Diabetes was 
associated with a more severe global parkinsonian signs score (beta=0.20, 
SE=0.10, P=0.05) and postural reflex impairment-gait disturbance (beta=0.40, 
SE=0.17, P=0.02), but not with bradykinesia, rigidity, or tremor. Associations 
were no longer significant after controlling for vascular risk factors or 
conditions, particularly body mass index and congestive heart failure. Overall, 
there was no evidence that vascular variables modified the relation of diabetes 
to parkinsonian signs. In summary, we found that diabetes was associated with 
parkinsonian signs, especially postural reflex impairment-gait disturbance, and 
that vascular factors may play a role in this association.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e31805ba768
PMID: 17545740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1652. Med Hypotheses. 2007;69(6):1219-21. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2007.04.014. Epub 2007 
Jun 4.

Glatiramer acetate could be a potential therapeutic agent for Parkinson's 
disease through its neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory effects.

Tsai SJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, No. 201 Shih-Pai 
Road, Sec. 2, 11217 Taipei, Taiwan sjtsai@vghtpe.gov.tw

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disease 
after Alzheimer's disease. The hallmark pathologic feature of PD is dopamine 
deficiency, caused by the degeneration of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. 
Current treatments for PD mainly address the dopaminergic features of the 
disease; however they do not modify the progression of neurodegeneration. The 
need for newer and more effective agents is consequently receiving a great deal 
of attention. Brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), a member of the 
neurotrophic factor family, can promote survival of injured dopaminergic 
nigrostriatal neurons in the rodent. Postmortem studies have suggested that BDNF 
deficiency may play a role in PD pathogenesis. This is further supported by the 
finding that BDNF administration has a therapeutic effect in animal models of 
PD. Glatiramer acetate (GA) is a collection of synthetic polypeptides approved 
for the treatment of relapsing-remitting multiple sclerosis. Preclinical studies 
have demonstrated that peripheral GA administration can enhance central BDNF 
activity and augment neurogenesis. Furthermore, PD has been associated with an 
inflammatory process in the brain. Animal studies have demonstrated that GA 
administration has a central anti-inflammatory effect through the release of 
anti-inflammatory cytokines. From the above evidence, GA could act as a 
potential therapeutic agent for PD by increasing central BDNF and by exerting an 
anti-inflammatory effect. With the recent finding that GA administration can 
prevent neuronal loss and cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease 
double-transgenic mice, early GA treatment may also prevent neurodegeneration 
and manifestations of PD symptoms in subjects with familial Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2007.04.014
PMID: 17548170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1653. Neurology. 2007 Jun 5;68(23):2012-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000264429.59379.d9.

Do alpha-synuclein aggregates in autonomic plexuses predate Lewy body 
disorders?: a cohort study.

Minguez-Castellanos A(1), Chamorro CE, Escamilla-Sevilla F, Ortega-Moreno A, 
Rebollo AC, Gomez-Rio M, Concha A, Munoz DG.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Virgen de las Nieves University Hospital, Granada, 
Spain. aminguezc@meditex.es

OBJECTIVE: To determine the prevalence of alpha-synuclein (AS) aggregates in 
abdominopelvic autonomic plexuses in the general population and to evaluate the 
relationship between this finding and the subsequent development of neurologic 
dysfunction.
METHODS: First, surgical specimens from 100 patients (ages 44 to 84) undergoing 
a wide resection of an abdominopelvic organ were examined by anti-AS 
immunostaining. Second, 16 patients (6 AS+ and 10 randomly selected AS-) 
participated in yearly double-blinded neurologic assessments.
RESULTS: AS aggregates were found in autonomic plexuses in 9% of the whole 
sample (95% CI 3.4 to 14.6%) but were more common in vesicoprostatic (26%) than 
in digestive tract (4%) specimens. At 16 months after the biopsy, no prevalent 
cases of Parkinson disease, dementia, or autonomic failure were diagnosed among 
participants. One AS+ patient had previously been diagnosed with REM sleep 
behavior disorder. Seven of 10 control subjects but none of the 6 AS+ patients 
had a diagnosis of hypertension (p = 0.01). During phase IV of Valsalva 
maneuver, AS+ group exhibited a longer blood pressure recovery time (p = 0.03), 
with one patient showing absence of blood pressure overshoot. Cardiac 
[(123)I]metaiodobenzylguanidine uptake was reduced in the AS+ group (p = 0.03). 
Striatal [(123)I]ioflupane uptake was abnormally low in only one AS+ patient. At 
30 months after the biopsy, lower cardiac and striatal uptake values tended to 
correlate with higher Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale III scores (p = 
0.07).
CONCLUSION: The common presence of alpha-synuclein aggregates in peripheral 
autonomic neurons may represent an early presymptomatic phase in the development 
of Lewy body disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000264429.59379.d9
PMID: 17548551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1654. J Anat. 2007 Jul;211(1):117-24. doi: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00748.x. Epub 2007 
Jun 6.

Alpha-synuclein pathology in the olfactory pathways of dementia patients.

Hubbard PS(1), Esiri MM, Reading M, McShane R, Nagy Z.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, The Medical School, University of Birmingham, UK.

Lewy-type pathology is a characteristic of a number of neurodegenerative 
disorders, including Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Thus 
far, the definitive diagnosis of these dementias can only be confirmed at 
post-mortem. However, it is known that the loss of smell (anosmia) is an early 
symptom in patients who develop dementia, and the use of the smell test has been 
proposed as an early diagnostic procedure. The aim of this study was to 
understand further the extent of Lewy pathology in the olfactory system of 
patients with neurodegenerative disorders. Post-mortem tissue from 250 subjects 
was obtained from the OPTIMA brain bank. Five areas of the olfactory pathway 
were examined by immunolabelling for alpha-synuclein - a major component of Lewy 
pathology: the olfactory tract/bulb (n = 79), the anterior olfactory nucleus in 
the lateral olfactory gyrus (n = 193), the region of olfactory projection to the 
orbito-frontal cortex (n = 225), the hippocampus (n = 236) and the amygdala (n = 
201). Results show that Lewy pathology affects different parts of the olfactory 
pathways differentially, suggesting a specific pattern of development of 
pathology. Clinical Parkinson's disease is most likely to be identified if the 
orbito-frontal cortex is affected, while the diagnosis is less likely if the 
pathology is restricted to the olfactory bulb or tract. These results suggest 
that pathology in the olfactory bulb and tract occurs prior to clinical signs of 
Parkinson's disease. Furthermore, the results presented here provide further 
evidence supporting the possible value of a smell test to aid the clinical 
diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7580.2007.00748.x
PMCID: PMC2375794
PMID: 17553102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1655. Eur J Public Health. 2008 Feb;18(1):77-84. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckm025. Epub 2007 
Jun 11.

Chronic conditions and the risk of long-term institutionalization among older 
people.

Nihtilä EK(1), Martikainen PT, Koskinen SV, Reunanen AR, Noro AM, Häkkinen UT.

Author information:
(1)Population Research Unit, Department of Sociology, University of Helsinki, 
Finland. elina.k.nihtila@helsinki.fi

BACKGROUND: As the public expenditure on long-term care is likely to increase 
with the ageing of the population, identifying chronic medical conditions 
associated with the risk of long-term institutionalization is of particular 
interest. However, there is little systematic evidence showing how chronic 
medical conditions, other than dementia, affect the risk of entering into 
institutional care in the general older population.
METHODS: We used population-based follow-up data on Finnish older people aged 65 
and over (n = 280 722), to estimate the impact of different chronic conditions 
on the risk of long-term institutionalization. Furthermore, we analysed which 
chronic conditions were more strongly associated with the risk of 
institutionalization than with the risk of death without institutionalization. 
Cox proportional hazard regression models were used.
RESULTS: Our results showed that dementia, Parkinson's disease, stroke, 
depressive symptoms, other mental health problems, hip fracture and diabetes 
were strongly associated with increased risk of long-term institutionalization, 
independent of socio-demographic confounders and the presence of other chronic 
conditions. All these conditions raised the risk of institutionalization by 50% 
or more. Dementia, Parkinson's disease, stroke and mental health problems were 
more strongly associated with the risk of institutionalization than with the 
risk of death without institutionalization.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, these results show that the future demand for 
institutional care depends not only on the ageing of the population but also on 
the development of the prevalence and severity of chronic conditions associated 
with institutionalization.

DOI: 10.1093/eurpub/ckm025
PMID: 17566001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1656. J Psychosom Res. 2007 Jul;63(1):93-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2007.02.004.

The development and validation of a carer questionnaire to assess cognitive 
function in neuropsychiatric patients.

Randhawa S(1), Walterfang M, Miller K, Scholes A, Mocellin R, Velakoulis D.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, and Melbourne Neuropsychiatry 
Centre, University of Melbourne, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: The carer history is an integral part of the assessment of patients 
with cognitive impairment. We aimed to develop a comprehensive yet concise carer 
questionnaire, the CogRisk, which captures actuarial risk variables for 
cognitive impairment in addition to key symptoms suggestive of cognitive decline 
in a number of cognitive domains, and to then assess its validity and 
reliability in a neuropsychiatric population.
METHOD: Carers of patients assessed for cognitive impairment completed the 
CogRisk, and patients were clinically assessed using the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and Neuropsychiatry Unit COGnitive assessment tool (NUCOG). 
Reliability was assessed using test-retest and interrater measures and measures 
of internal consistency. Construct and concurrent validity was assessed using 
correlation between total and subscale scores on the CogRisk, total scores on 
the NUCOG and MMSE, and subscale scores on the NUCOG. Predictive validity was 
determined using measures of sensitivity and specificity and using receiver 
operating characteristic (ROC) methods.
RESULTS: The CogRisk was completed by all carers in less than 10 min. The total 
CogRisk score correlated significantly with total MMSE and NUCOG scores 
(r=-0.511 and -0.563, respectively) and remained highly significant when age and 
education were controlled for. Internal consistency of CogRisk items was high 
(alpha=0.943). Intrarater reliability of the CogRisk was high with an intraclass 
correlation coefficient of .978 (P<.001), and interrater reliability between 
carers was also high at 0.868 (P<.05). Sensitivity and specificity for the 
detection of dementia were .70 and .73, respectively, with area under the ROC 
curve not significantly different from that of the MMSE or NUCOG.
CONCLUSION: The CogRisk is a brief carer-rated tool of a patient's cognitive 
functioning developed for use within a neuropsychiatric setting. It exhibited 
good concurrent validity, internal consistency, and interrater and intrarater 
reliability. The CogRisk also demonstrated good sensitivity and specificity for 
dementia. The CogRisk provides carer information, which complements the clinical 
assessment and can be used to focus on direct carer interview.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2007.02.004
PMID: 17586342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1657. Eur J Neurol. 2007 Jul;14(7):721-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.01853.x.

Classical Parkinson disease versus Parkinson complex--reflections against 
staging and in favour of heterogeneity.

Linazasoro G(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro De Investigación Parkinson, Policlínica Gipuzkoa, Parque Tecnológico 
Miramón, San Sebastián (Guipúzcoa), Spain. glinazasoro@terra.es

Pathological studies have prompted the idea that Parkinson disease (PD) is a 
multisystem disorder, which starts far away from the nigrostriatal dopamine 
system and it goes through a long pre-clinical period. Evidence from 
epidemiological research, functional imaging, olfaction and sleep studies 
provides support to this hypothesis. Accordingly, PD is seen as an homogeneous 
disease which sequentially affects different neural structures leading to a 
well-defined clinical picture. This concept, recently named PD complex, has deep 
theoretical and practical implications which raise some concerns. This report 
shows the concept of classical PD as opposed to PD complex. Although the 
relevance of the central argument concerning the PD complex concept is admitted, 
it needs to be fully proved before premature conclusions are drawn. In contrast, 
the notion of classical and clinically significant PD can explain many of the 
well-characterized pathological and clinical features of the disease and it 
gives support to the idea that the magic word in PD is variability.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.01853.x
PMID: 17594326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1658. Mov Disord. 2007 Oct 15;22(13):1839-51; quiz 1988. doi: 10.1002/mds.21537.

Prognostic factors for the progression of Parkinson's disease: a systematic 
review.

Post B(1), Merkus MP, de Haan RJ, Speelman JD; CARPA Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The purpose of this systematic review is to summarize studies that describe the 
course of Parkinson's disease (PD) and to identify factors that predict change 
in motor impairment, disability, and quality of life. A literature search was 
conducted in MEDLINE, EMBASE, CINAHL, and Web of Science limited to the English, 
French, German, Spanish, and Dutch language. Reports were selected if the study 
involved subjects with PD, the outcome measures described impairment, 
disability, or quality of life and follow-up was at least 6 months. All included 
studies were scored for methodological quality. Data were extracted and 
summarized in a best evidence synthesis. We screened 1,535 titles and abstracts, 
of which 27 fulfilled our inclusion criteria. A meta-analysis to quantitatively 
aggregate progression scores of motor impairment and disability was not possible 
because of the wide variety of outcome measures used and the heterogeneous study 
populations. Limited evidence is found for lower UPDRS-ME at baseline, dementia 
and SE < 70% as prognostic factors for future motor impairment. There is strong 
evidence for higher age at onset and higher PIGD-score; and limited evidence for 
higher bradykinesia-score, non-tremor dominant subtype, symmetrical disease at 
baseline, and depression as prognostic factors for progression of disability. 
Prognostic factors were identified for impairment and disability. The literature 
on prognosis in PD is not fulfilling the high methodological standards applied 
nowadays. There is a need for prospective cohorts of PD patients assembled at a 
common early point in the disease with long time follow-up.

2007 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21537
PMID: 17595026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1659. Neurology. 2007 Nov 13;69(20):1911-20. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000271087.67782.cb. 
Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Relation of cognitive activity to risk of developing Alzheimer disease.

Wilson RS(1), Scherr PA, Schneider JA, Tang Y, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, 600 South 
Paulina, Suite 1038, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rwilson@rush.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2007 Nov 13;69(20):1896-7.

BACKGROUND: Frequent cognitive activity in old age has been associated with 
reduced risk of Alzheimer disease (AD), but the basis of the association is 
uncertain.
METHODS: More than 700 old people underwent annual clinical evaluations for up 
to 5 years. At baseline, they rated current and past frequency of cognitive 
activity with the current activity measure administered annually thereafter. 
Those who died underwent a uniform postmortem examination of the brain. Amyloid 
burden, density of tangles, and presence of Lewy bodies were assessed in eight 
brain regions and the number of chronic cerebral infarctions was noted.
RESULTS: During follow-up, 90 people developed AD. More frequent participation 
in cognitive activity was associated with reduced incidence of AD (HR = 0.58; 
95% CI: 0.44, 0.77); a cognitively inactive person (score = 2.2, 10th 
percentile) was 2.6 times more likely to develop AD than a cognitively active 
person (score = 4.0, 90th percentile). The association remained after 
controlling for past cognitive activity, lifespan socioeconomic status, current 
social and physical activity, and low baseline cognitive function. Frequent 
cognitive activity was also associated with reduced incidence of mild cognitive 
impairment and less rapid decline in cognitive function. Among 102 persons who 
died and had a brain autopsy, neither global nor regionally specific measures of 
neuropathology were related to level of cognitive activity before the study, at 
study onset, or during the course of the study.
CONCLUSION: Level of cognitively stimulating activity in old age is related to 
risk of developing dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000271087.67782.cb
PMID: 17596582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1660. Nurs Older People. 2007 Jul 1;19(6):39. doi: 10.7748/nop.19.6.39.s21.

Primary and secondary causes of constipation in older people.

[No authors listed]

Older people are at risk of constipation because of age-related changes that may 
weaken intestinal muscles, decrease peristalsis and reduce physical activity. 
Primary causes of constipation include decrease in fluid intake, decrease in 
ingestion of high fibre foods which may be associated with reduced ability to 
chew food, and weak abdominal muscles reducing effective evacuation. Secondary 
causes include disease processes such as dementia, Parkinson's, hypothryroidism, 
diverticular disease and prescribed medications, including narcotics, calcium 
channel blockers, anticholinergics and antidepressants. In this study a mixture 
was made up consisting of one cup of each of the following.

DOI: 10.7748/nop.19.6.39.s21
PMID: 27726702


1661. Subcell Biochem. 2007;42:299-318.

Nutritional intervention in brain aging: reducing the effects of inflammation 
and oxidative stress.

Lau FC(1), Shukitt-Hale B, Joseph JA.

Author information:
(1)USDA-ARS, Human Nutrition Research Center on Aging at Tufts University, 
Boston, MA, USA.

It is estimated that by the year 2050 the elderly (aged 65 or older) population 
will double the population of children (aged 0-14) for the first time in 
history. The expansion of the elderly population has already taken a toll on 
health care systems. In order to alleviate the health care costs and increase 
the quality of living in the aging population, it is crucial to explore methods 
that may retard or reverse the deleterious effects of aging. Inflammation and 
oxidative stress play important roles in brain aging. Inflammatory markers, as 
well as cellular and molecular oxidative damage, increase during normal brain 
aging. This increase is accompanied by the concomitant decline in cognitive and 
motor performance in the elderly population, even in the absence of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Epidemiological studies have shown that consumption 
of diets rich in antioxidant and anti-inflammatory agents, such as those found 
in fruits and vegetables, may lower the risk of developing age-related 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease. 
Research from our laboratory suggests that dietary supplementation with fruit or 
vegetable extracts can decrease the age-enhanced vulnerability to oxidative 
stress and inflammation. Additional research suggests that the polyphenolic 
compounds found in fruits such as blueberries may exert their beneficial effects 
through signal transduction and neuronal communication. Thus, nutritional 
intervention may exert therapeutic protection against age-related deficits and 
neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 17612057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1662. Biomed Pharmacother. 2007 Aug;61(7):383-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2007.05.009. 
Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Serum biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: proteomic discovery.

German DC(1), Gurnani P, Nandi A, Garner HR, Fisher W, Diaz-Arrastia R, 
O'Suilleabhain P, Rosenblatt KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9070, USA. 
dwight.german@utsouthwestern.edu

For Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common neurodegenerative disease, there 
is no simple, cost-effective biomarker for disease identification. Using novel 
mass spectrometry (MS)-based techniques, and analysis of the albumin-enriched 
low molecular weight proteome, minute amounts of human serum were analyzed for 
the measurement of thousands of peptides and proteins in parallel. The mass 
spectrograms were then evaluated with a novel computer algorithm to identify 
spectral peaks that discriminate between samples from patients with and without 
AD. There are four peaks that distinguish AD from control subjects and AD 
subjects from those with Parkinson's disease (PD). Additionally, after analyzing 
data from a recently published study of AD and control subjects, we found three 
discriminating peaks in common with the four from our patient serum samples. The 
identification of these peptides/proteins, and their direct measurement in 
patient serum, may allow the development of a simple, cost-effective test for 
AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopha.2007.05.009
PMID: 17614251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1663. Hum Mov Sci. 2007 Aug;26(4):555-89. doi: 10.1016/j.humov.2007.05.003. Epub 2007 
Jul 5.

Gait dynamics, fractals and falls: finding meaning in the stride-to-stride 
fluctuations of human walking.

Hausdorff JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Gait & Neurodynamics, Movement Disorders Unit, Department of 
Neurology, Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Israel. 
jhausdor@tasmc.health.gov.it

Until recently, quantitative studies of walking have typically focused on 
properties of a typical or average stride, ignoring the stride-to-stride 
fluctuations and considering these fluctuations to be noise. Work over the past 
two decades has demonstrated, however, that the alleged noise actually conveys 
important information. The magnitude of the stride-to-stride fluctuations and 
their changes over time during a walk - gait dynamics - may be useful in 
understanding the physiology of gait, in quantifying age-related and pathologic 
alterations in the locomotor control system, and in augmenting objective 
measurement of mobility and functional status. Indeed, alterations in gait 
dynamics may help to determine disease severity, medication utility, and fall 
risk, and to objectively document improvements in response to therapeutic 
interventions, above and beyond what can be gleaned from measures based on the 
average, typical stride. This review discusses support for the idea that gait 
dynamics has meaning and may be useful in providing insight into the neural 
control of locomotion and for enhancing functional assessment of aging, chronic 
disease, and their impact on mobility.

DOI: 10.1016/j.humov.2007.05.003
PMCID: PMC2267927
PMID: 17618701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1664. Neurology. 2007 Jul 10;69(2):196-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000265590.66637.e8.

Brain volumes in Guam dementia vs Parkinson dementia complex vs aging Chamorro 
adults.

Kaye JA(1), Moore MM, Galasko D, Craig UK, Adonay R, Silbert LC.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, OR 
97239, USA. kaye@ohsu.edu

We sought to determine if Chamorro individuals with a family history of Guam 
dementia (GD) or Parkinson dementia complex (PDC) exhibit presymptomatic brain 
MRI changes. Sixty-six Chamorro subjects had neurocognitive assessment and 
volumetric MRI. MRI brain volumes differed between diagnostic groups (GD, PDC, 
control) and according to family history. Chamorros with a family history of PDC 
or dementia may have increased brain atrophy, suggesting a hereditary 
susceptibility to neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000265590.66637.e8
PMID: 17620553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1665. Neurodegener Dis. 2007;4(5):366-75. doi: 10.1159/000105157. Epub 2007 Jul 6.

Serum heart-type fatty acid-binding protein and cerebrospinal fluid tau: marker 
candidates for dementia with Lewy bodies.

Mollenhauer B(1), Steinacker P, Bahn E, Bibl M, Brechlin P, Schlossmacher MG, 
Locascio JJ, Wiltfang J, Kretzschmar HA, Poser S, Trenkwalder C, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard 
Institutes of Medicine, 77 Avenue Louis Pasteur, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
bmollenhauer@rics.bwh.harvard.edu

BACKGROUND: The measurement of biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) has 
gained increasing acceptance in establishing the diagnosis of some 
neurodegenerative diseases. Heart-type fatty acid-binding protein (H-FABP) was 
recently discovered in CSF and serum of patients with neurodegenerative 
diseases.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated H-FABP in CSF and serum alone and in combination with 
CSF tau protein to evaluate these as potential biomarkers for the 
differentiation between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD).
METHODS: We established H-FABP and tau protein values in a set of 144 persons 
with DLB (n = 33), Parkinson disease with dementia (PDD; n = 25), AD (n = 35) 
and nondemented neurological controls (NNC; n = 51). Additionally, serum H-FABP 
levels were analyzed in idiopathic Parkinson disease patients without evidence 
of cognitive decline (n = 45) using commercially available enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays. We calculated absolute values of H-FABP and tau protein in 
CSF and serum and established relative ratios between the two to obtain the best 
possible match for the clinical working diagnosis.
RESULTS: Serum H-FABP levels were elevated in DLB and PDD patients compared with 
NNC and AD subjects. To better discriminate between DLB and AD, we calculated 
the ratio of serum H-FABP to CSF tau protein levels. At the arbitrary chosen 
cutoff ratio > or =8 this quotient reached a sensitivity of 91% and a 
specificity of 66%.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the measurement of CSF tau protein, 
together with H-FABP quantification in serum and CSF, and the ratio of serum 
H-FABP to CSF tau protein represent marker candidates for the differentiation 
between AD and DLB.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000105157
PMID: 17622779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1666. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2007 Aug;19(4):350-4. doi: 
10.1097/GCO.0b013e32821642d1.

Elective oophorectomy in the gynecological patient: when is it desirable?

Parker WH(1), Shoupe D, Broder MS, Liu Z, Farquhar C, Berek JS.

Author information:
(1)UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA. wparker@ucla.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Oophorectomy is electively performed in approximately 300,000 
US women per year who are having hysterectomy for benign disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: New studies have suggested that elective oophorectomy may not 
be advisable for the majority of women, as it may lead to a higher risk of death 
from cardiovascular disease and hip fracture, and may result in a higher 
incidence of dementia and Parkinson's disease. Women with known BRCA 1/2 
germ-line mutations clearly benefit from oophorectomy after childbearing.
SUMMARY: Prophylactic oophorectomy should be undertaken with caution in the 
majority of women with an average risk of ovarian cancer who are having a 
hysterectomy for benign disease.

DOI: 10.1097/GCO.0b013e32821642d1
PMID: 17625417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1667. Occup Environ Med. 2007 Dec;64(12):820-6. doi: 10.1136/oem.2006.031559. Epub 
2007 Jul 11.

Mortality from Alzheimer's, motor neuron and Parkinson's disease in relation to 
magnetic field exposure: findings from the study of UK electricity generation 
and transmission workers, 1973-2004.

Sorahan T(1), Kheifets L.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Occupational and Environmental Medicine, University of 
Birmingham, Edgbaston, Birmingham B15 2TT, UK. T.M.Sorahan@bham.ac.uk

Comment in
    Occup Environ Med. 2007 Dec;64(12):790-1.

BACKGROUND: There are a number of reports linking magnetic field exposure to 
increased risks of Alzheimer's disease and motor neuron disease.
METHODS: The mortality experienced by a cohort of 83 997 employees of the former 
Central Electricity Generating Board of England and Wales was investigated for 
the period 1973-2004. All employees were employed for at least six months with 
some employment in the period 1973-82. Computerised work histories were 
available for 79 972 study subjects for the period 1971-93. Information on job 
and facility (location) were used to estimate exposures to magnetic fields. Two 
analytical approaches were used to evaluate risks, indirect standardisation 
(n = 83 997) and Poisson regression (n = 79 972).
RESULTS: Based on serial mortality rates for England and Wales, deaths from 
Alzheimer's disease and motor neuron disease were unexceptional. There was an 
excess of deaths from Parkinson's disease of borderline significance. No 
statistically significant trends were shown for risks of any of these diseases 
to increase with lifetime cumulative exposure to magnetic fields (RR per 
10 μT-y: Alzheimer's disease 1.10 (95% CI 0.90 to 1.33); motor neuron disease 
1.06 (95% CI 0.86 to 1.32); Parkinson's disease 0.88 (95% CI 0.74 to 1.05))
CONCLUSIONS: There is no convincing evidence that UK electricity generation and 
transmission workers have suffered increased risks from neurodegenerative 
diseases as a consequence of exposure to magnetic fields.

DOI: 10.1136/oem.2006.031559
PMCID: PMC2095390
PMID: 17626136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


1668. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2007;24(3):151-61. doi: 10.1159/000105483. Epub 2007 
Jul 10.

Presenilin gene predisposes to late-onset degenerative but not vascular 
dementia: a comparative study of PS1 and ApoE genes in a North Indian Cohort.

Pandey P(1), Pradhan S, Mittal B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical 
Sciences, Lucknow, India.

BACKGROUND: Variation in the presenilin gene shifts the cleavage site of amyloid 
precursor protein producing an insoluble peptide Abeta(42) (instead of 
Abeta(40), which is soluble when produced in restricted amount), which is prone 
to aggregation in the brain in the form of amyloid plaques not only in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) but also in other degenerative dementias. The role of 
presenilin 1 (PS1) and apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genes has not been explored in 
degenerative dementias other than AD.
OBJECTIVE: To study the association of PS1 intron 8 and ApoE epsilon4 gene 
polymorphism in degenerative and vascular dementia patients in the North Indian 
population.
DESIGN: A hospital-based association study on degenerative and vascular dementia 
patients proven on the basis of clinical profile and MRI.
PARTICIPANTS: A group of 107 dementia patients and 162 age- and sex-matched 
controls from a North Indian cohort participated in the study. All patients had 
Mini Mental State Examination scores less than 24 and met the DSM-IV criteria 
for dementia.
RESULTS: The frequency of genotype 1/1 and allele 1 in degenerative dementias 
(73.12 and 83.70%, respectively) was higher than what had been reported so far 
in AD. A significant association of PS1 intron 8 polymorphism was found with 
degenerative dementias but not with vascular dementias (OR 2.50, 95% CI 
1.27-5.00). On the other hand, ApoE epsilon4 allele was found to significantly 
increase the risk for both vascular and degenerative dementias (p = 0.0001, OR 
3.45, 95% CI 1.74-6.86).
CONCLUSION: While ApoE epsilon4 allele increases the susceptibility to both 
degenerative and vascular dementia, PS1 allele 1 increases the susceptibility to 
degenerative dementias only.

2007 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000105483
PMID: 17627113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1669. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008;14(1):37-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2007.05.009. Epub 2007 Jul 12.

A profile of neuropsychiatric problems and their relationship to quality of life 
for Parkinson's disease patients without dementia.

McKinlay A(1), Grace RC, Dalrymple-Alford JC, Anderson T, Fink J, Roger D.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, University of Canterbury, PO Box 1485, Private Bag 
4800, Christchurch, Canterbury 8004, New Zealand. aco24@student.canterbury.ac.nz

Neuropsychiatric problems are common in Parkinson's disease (PD) but there is 
little information regarding how they impact on quality of life. PD patients 
without dementia (49) were assessed for low mood/depression, fatigue, apathy, 
sleep problems and hallucinations. Measures of quality of life and motor 
function were also obtained. Over 77% of the patients reported symptoms 
consistent with one or more neuropsychiatric problems. Low mood/depression, 
anxiety and the presence of hallucinations predicted poorer quality of life 
after controlling for motor symptoms. Additional to the motor symptoms, we found 
that specific neuropsychiatric problems may impact on quality of life for PD 
patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2007.05.009
PMID: 17627863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1670. J Nucl Med. 2007 Aug;48(8):1289-300. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.106.037218. Epub 2007 
Jul 13.

Role of neuroimaging in Alzheimer's disease, with emphasis on brain perfusion 
SPECT.

Matsuda H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Saitama Medical University Hospital, Saitama, 
Japan. matsudah@saitama-med.ac.jp

Structural MRI and functional imaging by SPECT as well as 18F-FDG PET are widely 
used in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Metabolic and perfusion 
reductions in the parietotemporal association cortex are recognized as a 
diagnostic pattern for AD. Outstanding progress in the diagnostic accuracy of 
these modalities has been achieved with statistical analysis on a voxel-by-voxel 
basis after anatomic standardization of individual scans to a standardized brain 
volume template instead of visual inspection or a volume-of-interest technique. 
In a very early stage of AD, this statistical approach revealed losses of gray 
matter in the entorhinal and hippocampal areas and hypometabolism or 
hypoperfusion in the posterior cingulate cortex and precuneus. This statistical 
approach also offers a prediction of the conversion from mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) to AD. The presence of hypometabolism or hypoperfusion in 
parietal association areas and entorhinal atrophy at the MCI stage have been 
reported to predict a rapid conversion to AD. A recent advance in voxel-based 
statistical analysis has markedly enhanced the value of brain perfusion SPECT in 
diagnosing early AD at the stage of MCI.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.106.037218
PMID: 17631544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1671. Med Health R I. 2007 Jun;90(6):191-4.

Atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of dementia-related behaviors: an 
update.

Daiello LA(1).

Author information:
(1)The Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, USA. 
ldaiello@lifespan.org

Atypical antipsychotics will continue to be prescribed for the behavioral 
symptoms of dementia in the absence of more effective, better tolerated, and 
safer alternatives. The evidence base, although incomplete, suggests that modest 
treatment effect sizes are offset by risk of considerable adverse effects. How 
might this information be best applied to clinical practice? Non-pharmacologic 
strategies should be implemented in routine clinical practice. 
Placebo-controlled clinical trials of individual antipsychotic agents have 
historically reported high placebo response rates; CATIE-AD reported that the 
sum total of the risk/benefit equation of atypical antipsychotic therapy was no 
greater than that achieved by placebo. CATIE-AD was designed to study the 
effectiveness of atypical antipsychotic treatment in community dwelling patients 
with AD. It is uncertain whether the results can be generalized to the 
populations of dementia patients residing in nursing homes with more severe 
cognitive and behavioral impairment. There is some suggestion that nursing home 
patients with dementia complicated by severe behavioral symptoms, particularly 
agitation and aggression without accompanying psychosis, might achieve greater 
benefit from atypical antipsychotic treatment than patients with milder 
behavioral symptoms. The finding that dementia patients without psychosis may 
respond more robustly to antipsychotic treatment seems counterintuitive, but may 
support the hypothesis that the neurobiology of the "psychosis of AD" differs 
from the psychosis of schizophrenia or bipolar disease. Adverse effects 
associated with antipsychotic therapy should be aggressively monitored 
throughout therapy. Treatment-emergent sedation was associated with all of the 
atypical antipsychotics in CATIE-AD and is probably an important mediator of 
mortality risk in patients with dementia. Sedation exacerbates pre-existing 
cognitive impairment and increases the risk of complications such as aspiration 
pneumonia, so concomitant use of benzodiazepines should be discouraged or 
limited to short periods with careful observation.' Once initiated, the 
effectiveness and tolerability of antipsychotic therapy should be evaluated 
routinely. In Alzheimer's disease, the severity and frequency of behavioral 
symptoms often decreases as illness progresses. In a stable patient, it is 
prudent to attempt to taper and discontinue the antipsychotic after 2-8 months 
of therapy. Better understanding of the potential adverse effects of 
antipsychotic therapy has increased interest in the effects of the 
dementia-specific medications on behavioral symptoms. Reductions in 
neuropsychiatric symptoms have been reported from trials of individual 
cholinesterase inhibitors, memantine monotherapy, and memantine combined with 
donepezil in AD patients. Studies of small numbers of patients in open trials of 
cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine, galantamine) and one 
double-blind placebo controlled trial (rivastigmine) have reported varying 
degrees of improvement of behavioral symptoms and psychosis of dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB). Delusions, hallucinations, apathy, and agitation/aggression 
are cited as the symptom categories most likely to show significant improvement. 
Since few of these studies were prospectively designed to study behavioral 
symptoms, results must be interpreted cautiously. Treatment of behavioral 
symptoms in AD and other dementias is challenging. The limitations of current 
approaches drive the search for effective, well tolerated therapies.

PMID: 17633594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1672. Regen Med. 2007 Jul;2(4):425-46. doi: 10.2217/17460751.2.4.425.

Cell-replacement and gene-therapy strategies for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Korecka JA(1), Verhaagen J, Hol EM.

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Institute for Neuroscience, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and 
Sciences, Meibergdreef 47, 1105 BA, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease are the most common 
neurodegenerative diseases in the elderly population. Given that age is the most 
important risk factor in these diseases, the number of patients is expected to 
rise dramatically in the coming years. Therefore, an effective therapy for these 
diseases is highly sought. Current treatment brings only temporary symptomatic 
relief and does not result in halting the progression of these diseases. The 
increasing knowledge on the molecular mechanisms that underlie these diseases 
enables the design of novel therapies, targeted at degenerating neurons by 
creating an optimal regenerative cellular environment. Here, we review the 
progress made in the field of cell-replacement and gene-therapy strategies. New 
developments in the application of embryonic stem cells and adult neuronal 
progenitors are discussed. We also discuss the use of genetically engineered 
cells in neuronal rescuing strategies that have recently advanced into the 
clinic. The first trials for the treatment of Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease with this approach are ongoing.

DOI: 10.2217/17460751.2.4.425
PMID: 17635050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1673. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Jul 24;104(30):12524-9. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0705044104. Epub 2007 Jul 16.

Common molecular signature in SOD1 for both sporadic and familial amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis.

Gruzman A(1), Wood WL, Alpert E, Prasad MD, Miller RG, Rothstein JD, Bowser R, 
Hamilton R, Wood TD, Cleveland DW, Lingappa VR, Liu J.

Author information:
(1)Bioconformatics Laboratory and Department of Neuroscience, California Pacific 
Medical Center Research Institute, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a devastating motor neuron degenerative 
disease whose etiology and pathogenesis remain poorly understood. Most cases of 
ALS ( approximately 90%) are sporadic (SALS), occurring in the absence of 
genetic associations. Approximately 20% of familial ALS (FALS) cases are due to 
known mutations in the copper, zinc superoxide dismutase (SOD1) gene. Molecular 
evidence for a common pathogenesis of SALS and FALS has remained elusive. Here 
we use covalent chemical modification to reveal an attribute of spinal cord SOD1 
common to both SOD1-linked FALS and SALS, but not present in normal or 
disease-affected tissues from other neurodegenerative diseases, including 
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's diseases and spinal muscular atrophy, 
a non-ALS motor neuron disease. Biotinylation reveals a 32-kDa, covalently 
cross-linked SOD1-containing protein species produced not only in FALS caused by 
SOD1 mutation, but also in SALS. These studies use chemical modification as a 
novel tool for the detection of a disease-associated biomarker. Our results 
identify a shared molecular event involving a known target gene and suggest a 
common step in the pathogenesis between SALS and FALS.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0705044104
PMCID: PMC1941502
PMID: 17636119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: V.R.L. is a 
founder and J.L. a consultant to Prosetta Corporation, an early stage 
biotechnology company.


1674. BMC Med. 2007 Jul 19;5:20. doi: 10.1186/1741-7015-5-20.

Simvastatin is associated with a reduced incidence of dementia and Parkinson's 
disease.

Wolozin B(1), Wang SW, Li NC, Lee A, Lee TA, Kazis LE.

Author information:
(1)Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, USA. bwolozin@bu.edu

BACKGROUND: Statins are a class of medications that reduce cholesterol by 
inhibiting 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme A reductase. Whether statins can 
benefit patients with dementia remains unclear because of conflicting results. 
We hypothesized that some of the confusion in the literature might arise from 
differences in efficacy of different statins. We used a large database to 
compare the action of several different statins to investigate whether some 
statins might be differentially associated with a reduction in the incidence of 
dementia and Parkinson's disease.
METHODS: We analyzed data from the decision support system of the US Veterans 
Affairs database, which contains diagnostic, medication and demographic 
information on 4.5 million subjects. The association of lovastatin, simvastatin 
and atorvastatin with dementia was examined with Cox proportional hazard models 
for subjects taking statins compared with subjects taking cardiovascular 
medications other than statins, after adjusting for covariates associated with 
dementia or Parkinson's disease.
RESULTS: We observed that simvastatin is associated with a significant reduction 
in the incidence of dementia in subjects > or =65 years, using any of three 
models. The first model incorporated adjustment for age, the second model 
included adjusted for three known risk factors for dementia, hypertension, 
cardiovascular disease or diabetes, and the third model incorporated adjustment 
for the Charlson index, which is an index that provides a broad assessment of 
chronic disease. Data were obtained for over 700,000 subjects taking simvastatin 
and over 50,000 subjects taking atorvastatin who were aged >64 years. Using 
model 3, the hazard ratio for incident dementia for simvastatin and atorvastatin 
are 0.46 (CI 0.44-0.48, p < 0.0001) and 0.91 (CI 0.80-1.02, p = 0.11), 
respectively. Lovastatin was not associated with a reduction in the incidence of 
dementia. Simvastatin also exhibited a reduced hazard ratio for newly acquired 
Parkinson's disease (HR 0.51, CI 0.4-0.55, p < 0.0001).
CONCLUSION: Simvastatin is associated with a strong reduction in the incidence 
of dementia and Parkinson's disease, whereas atorvastatin is associated with a 
modest reduction in incident dementia and Parkinson's disease, which shows only 
a trend towards significance.

DOI: 10.1186/1741-7015-5-20
PMCID: PMC1955446
PMID: 17640385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1675. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2007;114(10):1355-61. doi: 10.1007/s00702-007-0778-5. 
Epub 2007 Jul 4.

Gait and posture impairment, parkinsonism and cognitive decline in older people.

Camicioli R(1), Wang Y, Powell C, Mitnitski A, Rockwood K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
rcamicio@ualberta.ca

Our objective was to examine the frequency of gait and posture impairment and 
parkinsonism in 3 waves of the Canadians Study of Health and Aging (CSHA) and to 
determine their relationship to the development of cognitive impairment-not 
dementia (CIND) and dementia. A secondary analysis of a Canadian 
population-based cohort study was performed. People 65 years of age and older 
without cognitive impairment or dementia underwent examination for the presence 
of gait or posture impairment (GPI) or parkinsonism (based on the presence of 
2/3 signs among resting tremor, rigidity or bradykinesia), both defined by a 
clinical examination. Risk for development of cognitive impairment or dementia 
was examined at 5 and 10 year follow up in pre-specified logistic regression 
models adjusted for age, sex, education and in separate models, frailty. The 
frequency of GPI ranged from 25 to 30% in cognitively unimpaired to 46-53% in 
CIND and demented subjects. Parkinsonism was more common with increasing 
cognitive impairment at each wave of the CSHA. Both GPI and parkinsonism 
predicted cognitive decline. Frailty reduced, but did not eliminate the impact 
of these motor measures and was itself a significant predictor of cognitive 
decline. In conclusion, motor impairment and frailty are common in older people 
and are associated with an increased risk of cognitive decline and dementia. GPI 
is common in CIND, while GPI and parkinsonism are both common in dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-007-0778-5
PMID: 17641815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1676. Neurology. 2007 Jul 24;69(4):356-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000266626.64913.0f.

In dementia with Lewy bodies, Braak stage determines phenotype, not Lewy body 
distribution.

Weisman D(1), Cho M, Taylor C, Adame A, Thal LJ, Hansen LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA, USA. 
davew@graffiti.net

Comment in
    Neurology. 2008 Jan 29;70(5):407-8.
    Neurology. 2008 May 27;70(22):2087-8; author reply 2088-9.

We used an autopsy series to determine whether the newest dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) consensus pathologic classification correlates with premortem 
diagnosis of DLB. Neocortical sections from a total of 95 cases with Lewy bodies 
were stained with alpha-synuclein antibodies. We assigned cases according to the 
DLB consensus' categories and found a significant association with the premortem 
clinical diagnosis of DLB. Clinical diagnosis of DLB, however, depended on the 
presence of low Alzheimer disease pathology (by Braak staging) rather than on 
Lewy body distribution.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000266626.64913.0f
PMID: 17646627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1677. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2007 Aug;26(2):256-64. doi: 10.1002/jmri.22987.

Establishing a baseline phase behavior in magnetic resonance imaging to 
determine normal vs. abnormal iron content in the brain.

Haacke EM(1), Ayaz M, Khan A, Manova ES, Krishnamurthy B, Gollapalli L, Ciulla 
C, Kim I, Petersen F, Kirsch W.

Author information:
(1)MRI Institute for Biomedical Research, Detroit, Michigan, USA. 
nmrimaging@aol.com

PURPOSE: To establish a baseline of phase differences between tissues in a 
number of regions of the human brain as a means of detecting iron abnormalities 
using magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A fully flow-compensated, three-dimensional (3D), 
high-resolution, gradient-echo (GRE) susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) 
sequence was used to collect magnitude and phase data at 1.5 T. The phase images 
were high-pass-filtered and processed region by region with hand-drawn areas. 
The regions evaluated included the motor cortex (MC), putamen (PUT), globus 
pallidus (GP), caudate nucleus (CN), substantia nigra (SN), and red nucleus 
(RN). A total of 75 subjects, ranging in age from 55 to 89 years, were analyzed.
RESULTS: The phase was found to have a Gaussian-like distribution with a 
standard deviation (SD) of 0.046 radians on a pixel-by-pixel basis. Most regions 
of interest (ROIs) contained at least 100 pixels, giving a standard error of the 
mean (SEM) of 0.0046 radians or less. In the MC, phase differences were found to 
be roughly 0.273 radians between CSF and gray matter (GM), and 0.083 radians 
between CSF and white matter (WM). The difference between CSF and the GP was 
0.201 radians, and between CSF and the CN (head) it was 0.213 radians. For CSF 
and the PUT (the lower outer part) the difference was 0.449 radians, and between 
CSF and the RN (third slice vascularized region) it was 0.353 radians. Finally, 
the phase difference between CSF and SN was 0.345 radians.
CONCLUSION: The Gaussian-like distributions in phase make it possible to predict 
deviations from normal phase behavior for tissues in the brain. Using phase as 
an iron marker may be useful for studying absorption of iron in diseases such as 
Parkinson's, Huntington's, neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation 
(NBIA), Alzheimer's, and multiple sclerosis (MS), and other iron-related 
diseases. The phases quoted here will serve as a baseline for future studies 
that look for changes in iron content.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmri.22987
PMID: 17654738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1678. Dis Mon. 2007 May;53(5):302-8. doi: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2007.02.007.

Cognitive disturbances in Parkinson's disease.

Grujic Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer's, Cognitive and Memory Disorders, Evanston Northwestern 
Healthcare, Glenview, Illinois, USA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.disamonth.2007.02.007
PMID: 17656192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1679. Neurol Clin. 2007 Aug;25(3):741-60, vii. doi: 10.1016/j.ncl.2007.03.001.

Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Ferman TJ(1), Boeve BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, 
USA. ferman.tanis@mayo.edu <ferman.tanis@mayo.edu>

The advent of new immunostains have improved the ability to detect limbic and 
cortical Lewy bodies, and it is evident that dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is 
the second most common neurodegenerative dementia, after Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Distinguishing DLB from AD has important implications for treatment, in 
terms of substances that may worsen symptoms and those that may improve them. 
Neurocognitive patterns, psychiatric features, extrapyramidal signs, and sleep 
disturbance are helpful in differentiating DLB from AD early in the disease 
course. Differences in the severity of cholinergic depletion and 
type/distribution of neuropathology contribute to these clinical differences.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ncl.2007.03.001
PMCID: PMC3181471
PMID: 17659188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1680. J Neurochem. 2007 Oct;103(2):467-74. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04763.x. Epub 
2007 Jul 27.

Blood-based neurochemical diagnosis of vascular dementia: a pilot study.

Bibl M(1), Esselmann H, Mollenhauer B, Weniger G, Welge V, Liess M, Lewczuk P, 
Otto M, Schulz JB, Trenkwalder C, Kornhuber J, Wiltfang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry University of Goettingen, von-Siebold-Str, 
Goettingen, Germany. mbibl@gwdg.de

Blood-based tests for the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are 
under intensive investigation and have shown promising results with regard to 
Abeta40 and Abeta42 peptide species in incipient AD. Moreover, plasma Abeta40 
was suggested as an independent cerebrovascular risk factor candidate. These 
considerations prompted us to analyse a total of 72 plasma samples in vascular 
dementias (VAD, n = 15), AD with cerebrovascular disease (AD with CVD, n = 7), 
AD (n = 15), Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's disease dementia (PD/PDD, n = 
20) and 15 patients with depression that served as controls (DC) for distinct 
plasma amyloid-beta (Abeta) peptide patterns. For the analysis of plasma we used 
immunoprecipitation followed by the quantitative Abeta-SDS-PAGE/immunoblot. For 
comparison, CSF tau and Abeta1-42 analyses were performed. The major outcome was 
an increase in Abeta1-40 in plasma of VAD paralleled by a decrease in the ratio 
of Abeta1-38/Abeta1-40. The ratio Abeta1-38/Abeta1-40 in plasma enabled 
contrasts of beyond 85% and 80% for discriminating VAD from DC and all other 
patients, respectively. In CSF, we confirmed the typical CSF biomarker 
constellation of increased tau and diminished Abeta1-42 levels for AD. The 
diagnostic accuracy of plasma Abeta1-38/Abeta1-40 for VAD resembled the accuracy 
of CSF biomarkers for AD. From the presented results, we consider the ratio of 
plasma Abeta1-38/Abeta1-40 peptides to be a blood-based biomarker candidate for 
VAD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2007.04763.x
PMID: 17662050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1681. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2007 Jun;65(2B):402-5. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300007.

Non-choreic movement disorders as initial manifestations of Huntington's 
disease.

Becker N(1), Munhoz RP, Raskin S, Werneck LC, Teive HA.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Hospital de Clínicas, Federal 
University of Paraná, Curitiba, PR, Brazil.

We describe seven patients with genetically confirmed Huntington's disease (HD) 
who had non-choreic movement disorders as presenting symptoms or signs. Patients 
with movement disorders other than chorea in the early stages tended to have 
larger CAG trinucleotide repeat expansion in comparison with more "typical" HD 
patients.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2007000300007
PMID: 17665004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1682. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2007 Nov;22(8):925-31. doi: 10.1016/j.acn.2007.06.008. 
Epub 2007 Aug 2.

Boston naming performance distinguishes between Lewy body and Alzheimer's 
dementias.

Williams VG(1), Bruce JM, Westervelt HJ, Davis JD, Grace J, Malloy PF, Tremont 
G.

Author information:
(1)Brown Medical School, Providence, RI, USA. Vanessa_Williams@brown.edu

Although naming impairment is common among persons with dementia, little is 
known about how specific error types on naming tasks may differ between 
dementias. Recent research has suggested that persons with dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) have more visuospatial/visuoperceptual dysfunction than those with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), which may impact their ability to correctly perceive 
and name objects. Our retrospective study evaluated the presence and frequency 
of error types among patients with DLB and AD on the Boston Naming Test (BNT). 
Errors on the BNT were classified into five types (i.e., visuoperceptual, 
semantic, phonemic, no response, and other), and performance was compared among 
31 probable DLB patients and 31 probable AD patients matched for age, gender, 
education, and overall dementia severity. AD patients' overall performance on 
the BNT was significantly worse than DLB patients (p<.05). In terms of error 
types, DLB patients made significantly more visuoperceptual errors (p<.05) while 
AD patients made significantly more semantic errors (p<.001). Logistic 
regression revealed that the number of visuoperceptual and semantic errors 
significantly predicted group membership (p<.005), with an accuracy of up to 
85%. Results suggest that error analysis of BNT responses may be useful in 
distinguishing between patients with DLB and AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acn.2007.06.008
PMID: 17681741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1683. Ann Neurol. 2007 Aug;62(2):145-53. doi: 10.1002/ana.21192.

Tau and alpha-synuclein in susceptibility to, and dementia in, Parkinson's 
disease.

Goris A(1), Williams-Gray CH, Clark GR, Foltynie T, Lewis SJ, Brown J, Ban M, 
Spillantini MG, Compston A, Burn DJ, Chinnery PF, Barker RA, Sawcer SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences (Neurology Unit), University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, United Kingdom. an.goris@med.kuleuven.be

OBJECTIVE: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative condition that 
typically presents as a movement disorder but is known to be associated with 
variable degrees of cognitive impairment including dementia. We investigated the 
genetic basis of susceptibility to and cognitive heterogeneity of this disease.
METHODS: In 659 PD patients, 109 of which were followed up for 3.5 years from 
diagnosis, and 2,176 control subjects, we studied candidate genes involved in 
protein aggregation and inclusion body formation, the pathological hallmark of 
parkinsonism: microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), glycogen synthase 
kinase-3beta (GSK3B), and alpha-synuclein (SNCA).
RESULTS: We observed that cognitive decline and the development of PD dementia 
are strongly associated (p = 10(-4)) with the inversion polymorphism containing 
MAPT. We also found a novel synergistic interaction between the MAPT inversion 
polymorphism and the single nucleotide polymorphism rs356219 from the 3' region 
of SNCA. In our data, carrying a risk genotype at either of these loci 
marginally increases the risk for development of PD, whereas carrying the 
combination of risk genotypes at both loci approximately doubles the risk for 
development of the disease (p = 3 x 10(-6)).
INTERPRETATION: Our data support the hypothesis that tau and alpha-synuclein are 
involved in shared or converging pathways in the pathogenesis of PD, and suggest 
that the tau inversion influences the development of cognitive impairment and 
dementia in patients with idiopathic PD. These findings have potentially 
important implications for understanding the interface between tau and 
alpha-synuclein pathways in neurodegenerative disorders and for unraveling the 
biological basis for cognitive impairment and dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21192
PMID: 17683088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1684. Nature. 2007 Aug 9;448(7154):704-8. doi: 10.1038/nature06022.

Global changes to the ubiquitin system in Huntington's disease.

Bennett EJ(1), Shaler TA, Woodman B, Ryu KY, Zaitseva TS, Becker CH, Bates GP, 
Schulman H, Kopito RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Stanford University, Stanford, California 
94305, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited neurodegenerative disorder 
caused by expansion of CAG triplet repeats in the huntingtin (HTT) gene (also 
called HD) and characterized by accumulation of aggregated fragments of 
polyglutamine-expanded HTT protein in affected neurons. Abnormal enrichment of 
HD inclusion bodies with ubiquitin, a diagnostic characteristic of HD and many 
other neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
diseases, has suggested that dysfunction in ubiquitin metabolism may contribute 
to the pathogenesis of these diseases. Because modification of proteins with 
polyubiquitin chains regulates many essential cellular processes including 
protein degradation, cell cycle, transcription, DNA repair and membrane 
trafficking, disrupted ubiquitin signalling is likely to have broad consequences 
for neuronal function and survival. Although ubiquitin-dependent protein 
degradation is impaired in cell-culture models of HD and of other 
neurodegenerative diseases, it has not been possible to evaluate the function of 
the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) in HD patients or in animal models of the 
disease, and a functional role for UPS impairment in neurodegenerative disease 
pathogenesis remains controversial. Here we exploit a mass-spectrometry-based 
method to quantify polyubiquitin chains and demonstrate that the abundance of 
these chains is a faithful endogenous biomarker of UPS function. Lys 48-linked 
polyubiquitin chains accumulate early in pathogenesis in brains from the R6/2 
transgenic mouse model of HD, from a knock-in model of HD and from human HD 
patients, establishing that UPS dysfunction is a consistent feature of HD 
pathology. Lys 63- and Lys 11-linked polyubiquitin chains, which are not 
typically associated with proteasomal targeting, also accumulate in the R6/2 
mouse brain. Thus, HD is linked to global changes in the ubiquitin system to a 
much greater extent than previously recognized.

DOI: 10.1038/nature06022
PMID: 17687326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1685. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2007;114(12):1579-83. doi: 10.1007/s00702-007-0794-5. 
Epub 2007 Aug 10.

Serum proteomic profiling of dementia with Lewy bodies: diagnostic potential of 
SELDI-TOF MS analysis.

Wada-Isoe K(1), Michio K, Imamura K, Nakaso K, Kusumi M, Kowa H, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neurological 
Sciences, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. kewada@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common senile degenerative 
dementia after Alzheimer's disease (AD). The presentation of overlapping 
symptoms between these two disorders leads to difficulties in the determination 
of clinical entities. Serum samples were subjected to surface-enhanced laser 
desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (SELDI-TOF MS) analysis 
in order to identify a diagnostic marker for DLB. Four putative protein peaks 
(m/z 3,883, 4,964, 7,761 and 10,534) were differentially expressed in DLB 
patients compared to AD patients and control subjects. Receiver operating 
characteristics (ROC) analysis of a multivariate logistic model of the 
combination of three peaks (m/z 3,883, 7,761 and 10,534) exhibited the highest 
discriminatory ability of DLB subjects from non-DLB subjects with a sensitivity 
of 83.3%, a specificity of 95.8%, a positive predictive value of 90.9% and a 
negative predictive value of 92.0%. SELDI-TOF MS profiling, therefore, has 
revealed a serum signature with high diagnostic potential for DLB.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-007-0794-5
PMID: 17690946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1686. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Jan 15;264(1-2):22-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.07.017. Epub 
2007 Aug 15.

Association of visual hallucinations with reduction of MIBG cardiac uptake in 
Parkinson's disease.

Kitayama M(1), Wada-Isoe K, Irizawa Y, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. mickita@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Postganglionic cardiac sympathetic denervation is evident in 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine 
((123)I-MIBG) cardiac scintigraphy has proven to be a useful tool for diagnosis 
of PD.
OBJECTIVE: To elucidate the factors associated with severity of cardiac 
sympathetic nerve dysfunction in PD patients.
METHODS: We investigated 95 PD patients hospitalized in the Department of 
Neurology at Tottori University Hospital. (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy was 
performed on each patient and the early and delayed heart to mediastinum (H/M) 
ratios and washout rate (WR) of (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy were 
calculated. Independent predictive variables for parameters of (123)I-MIBG 
cardiac scintigraphy were analyzed by multivariate regression analysis.
RESULTS: Multivariate regression analysis revealed that the presence of visual 
hallucinations (VH) and the patient's age at the time of evaluation 
independently predicted the early or delayed H/M ratio. Analysis of covariance, 
adjusted for the age of the patients as covariates, revealed that the early and 
delayed H/M ratios of PD patients with VH but no dementia, as well as PD 
patients with dementia were significantly lower than the ratios in PD patients 
with no VH or dementia.
CONCLUSION: Cardiac sympathetic dysfunction may be associated with the presence 
of VH in PD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.07.017
PMID: 17706675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1687. ACS Chem Biol. 2007 Aug 17;2(8):525-8. doi: 10.1021/cb700165v.

When conjugated polymers meet amyloid fibrils.

Stains CI(1), Ghosh I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Arizona, Tucson, Arizona 85721, USA.

Comment on
    ACS Chem Biol. 2007 Aug 17;2(8):553-60.

In the early 1900s, Alois Alzheimer diagnosed one of his patients with a 
devastating neurological impairment, and this form of dementia became known as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Much research over the past century has clearly 
established that numerous human diseases, ranging from AD and Parkinson's 
disease to dialysis-related amyloidosis, are best characterized by the abnormal 
aggregation of specific proteins. However, in the case of AD, the true toxic 
molecular species is still debated. Thus, the recent development of new 
diagnostic agents capable of distinguishing between different morphologies of 
aggregated proteins is of much interest.

DOI: 10.1021/cb700165v
PMID: 17708668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1688. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Aug 31;424(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.07.015. Epub 
2007 Aug 1.

Relationship of the Ubiquilin 1 gene with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease 
and cognitive function.

Arias-Vásquez A(1), de Lau L, Pardo L, Liu F, Feng BJ, Bertoli-Avella A, Isaacs 
A, Aulchenko Y, Hofman A, Oostra B, Breteler M, van Duijn C.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology & Biostatistics Department, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands. a.ariasvasquez@erasmusmc.nl

Ubiquilin 1 (UBQLN1) is involved in the ubiquitination machinery, which has been 
implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD) as well as Parkinson's disease (PD). A 
polymorphism in the gene encoding for UBQLN1 has been previously associated with 
a higher risk of AD. We studied the role of the SNP rs12344615 on the UBQLN 1 
gene in AD, PD and cognitive function in a population-based study, the Rotterdam 
Study, and a family-based study embedded in the genetic research in isolated 
population (GRIP) program. The Rotterdam Study includes 549 patients with AD and 
157 patients with PD. The GRIP program includes a series of 123 patients with AD 
and a study of 1049 persons who are characterized for cognitive function. Data 
were analysed using logistic and multiple regression analysis. We found no 
significant difference in risk of AD or PD by the UBQLN1 SNP rs12344615 in our 
overall and stratified analyses in the Rotterdam Study. In our family-based 
study, we did not find evidence for linkage of AD to the region including the 
UBQLN1 gene. In the family-based study we also failed to detect an effect of 
this polymorphism on cognitive function. Our results suggest that it is unlikely 
that the SNP rs12344615 of the UBQLN1 gene is related to the onset of AD, PD or 
cognitive function.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.07.015
PMID: 17709205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1689. Mov Disord. 2007 Nov 15;22(15):2235-41. doi: 10.1002/mds.21698.

Pure akinesia with gait freezing: a third clinical phenotype of progressive 
supranuclear palsy.

Williams DR(1), Holton JL, Strand K, Revesz T, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine (Neurosciences), Monash University (Alfred Hospital 
Campus), Melbourne, Australia. david.williams@med.monash.edu.au

The clinical syndrome of pure akinesia has most often been associated with 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and is characterized by difficulty 
initiating gait and "freezing" during walking, writing and speaking. Similar 
syndromes have been described under the rubrics of primary progressive freezing 
gait and primary gait ignition failure. We investigated the specificity of the 
clinical syndrome of pure akinesia with gait freezing (PAGF) for PSP-tau 
pathology. Among 749 patients archived at the QSBB, only 7 fulfilled proposed 
diagnostic criteria of: gradual onset of freezing of gait or speech; absent limb 
rigidity and tremor; no sustained response to levodopa; and no dementia or 
ophthalmoplegia in the first 5 years of disease. In these cases detailed 
pathological examination was performed. PSP was the pathological diagnosis in 
six patients, and Parkinson's disease (PD) in the seventh. As defined, this 
syndrome had a positive predictive value of 86% for PSP-tau pathology. In the 
cases with PSP there were no additional features of coexistent vascular or PD 
and the median PSP-tau score was 3, reflecting relative mild tau load. The 
clinical syndrome of PAGF appears to have a high specificity for PSP-tau 
pathology. This relatively uncommon presentation of PSP-tau pathology has less 
severe tau accumulation than in the more common, "classic" PSP clinical 
phenotype: Richardson's disease.

(c) 2007 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21698
PMID: 17712855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1690. Acta Neurol Scand. 2007 Sep;116(3):190-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00860.x.

Clinical evaluation of Parkinson's disease dementia: association with aging and 
visual hallucination.

Kitayama M(1), Wada-Isoe K, Nakaso K, Irizawa Y, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. mickita@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVES: In order to explore factors associated with the development of 
dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), we 
systematically investigated the clinical evaluation of PD and DLB patients 
hospitalized in the Department of Neurology at Tottori University Hospital, 
Japan.
RESULTS: There were 208 patients diagnosed as having PD and 39 patients 
diagnosed with DLB in this study. Of the patients with PD, 67 (32%) developed 
dementia and only five PD+ patients were considered to have cognitive impairment 
attributable to Alzheimer's disease (AD) or vascular dementia (VaD). Fifty-four 
(81%) PDD patients had visual hallucinations (VH) with or without cognitive 
fluctuation. The onset age of parkinsonian motor symptoms of patients with PD 
dementia (PDD) did not differ from that of PD patients without dementia. There 
was a significant inverse correlation between the onset age of motor symptoms in 
PD and the onset of their dementia in PDD. Seventy-five (36%) patients with PD 
had experienced VH and most of the PDD patients had experienced VH within 1 year 
before or after diagnosis of PDD.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that aging and VH are important factors 
associated with dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00860.x
PMID: 17714333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1691. Neurobiol Aging. 2009 Mar;30(3):501-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.07.010. Epub 2007 Aug 27.

Case control analysis of LRRK2 Gly2385Arg in Alzheimer's disease.

Tan EK(1), Lee J, Chen CP, Wong MC, Zhao Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore. 
gnrtek@sgh.com.sg

Alzheimer's disease (AD) pathology has been described in Parkinson's disease 
(PD) patients with leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) mutations. A common 
LRRK2 Gly2385Arg variant has been widely shown to be associated with a twofold 
increased risk of PD in various Asian populations. In a case control study, the 
frequency of the heterozygous Gly2385Arg genotype was demonstrated in 4.3% of AD 
compared to 4.5% in controls (odds ratio=0.94, 95% CI 0.37-2.42, p=1.0). The 
Gly2385Arg variant does not appear to modulate the risk of AD in our population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.07.010
PMID: 17720280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1692. Neurosci Lett. 2007 Sep 20;425(1):18-22. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.08.010. Epub 
2007 Aug 11.

Plasma levels of DJ-1 as a possible marker for progression of sporadic 
Parkinson's disease.

Waragai M(1), Nakai M, Wei J, Fujita M, Mizuno H, Ho G, Masliah E, Akatsu H, 
Yokochi F, Hashimoto M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Chemistry and Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for 
Neuroscience, Tokyo 183-8526, Japan. waragai@kk.iij4u.or.jp

DJ-1 is a multifunctional protein whose loss of function by gene mutations may 
play a causative role for familial Parkinson's disease (PD). A recent study has 
shown that the expression of this molecule is upregulated in both brains and 
cerebrospinal fluids (CSF) in various neurological disorders, including sporadic 
PD, Alzheimer's disease (AD) and stroke, raising a possibility that DJ-1 could 
be a potential biomarker for these diseases. In this context, the main objective 
of the present study was to determine if DJ-1 was increased in the plasma of PD 
patients. For this purpose, blood plasma samples collected from sporadic PD 
patients, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and healthy age-matched controls were 
analyzed by immunoblotting and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The results 
showed that the plasma DJ-1 levels in PD (n=104) were higher than those in 
control (n=80) (p<0.05). Moreover, the plasma DJ-1 levels in the advanced stage 
of PD (n=52, Yahr III-IV) were higher than those in the early stage of PD (n=52, 
Yahr I-II) (p<0.05), demonstrating that the plasma DJ-1 was correlated with the 
disease severity in PD. Plasma DJ-1 levels were also significantly higher in DLB 
(n=30) compared with both controls and early stage of PD (p<0.01). Taken 
together, these results suggest that the plasma DJ-1 could be a useful biomarker 
for the evaluation of the disease severity in PD and possibly in other Lewy body 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2007.08.010
PMID: 17720313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1693. Hum Mol Genet. 2007 Nov 15;16(22):2703-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm224. Epub 2007 
Aug 27.

Genome-wide linkage analysis of 723 affected relative pairs with late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease.

Hamshere ML(1), Holmans PA, Avramopoulos D, Bassett SS, Blacker D, Bertram L, 
Wiener H, Rochberg N, Tanzi RE, Myers A, Wavrant-De Vrièze F, Go R, Fallin D, 
Lovestone S, Hardy J, Goate A, O'Donovan M, Williams J, Owen MJ.

Author information:
(1)Biostatistics and Bioinformatics Unit, School of Medicine, Cardiff 
University, Heath Park, Cardiff CF14 4XN, UK.

Previous attempts to identify genetic loci conferring risk for late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) through linkage analysis have observed some regions 
of linkage in common. However, due to the sometimes-considerable overlap between 
the samples, some of these reports cannot be considered to be independent 
replications. In order to assess the strength of the evidence for linkage and to 
obtain the best indication of the location of susceptibility genes, we have 
amalgamated three large samples to give a total of 723 affected relative pairs 
(ARPs). Multipoint, model-free ARP linkage analysis was performed. Genome-wide 
significant evidence for linkage was observed on 10q21.2 (LOD=3.3) and 
genome-wide suggestive evidence was observed on 9q22.33 (LOD=2.5) and 19q13.32 
(LOD=2.0). One further region on 9p21.3 was identified with an LOD score>1. We 
observe no evidence to suggest that more than one locus is responsible for the 
linkage to 10q21.2, although this linked region may harbour more than one 
susceptibility gene. Evidence of allele-sharing heterogeneity between the 
original collection sites was observed on chromosome 9 but not on chromosome 10 
or 19. Evidence for an interaction was observed between loci on chromosomes 10 
and 19. Where samples overlapped, the genotyping consistency was high, estimated 
to average at 97.3%. Our large-scale linkage analysis consolidates clear 
evidence for a susceptibility locus for LOAD on 10q21.2.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm224
PMID: 17725986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1694. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Jan 15;264(1-2):63-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.07.021. Epub 
2007 Aug 28.

Incidence and subtypes of dementia in three elderly populations of central 
Spain.

Bermejo-Pareja F(1), Benito-León J, Vega S, Medrano MJ, Román GC; Neurological 
Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To assess age-, gender, and subtype-specific incidence rates of 
dementia in three populations in central Spain using data from the Neurological 
Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES), a population-based survey of elderly 
participants.
METHODS: Individuals were evaluated at baseline (1994-1995) and at follow-up (a 
median of 3.2 years later in 1997-1998). The evaluation included a screening 
questionnaire for dementia and a neurological assessment, when possible.
RESULTS: Of 5278 participants evaluated at baseline, there were 306 prevalent 
dementia cases. One hundred and sixty-one incident dementia cases were 
identified among 3,891 individuals assessed at follow-up. The large majority had 
Alzheimer's disease (AD): 115 (71.4%) AD, 18 (11.2%) vascular dementia (VaD), 11 
(6.8%) dementia associated with parkinsonism, 11 (6.8%) undetermined etiology, 
and 6 (3.7%) secondary dementia. Average annual incidence rates (per 1,000 
person-years) in the population aged 65 to 90 and over years, adjusted to the 
standard European population, were 10.6 (95% CI, 8.9 to 12.3) for dementia, 7.4 
(95% CI=6.0 to 8.8) for AD, and 1.4 (95% CI=0.6 to 2.3) for VaD. Age-specific 
incidence rates of dementia and AD increased exponentially with advancing age. 
Age, stroke and illiteracy were independent risk factors for dementia and AD. 
Aggregation of vascular risk factors was related to a higher risk of both VaD 
and AD.
CONCLUSIONS: In the NEDICES study, incidence of dementia increased with age 
beyond age 85 and AD was the most frequent type of dementia. The risk of AD and 
VaD increased with the number of vascular risk factors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.07.021
PMID: 17727890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1695. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2007 Sep;75(9):515-27. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-980112.

[Review of the role of hyperhomocysteinemia and B-vitamin deficiency in 
neurological and psychiatric disorders--current evidence and preliminary 
recommendations].

[Article in German]

Herrmann W(1), Lorenzl S, Obeid R.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Klinische Chemie und Laboratoriumsmedizin, Universitätsklinikum 
des Saarlandes, Kirrberger Strasse, Gebaude 57, 66421 Homburg. 
prof.wolfgang.herrmann@uni-klinikum-saarland.de

Elevated concentration of total homocysteine (Hcy) in plasma (> 12 micromol/l) 
is a risk factor for several diseases of the central nervous system. 
Epidemiological studies have shown a dose-dependent relationship between 
concentrations of Hcy and the risk for neurodegenerative diseases. Hcy is a 
marker for B-vitamin deficiency (folate, B12, B6). Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) 
causes hypomethylation which is an important mechanism that links Hcy to 
dementia. Supplementation with vitamins B aims at reducing the risk of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Current evidence suggests that Hcy-lowering 
treatment has a positive effect for the secondary and primary prevention of 
stroke. HHcy is very common in patients with Parkinson disease particularly 
those who receive L-dopa treatment. Furthermore, a positive association has been 
reported between HHcy and multiple sclerosis. Moreover, HHcy and vitamin B 
deficiency are reported to have a causal role in depression, and epilepsy. In 
addition several anti-epileptic drugs cause secondary HHcy. Therefore, 
sufficient intakes of the vitamins are recommended for patients who have already 
developed neuropsychiatric diseases. Vitamin B deficiency should be suspected in 
children with development disorders, failure to thrive and unexplained 
neurological manifestations. Elderly people are also an important at-risk group 
where vitamin B deficiency and HHcy have been linked to neurodegenerative 
diseases. Treatment with folate, B12, and B6 can improve cerebral function. 
Preventive vitamin B supplementation and sufficient intake seem very important 
for secondary and primary prevention of neuropsychiatric disorders, especially 
in subjects with a low intake or status of the vitamins.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-980112
PMID: 17729191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1696. Neurology. 2007 Oct 16;69(16):1569-79. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000271077.82508.a0. 
Epub 2007 Aug 29.

Plasma and CSF serpins in Alzheimer disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Nielsen HM(1), Minthon L, Londos E, Blennow K, Miranda E, Perez J, Crowther DC, 
Lomas DA, Janciauskiene SM.

Author information:
(1)Chronic Inflammatory and Degenerative Disease Research Unit, Department of 
Clinical Sciences, Lund University, Malmö University Hospital, Malmö, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Serine protease inhibitors (serpins), the acute phase reactants and 
regulators of the proteolytic processing of proteins, have been recognized as 
potential contributors to the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD). We 
measured plasma and CSF levels of serpins in controls and patients with 
dementia.
METHODS: Using rocket immunoelectrophoresis, ELISA, and Luminex xMAP technology, 
we analyzed plasma levels of alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin and alpha(1)-antitrypsin, 
and CSF levels of alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin, alpha(1)-antitrypsin, and 
neuroserpin along with three standard biomarkers (total tau, tau phosphorylated 
at threonine-181, and the A beta(1-42)) in patients with AD (n = 258), patients 
with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; n = 38), and age-matched controls (n = 37).
RESULTS: The level of CSF neuroserpin was significantly higher in AD compared 
with controls and DLB, whereas CSF alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin and 
alpha(1)-antitrypsin were significantly higher in both AD and DLB groups than in 
controls. Results from logistic regression analyses demonstrate a relationship 
between higher CSF levels of alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin and neuroserpin and 
increased predicted probability and odds ratios (ORs) of AD (OR 5.3, 95% CI 1.3 
to 20.8 and OR 3.3, CI 1.3 to 8.8). Furthermore, a logistic regression model 
based on CSF alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin, neuroserpin, and A beta(1-42) enabled us 
to discriminate between AD patients and controls with a sensitivity of 94.7% and 
a specificity of 77.8%.
CONCLUSIONS: Higher CSF levels of neuroserpin and alpha(1)-antichymotrypsin were 
associated with the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease (AD) and facilitated 
the diagnostic classification of AD vs controls. CSF serpin levels did not 
improve the diagnostic classification of AD vs dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000271077.82508.a0
PMID: 17761554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1697. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2008 Jul-Aug;47(1):53-61. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2007.07.005. Epub 2007 Aug 31.

Cognitive and behavioral assessment in the early stages of neurodegenerative 
extrapyramidal syndromes.

Borroni B(1), Turla M, Bertasi V, Agosti C, Gilberti N, Padovani A.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Department of Medical Sciences, University of Brescia, Piazza 
Spedali Civili 1, I-25125 Brescia, Italy. bborroni@inwind.it

Parkinson's disease (PD), Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB), Progressive 
Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) and Corticobasal Degeneration Syndrome (CBDS) are the 
most common neurodegenerative extrapyramidal syndromes. Beyond motor symptoms, 
cognitive dysfunctions and behavioral disturbances are reported. 
Neuropsychological and neuropsychiatry features in the early stages, however, 
are under-investigated, and few comparison studies are available yet. The aim of 
the present study was to evaluate the cognitive and behavioral profile in the 
early stages of neurodegenerative extrapyramidal syndromes. Thirty-nine PD, 27 
DLB, 16 CBDS, and 24 PSP were recruited. Groups were matched for global 
cognitive and motor impairment. The overall sample showed a common 
neuropsychological core characterized by visuospatial deficits. Although in the 
early stage of the disease, a high presence of behavioral disturbances was 
detected, depression and anxiety were the most common disorders, followed by 
apathy and sleep disturbances. The observation of overlapping clinical entities 
points the attention on the need of adjunctive diagnostic markers for early 
differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2007.07.005
PMID: 17765337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1698. Sleep Med. 2008 May;9(4):343-51. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2007.06.013. Epub 2007 Sep 
4.

Cognitive performance in REM sleep behaviour disorder: a possible early marker 
of neurodegenerative disease?

Terzaghi M(1), Sinforiani E, Zucchella C, Zambrelli E, Pasotti C, Rustioni V, 
Manni R.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Medicine Unit, IRCCS C Mondino Institute of Neurology Foundation, Via 
Mondino, Pavia, Italy. michele.terzaghi@mondino.it

Comment in
    Sleep Med. 2008 May;9(4):341-2.

BACKGROUND: Rapid eye movement [REM] sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) may herald 
neurodegenerative diseases. Neurobiological deficits similar to those identified 
in neurodegenerative diseases have been reported in idiopathic RBD. Researchers 
are looking for early markers supporting a possible role of RBD as a harbinger 
of impending neurodegenerative disease.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the neuropsychological functions in idiopathic RBD 
subjects. Should they be found to present a neuropsychological dysfunction that 
overlaps that reported in neurodegenerative diseases, it would be possible to 
consider cognitive deficits as possible early markers of an underlying 
degenerative process.
METHODS: Twenty-three subjects with idiopathic RBD (21 males, mean age 
67.0+/-7.0 years) and a group of healthy controls matched for sex, age and 
education underwent a neuropsychological battery evaluating different cognitive 
domains.
FINDINGS: Considering mean values, poorer performances were observed in the Word 
Span (p<.001), Rey-Osterrieth's complex figure recall (p=.003), Digit Span 
(p=.003) and Logic Memory (p=.003) tests. On the basis of equivalent scores, the 
RBD subjects performed significantly more poorly on tests of 
visuo-constructional learning abilities (p<.001).
INTERPRETATION: Our data show the possible presence of cognitive deficits in RBD 
defined as idiopathic, sharing common features in particular with Lewy body 
disease. Neuropsychological evaluation in RBD could lead to presymptomatic 
identification of neurodegenerative disease, but until more prolonged long-term 
follow-up data are available, the true neurobiological significance of cognitive 
deficits in RBD will remain unknown.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2007.06.013
PMID: 17766178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1699. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Mar 15;266(1-2):216-28. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.08.015. Epub 
2007 Sep 4.

Management of non-motor symptoms in advanced Parkinson disease.

Truong DD(1), Bhidayasiri R, Wolters E.

Author information:
(1)The Parkinson's and Movement Disorder Institute, 9940 Talbert Avenue, 
Fountain Valley, CA 92708, USA. dtruong@pmdi.org

Progress in pharmacology has markedly improved the treatment of early 
Parkinson's disease. The management of advanced Parkinson's symptoms, however, 
remains a challenge. These symptoms are divided into motor and non-motor 
symptoms. Non-motor symptoms may appear early or late in the disease and 
sometimes even before the onset of the first motor symptoms confirming the 
diagnosis. The spectrum of non-motor symptoms encompasses autonomic 
dysfunctions, sleep disorders, mood disorders, impulse control disorders, 
cognitive dysfunction, dementia, paranoia and hallucinations. They are often 
less appreciated than motor symptoms but are important sources of disability for 
many PD patients. This review describes these non-motor symptoms and their 
managements.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.08.015
PMID: 17804018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1700. Neurogenetics. 2007 Nov;8(4):263-70. doi: 10.1007/s10048-007-0100-6. Epub 2007 
Sep 6.

Evidence of shared risk for Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease using 
family history.

Rosen AR(1), Steenland NK, Hanfelt J, Factor SA, Lah JJ, Levey AI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University, 1841 Clifton Rd, Atlanta, GA 
30329, USA. ami.rosen@emory.edu

This case-control study examined the potential for a common etiology of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) using reported family 
history. Structured interviews were used to collect AD and PD family history 
from subjects (n = 1,531) with AD, PD, AD/PD, or controls. Intergroup analysis 
compared reported AD and PD family histories in the three case groups to the 
histories reported in the control group. Intragroup analysis stratified each 
diagnostic group based on positive family history of AD, then compared the 
subgroups for a family history of PD. Subjects with AD had a higher risk of 
having a family history of AD [odds ratio (OR) 2.3; 1.5-3.4] and subjects with 
PD had a higher risk of having a family history of PD (OR 2.2; 1.2-4.0) as 
compared to control subjects. Intergroup analyses revealed no significant 
crossed risk, increased risk of subjects with AD having a family history of PD 
vs controls and vice versa. Intragroup analysis found that subjects with PD and 
a family history of AD were more likely to have a family history of PD (OR 1.7; 
1.1-2.6) when compared to subjects with PD and no family history of AD. A 
similar trend was found for subjects with AD (OR 1.7; 0.9-3.1). AD and PD cases 
each have an increased familial risk of their respective disease. Probands with 
AD or PD and a family history of either disease have a higher crossed risk of a 
family history of the other disease. These findings suggest the existence of 
common genetic and/or environmental factors that predispose to both AD and PD in 
the subset of cases with positive family history of both neurodegenerative 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-007-0100-6
PMCID: PMC2679377
PMID: 17805588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


