901. J Appl Genet. 2002;43(4):535-43.

A novel mutation at position +11 in the intron following exon 10 of the tau gene 
in FTDP-17.

Kowalska A(1), Hasegawa M, Miyamoto K, Akiguchi I, Ikemoto A, Takahashi K, Araki 
W, Tabira T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, ul. Strzeszyńska 32, 
60-479 Poznań, Poland. annkowal@rose.man.poznan.pl

Mutations in the microtubule-associated tau gene are responsible for 
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). A 
reduced ability of the mutated microtubule-associated tau protein to interact 
with microtubules causes microtubule destabilization leading to deleterious 
effects on axonal transport and the formation of tau filaments. Here, we 
describe a new mutation of the tau gene, a T --> C transition at position +11 of 
the intron following exon 10 (T --> C 3'E10 +11) in the family showing 
frontotemporal dementia with very early age of onset (the first decade of 
proband's life). The T -->C 3'E10 +11 mutation caused a large increase in the 
proportion of transcripts containing exon 10 detected by exon-trapping analysis. 
Our study confirmed that the T --> C 3'E10 +11 mutation, as the other 5' splice 
site mutations of tau exon 10, modifies alternative splicing of exon 10.

PMID: 12441638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


902. Adv Neurol. 2003;91:411-3.

Differential diagnosis between early Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Sulkava R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and General Practice, University of Kuopio, 
Kuopio, Finland.

PMID: 12442700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


903. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Dec 15;70(6):734-45. doi: 10.1002/jnr.10451.

Transgenic zebrafish model of neurodegeneration.

Tomasiewicz HG(1), Flaherty DB, Soria JP, Wood JG.

Author information:
(1)NIEHS Marine and Freshwater Biomedical Sciences Center, University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee Great Lakes WATER Institute, Milwaukee, Wisconsin, USA.

In Alzheimer's disease (AD), the microtubule-associated protein, tau, is 
compromised in its normal association with microtubules and forms into paired 
helical filaments (PHF) that are the hallmark cytoskeletal pathology of the 
disease. Several posttranslational modifications of tau including 
phosphorylation have been implicated in AD pathogenesis. In addition, and 
importantly, mutations in the genes encoding human tau have recently been 
implicated in a variety of hereditary dementias, collectively termed 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). 
This has rekindled interest in the importance of tau in neurodegenerative 
diseases (cf. Vogel [1998] Science 280:1524-1525; Goedert et al. [1998] Neuron 
21:955-958; D'Souza et al. [1999] PNAS 96:5598-5603). Despite significant 
progress in the field of tau biology and neurodegenerative diseases, several 
important issues remain unresolved. The early functional consequences of tau 
alterations in living neurons is incompletely understood, and it is not clear 
how tau in neurodegenerative diseases becomes redistributed from its normal 
concentration in neuronal axons to pathological inclusions in neuronal soma 
known as neurofibrillary tangles (NFT). One of the reasons for these gaps in 
knowledge is the relative paucity of model systems to study these processes. We 
have developed a transgenic model system to study the functional consequences 
and trafficking patterns in zebrafish neurons of human tau either mutated on 
sites associated with hereditary dementias or altered at select 
posttranslational modification sites. The overall guiding hypothesis is that the 
model allows dissection of a hierarchy of events relevant to potential 
mechanisms of neurodegenerative diseases related to critical early stages in 
development of disease. We showed that a FTDP-17 mutant form of human tau 
expressed in zebrafish neurons produced a cytoskeletal disruption that closely 
resembled the NFT in human disease. This model system will prove useful in the 
study of other mutant taus in vertebrate neurons in vivo, and the approaches 
developed here will have broad usefulness in the study of functional 
consequences and potential genetic analyses of introducing into living 
vertebrate neurons other molecules involved in the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.10451
PMID: 12444595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


904. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2002 Nov;158(11):1049-56.

[REM Sleep behavioral disorder].

[Article in French]

Portet F(1), Touchon J.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Neurologie comportementale et dégénérative, service de Neurologie B, 
CHU Gui de Chauliac, 80, rue Auguste Fliche, 34295 Montpellier Cedex, France.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia which 
occurs only during REM sleep. RBD is characterized by the loss of skeletal 
muscle atonia, which is the principal feature of REM sleep, and by abnormal 
behavior representing the attempted enactment of dreaming. Clinically, it 
consists of abnormal behavior, frequently violent, that may lead to injuries. A 
polysomnographic study is necessary to assess the diagnosis showing the absence 
of REM sleep atonia and related abnormal behavior. RBD usually affects older 
men. Its exact etiological factors remain unknown. However, RBD is sometimes 
linked with drug use or exposure to toxic conditions. Moreover, the association 
with neurological disorders is frequently reported, particularly 
cerebrovascular, tumoral or neurodegenerative disease. Neurodegenerative 
disorders with parkinsonism are frequently involved. In Lewy body dementia, RBD 
is particularly frequent. In many cases, RBD may have a predictive value, 
preceding other symptoms of neurodegenerative disorders with parkinsonism. The 
biochemical mechanisms underlying RBD still remain unclear but could involve the 
dopamino-cholinergic balance and the serotoninergic pathway.

PMID: 12451337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


905. Rinsho Byori. 2002 Oct;50(10):965-9.

[Gene diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka S(1).

Author information:
(1)Kyoto University, Institute for Chemical Research, Uji 611-0011.

Alzheimer's disease(AD) is the most common form of neurodegenerative diseases 
that causes intellectual dysfunction. AD is a genetically heterogenous disorder. 
Over 100 mutations have been identified in three causative genes, i.e. amyloid 
protein precursor(APP), presenilin 1(PS1) and presenilin 2(PS2) genes, for 
early-onset autosomal dominant familial AD(FAD). Apolipoprotein E(APOE) gene has 
been identified as susceptibility gene for late-onset FAD. The missense 
mutations in the causative genes lead to abnormal APP processing with 
overproduction of total A beta protein or A beta 42(43) isoform. The epsilon 4 
allele of APOE gene is a genetic risk factor for sporadic AD as well as FAD. 
Parkinson's disease(PD) is another common form of neurodegenerative disease that 
causes movement dysfunction. Three genes, i.e. alpha-synuclein (SNCA), 
parkin(PARK2), and ubiquitin carboxy-terminal hydrolase L1(UCHL1) genes, have 
been identified as causative genes for familial PD. The B mutation of CYP2D6 
gene(CYP2D6*4 allele) is a genetic risk factor for PD. Lewy body(LB), that is an 
intracellular inclusion body characteristic of PD, is widely distributed in the 
cerebral cortex of 20 to 30% of AD patients. This disease entity is called as 
Lewy body variant(LBV) of AD. LBV shares the genetic risk factor with AD and PD, 
i.e. APOE epsilon 4 allele and CYP2D6 B mutation. Gene diagnosis is possible for 
familial AD and PD. APOE and CYP2D6 genotyping is also applicable to the future 
prediction of AD and PD, respectively.

PMID: 12451676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


906. N Engl J Med. 2002 Nov 28;347(22):1761-8. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa020441.

Abnormality of gait as a predictor of non-Alzheimer's dementia.

Verghese J(1), Lipton RB, Hall CB, Kuslansky G, Katz MJ, Buschke H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461, USA. jverghes@aecom.yu.edu

BACKGROUND: Neurologic abnormalities affecting gait occur early in several types 
of non-Alzheimer's dementias, but their value in predicting the development of 
dementia is uncertain.
METHODS: We analyzed the relation between neurologic gait status at base line 
and the development of dementia in a prospective study involving 422 subjects 
older than 75 years of age who lived in the community and did not have dementia 
at base line. Cox proportional-hazards regression analysis was used to calculate 
hazard ratios with adjustment for potential confounding demographic, medical, 
and cognitive variables.
RESULTS: At enrollment, 85 subjects had neurologic gait abnormalities of the 
following types: unsteady gait (in 31 subjects), frontal gait (in 12 subjects), 
hemiparetic gait (in 11 subjects), neuropathic gait (in 11 subjects), ataxic 
gait (in 10 subjects), parkinsonian gait (in 8 subjects), and spastic gait (in 2 
subjects). During follow-up (median duration, 6.6 years), there were 125 newly 
diagnosed cases of dementia, 70 of them cases of Alzheimer's disease and 55 
cases of non-Alzheimer's dementia (47 of which involved vascular dementia and 8 
of which involved other types of dementia). Subjects with neurologic gait 
abnormalities had a greater risk of development of dementia (hazard ratio, 1.96 
[95 percent confidence interval, 1.30 to 2.96]). These subjects had an increased 
risk of non-Alzheimer's dementia (hazard ratio, 3.51 [95 percent confidence 
interval, 1.98 to 6.24]), but not of Alzheimer's dementia (hazard ratio, 1.07 
[95 percent confidence interval, 0.57 to 2.02]). Of non-Alzheimer's dementias, 
abnormal gait predicted the development of vascular dementia (hazard ratio, 3.46 
[95 percent confidence interval, 1.86 to 6.42]). Among the types of abnormal 
gait, unsteady gait predicted vascular dementia (hazard ratio, 2.61), as did 
frontal gait (hazard ratio, 4.32) and hemiparetic gait (hazard ratio, 13.13).
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of neurologic gait abnormalities in elderly persons 
without dementia at base line is a significant predictor of the risk of 
development of dementia, especially non-Alzheimer's dementia.

Copyright 2002 Massachusetts Medical Society

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa020441
PMID: 12456852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


907. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2002 Dec;29(12):1685-96. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-002-0967-2. Epub 2002 Sep 25.

Functional brain imaging in the dementias: role in early detection, differential 
diagnosis, and longitudinal studies.

Devous MD Sr(1).

Author information:
(1)Nuclear Medicine Center and Department of Radiology, The University of Texas 
Southwestern Medical Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, TX 75390-9061 USA. 
Michael.Devous@UTSouthwestern.edu

This review considers the role of functional brain imaging techniques in the 
dementias. The substantial assistance that especially single-photon emission 
tomography and positron emission tomography can play in the initial diagnosis of 
dementia and in the differential diagnosis of the specific dementing disorder is 
discussed. These techniques alone essentially match the sensitivity and 
specificity of clinical diagnoses in distinguishing Alzheimer's dementia (AD) 
from age-matched controls, from frontal lobe dementia and vascular dementia, and 
even from Lewy body dementia. Newer analytic techniques such as voxel-based 
correlational analyses and discriminant function analyses enhance the power of 
such differential diagnoses. Functional brain imaging techniques can also 
significantly assist in patient screening for clinical trials. The correlation 
of the observed deficits with specific patterns of cognitive abnormalities 
permits enhanced patient management and treatment planning and improved 
longitudinal assessment of outcome. It is also noteworthy that the classic 
abnormalities of temporoparietal and posterior cingulate hypoperfusion or 
hypometabolism appear to be present prior to symptom onset. These abnormalities 
predict progression to AD in the presence of the earliest of symptoms, and are 
present even in cognitively normal but at-risk subjects, with a severity 
proportional to the risk status. Even greater predictive ability for progression 
to AD is obtained by combining measures of perfusion or metabolism with risk 
factors, tau protein levels, hippocampal N-Acetyl aspartate concentrations, or 
hippocampal volume measures.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-002-0967-2
PMID: 12458405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


908. Eur J Neurol. 2002 Nov;9 Suppl 3:23-30. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.9.s3.3.x.

The differential diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.

Poewe W(1), Wenning G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Innsbruck, Austria. 
werner.poewe@uibk.ac.at

The diagnosis of Parkinson's disease continues to be challenging with 
misdiagnosis rates as high as 20-30% in early stages. Such diagnostic inaccuracy 
is largely due to failure to recognize atypical parkinsonian disorders including 
multiple system atrophy (MSA), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). These 
disorders are characterized by distinctive sets of atypical features that have 
been incorporated into recent consensus diagnostic criteria. Early diagnosis of 
atypical parkinsonian disorders is important not only because of prognostic 
implications, but also because of variable therapeutic targets such as autonomic 
failure, apraxia or dementia.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.9.s3.3.x
PMID: 12464118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


909. Mov Disord. 2002 Nov;17(6):1221-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.10280.

Memory and executive function impairment predict dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Levy G(1), Jacobs DM, Tang MX, Côté LJ, Louis ED, Alfaro B, Mejia H, Stern Y, 
Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We analyzed the association of neuropsychological test impairment at baseline 
with the development of dementia in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients. A cohort of nondemented PD patients from northern Manhattan, NY was 
followed annually with neurological and neuropsychological evaluations. The 
neuropsychological battery included tests of verbal and nonverbal memory, 
orientation, visuospatial ability, language, and abstract reasoning. The 
association of baseline neuropsychological tests scores with incident dementia 
was analyzed using Cox proportional hazards models. The analysis controlled for 
age, gender, education, duration of PD, and the total Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale motor score at baseline. Forty-five out of 164 patients 
(27%) became demented during a mean follow-up of 3.7 +/- 2.3 years. Four 
neuropsychological test scores were significantly associated with incident 
dementia in the Cox model: total immediate recall (RR: 0.92, 95% CI: 0.87-0.97, 
P = 0.001) and delayed recall (RR: 0.73, 95% CI: 0.59-0.91, P = 0.005) of the 
Selective Reminding Test (SRT), letter fluency (RR: 0.87, 95% CI: 0.77-0.99, P = 
0.03), and Identities and Oddities of the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (RR: 
0.85, 95% CI: 0.73-0.98, P = 0.03). When the analysis was performed excluding 
patients with a clinical dementia rating of 0.5 (questionable dementia) at 
baseline evaluation, total immediate recall and delayed recall were still 
predictive of dementia in PD. Our results indicate that impairment in verbal 
memory and executive function are associated with the development of dementia in 
patients with PD.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10280
PMID: 12465060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


910. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2002 Nov;2(6):523.

Gene variant linked to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's predicts diabetic neuropathy.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 12465441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


911. Am J Pathol. 2002 Dec;161(6):2087-98. doi: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64487-2.

Cytoplasmic aggregates of phosphorylated extracellular signal-regulated protein 
kinases in Lewy body diseases.

Zhu JH(1), Kulich SM, Oury TD, Chu CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 200 
Lothrop Street, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA.

A better understanding of cellular mechanisms that occur in Parkinson's disease 
and related Lewy body diseases is essential for development of new therapies. We 
previously found that 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) elicits sustained extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation that contributes to neuronal cell death 
in vitro. As subcellular localization of activated kinases affect accessibility 
to downstream targets, we examined spatial patterns of ERK phosphorylation in 
6-OHDA-treated cells and in human postmortem tissues representing the full 
spectrum of Lewy body diseases. All diseased human cases exhibited striking 
granular cytoplasmic aggregates of phospho-ERK (P-ERK) in the substantia nigra 
(involving 28 +/- 2% of neurons), which were largely absent in control cases 
(0.3 +/- 0.3%). Double-labeling studies and examination of preclinical cases 
suggested that these P-ERK alterations could occur relatively early in the 
disease process. Development of granular cytoplasmic P-ERK staining in 
6-OHDA-treated cells was blocked by neuroprotective doses of catalase, 
supporting a role for oxidants in eliciting neurotoxic patterns of ERK 
activation. Evidence of nuclear translocation was not observed in degenerating 
neurons. Moreover, granular cytoplasmic P-ERK was associated with alterations in 
the distribution of downstream targets such as P-RSK1, but not of P-Elk-1, 
suggesting functional diversion of ERK-signaling pathways in Lewy body diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/S0002-9440(10)64487-2
PMCID: PMC1850911
PMID: 12466125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


912. Neurology. 2002 Dec 10;59(11):1708-13. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000036610.36834.e0.

The association of incident dementia with mortality in PD.

Levy G(1), Tang MX, Louis ED, Côté LJ, Alfaro B, Mejia H, Stern Y, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, 
USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2003 Aug 12;61(3):424.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association of incident dementia with mortality in a 
cohort of patients with idiopathic PD who were nondemented at baseline 
evaluation, controlling for extrapyramidal sign (EPS) severity at each study 
visit.
BACKGROUND: The development of dementia has been associated with reduced 
survival in PD. Because EPS severity is associated with both dementia and 
mortality in PD, the association of dementia with mortality may be confounded by 
disease severity.
METHODS: A cohort of patients with PD was followed annually with neurologic and 
neuropsychological evaluations. The association of incident dementia and the 
total Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor score with mortality in PD was 
examined using Cox proportional hazards models with time-dependent covariates. 
All analyses were adjusted for age at baseline, sex, years of education, 
ethnicity, and duration of PD.
RESULTS: Of 180 PD patients, 41 (22.8%) died during a mean follow-up period of 
3.9 +/- 2.2 years. Among those who died during the study period, 48.8% (20 of 
41) became demented during follow-up, as compared to 23.0% (32 of 139) of those 
who remained alive. Both incident dementia (RR: 2.2, 95% CI: 1.1 to 4.5, p = 
0.04) and the total UPDRS motor score at each study visit (RR: 1.04, 95% CI: 
1.02 to 1.07, p = 0.001) were associated with mortality in PD when included in 
the same Cox model.
CONCLUSIONS: Incident dementia has an independent effect on mortality when 
controlling for EPS severity. The development of dementia is associated with a 
twofold increased mortality risk in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000036610.36834.e0
PMID: 12473757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


913. Lancet. 2002 Nov 30;360(9347):1759-66. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11667-9.

The dementias.

Ritchie K(1), Lovestone S.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, EMI 99-30, Hôpital 
La Colombière, Montpellier, France. ritchie@montp.inserm.fr

Comment in
    Lancet. 2003 Apr 5;361(9364):1227.

Dementia affects about 5% of the elderly population over age 65 years and has an 
unexplained predominance in women and a low rate in some cultures. Different 
forms of dementia are now distinguished-Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, frontotemporal dementia, and dementia secondary to disease, such as AIDS 
dementia. However, such nosological boundaries are being re-evaluated because 
different dementias are believed to have common underlying neuropathology. 
Neurochemical and neurobiological research has led to advances in understanding 
causes of dementia, and functional imaging has allowed identification of 
possible biomarkers; from these, a range of potential treatment approaches have 
arisen that focus on enhancement of neurotransmitter function, intervention at 
the level of amyloid production and deposition, and reduction of secondary risk 
factors such as hypertension, depression, and hypolipidaemia. Molecular 
diagnostic testing and genetic counselling for families with autosomal dominant 
early-onset dementia are new developments; however, this approach is not useful 
for late-onset dementia, in which the identified candidate susceptibility genes 
have a relatively small effect on risk. While fundamental research works towards 
new biological treatment strategies, much remains to be done in the area of 
disease management and the development of appropriate models of long-term care.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(02)11667-9
PMID: 12480441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


914. Lancet. 2002 Nov 30;360(9347):1767-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(02)11668-0.

Dopamine agonist monotherapy in Parkinson's disease.

Clarke CE(1), Guttman M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK. 
c.e.clarke@bham.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Levodopa is the gold-standard therapy for Parkinson's disease. However, 
long-term treatment leads to involuntary movements and response fluctuations 
which add to the complexities of later disease-management. In addition, 
preclinical evidence suggests that levodopa is toxic to dopaminergic neurons. 
These problems have led to a move away from levodopa towards initial monotherapy 
with a dopamine agonist.
STARTING POINT: Positron-emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) tracers have been developed which may be considered 
surrogate markers for remaining dopaminergic neurons. In a randomised controlled 
trial in patients with early Parkinson's disease, the Parkinson Study Group used 
123I-beta-CIT SPECT (JAMA 2002; 287: 1653-61). Those patients given pramipexole 
had significantly reduced loss of striatal uptake at 46 months compared with 
those given levodopa (16.0% vs 25.5%). In a similar trial, Alan Whone and 
colleagues used 18F-DOPA PET (Neurology 2002; 58 [suppl 3]: A82-83). Patients 
given ropinirole had significantly reduced loss of striatal uptake at 24 months 
compared with those given levodopa (13% vs 20%). These studies suggest that 
agonist monotherapy may be neuroprotective and/or that levodopa is toxic. This 
work has been criticised as the SPECT results may have resulted from a 
differential effect of the agonist and levodopa on the regulation of the 
dopamine transporter, thereby influencing the imaging outcome measure. Other 
criticisms include insufficient data on the use of the potential neuroprotectant 
selegiline and patients on pramipexole in the SPECT study appear to have been 
clinically slow progressors. Single clinical trials with each of the four modern 
agonists compared with levodopa show that as monotherapy the agonists delay the 
onset of involuntary movements, although at the expense of poorer treatment of 
motor impairments and disability and more dopaminergic adverse events. The only 
health-related quality of life data show no difference between pramipexole and 
levodopa after 4 years. No information on health-economics measures is available 
but agonists cost two to three times as much as levodopa. WHERE NEXT? Young 
patients should be treated with agonist monotherapy since the trials included 
predominantly younger patients who have a higher incidence of motor 
complications. Those with significant co-morbidity, dementia, or a short 
life-expectancy should be treated with the lowest dose of levodopa required to 
maintain motor function. For the vast majority though, no clear guidance can be 
given. Further large-scale pragmatic trials in large numbers of patients over 
prolonged periods are urgently required.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(02)11668-0
PMID: 12480442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


915. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2002 Nov;977:216-23. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04818.x.

Decreased cerebrospinal fluid levels of neurosin (KLK6), an aging-related 
protease, as a possible new risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.

Mitsui S(1), Okui A, Uemura H, Mizuno T, Yamada T, Yamamura Y, Yamaguchi N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Research Institute for Geriatrics, Kyoto 
Prefectural University of Medicine, Kawaramachi-Hirokoji, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

Neurosin is a kallikrein-like serine protease expressed preferentially in the 
human brain. It is localized in senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in 
the brains of individuals with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and in Lewy bodies in 
patients with Parkinson's disease. Neurosin is present in the cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) as a proenzyme and does not show any enzymatic activity. We have 
developed a sandwich ELISA system using monoclonal and polyclonal antibodies 
against human neurosin and have measured neurosin levels in the CSF from AD and 
non-CNS disease patients. Both male and female patients with peripheral 
neuropathy showed statistically positive correlations between CSF neurosin 
concentrations and age (males, n = 52, r = 0.482, p < 0.005; females, n = 43, r 
= 0.365, p < 0.005). In contrast, such positive correlation was not observed in 
the CSF from patients with AD. Further, some such patients showed extremely low 
levels of CSF neurosin. Our results suggest that neurosin is an aging-related 
protease and that a decreased CSF concentration of neurosin may be a risk factor 
for developing AD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2002.tb04818.x
PMID: 12480753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


916. Unfallchirurg. 2002 Dec;105(12):1076-87. doi: 10.1007/s00113-002-0540-2.

[Injury prevention in the elderly population].

[Article in German]

Richter M(1), Becker C, Seifert J, Gebhard F, Pieske O, Holch M, Lob G; 
Arbeitsgemeinschaft "Prävention von Verletzungen" der Deutschen Gesellschaft für 
Unfallchirurgie.

Author information:
(1)Unfallchirurgische Klinik mit Unfallforschung, Medizinische Hochschule 
Hannover, Hannover.

Comment in
    Unfallchirurg. 2002 Dec;105(12):1075.

Injuries in the elderly population have more considerable consequences (more 
difficult treatment, higher costs,worse outcome) than in the younger population. 
Therefore, the prevention is especially important. The majority of the injuries 
are caused by traffic accidents and falls. TRAFFIC ACCIDENTS: An analysis of the 
current injury situation in elderly road users (65 years and older) involved in 
road traffic accidents was intended to allow conclusions regarding future 
prophylaxis. FALLS: Falls are mostly caused by numerous factors. The most 
important predictors for falls are dementia,Parkinson-Syndrome and neurologic 
deficits after cerebrovascular insults. The most important symptoms, that 
indicate an increased risk for fall are gait abnormalities, balance lack and 
underweight. The most important anamnestic indications are more than one falls 
in the recent 90 days, need for assistance in daily living and prevailing 
medication. Another important factor is the residential setting (lighting, 
stairs, floor conditions,bath installations). The most affective protective 
interventions involve multiple factors. The incidence of falls could be reduced 
by 30%. The hip protector is an effective protection against proximal femur 
fractures. which is the most frequent fracture in the elderly population that 
requires treatment as an inpatient. Injury prevention in the elderly population 
is an interdisciplinary task as for example shown by the successful fall clinics 
in the anglo-american area.

DOI: 10.1007/s00113-002-0540-2
PMID: 12486574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


917. Auton Neurosci. 2002 Nov 29;102(1-2):71-7. doi: 10.1016/s1566-0702(02)00205-9.

Physiologic assessment of autonomic dysfunction in pallidopontonigral 
degeneration with N279K mutation in the tau gene on chromosome 17.

Cheshire WP(1), Tsuboi Y, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Rd., Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA. cheshire@mayo.edu

Autonomic function was investigated in five affected and five at-risk members of 
a single kinship of pallidopontonigral degeneration (PPND), which is a 
progressive syndrome of parkinsonism and frontotemporal dementia resulting from 
a mutation in the N279K tau gene on chromosome 17. Affected subjects reported 
symptoms including hyperhidrosis, sialorrhea, urinary frequency or incontinence, 
thermal intolerance, male sexual dysfunction, lacrimation, and dryness of the 
eyes or mouth. None had orthostatic hypotension. Autonomic testing revealed 
mild-to-moderate abnormalities in all five affected subjects and minor 
abnormalities in the three oldest, asymptomatic, at-risk subjects. Findings in 
affected subjects consisted of preganglionic sudomotor dysfunction in all five, 
impaired cardiovagal function in three, and reduced or absent pupillary near 
responses in four. Tests of adrenergic function were normal in all subjects. The 
degree of autonomic dysfunction correlated significantly with disease duration 
and with indices of disease severity. In conclusion, there is evidence in PPND 
of a disturbance in the central autonomic network.

DOI: 10.1016/s1566-0702(02)00205-9
PMID: 12492138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


918. Clin Rehabil. 2002 Dec;16(8):886-93. doi: 10.1191/0269215502cr573oa.

Prediction of outcome of physiotherapy in advanced Parkinson's disease.

Nieuwboer A(1), De Weerdt W, Dom R, Bogaerts K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Faculty of Physical Education and 
Physiotherapy, Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium. 
alice.nieuwboer@flok.kuleuven.ac.be

OBJECTIVE: Prediction of the effect of a home physiotherapy intervention on the 
basis of four clinical characteristics of patients with advanced Parkinson's 
disease.
DESIGN: A repeated measures design comparing six weeks without treatment with 
six weeks of physiotherapy and a follow-up of 12 weeks.
SUBJECTS: Persons with Parkinson's disease without dementia and suffering from 
considerable functional disability.
INTERVENTION: Community physiotherapists treated patients in the home situation 
three times a week teaching cueing and conscious movement control for walking 
and carrying out transfers in and out of beds and chairs.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Mental status, disease severity, age and mood were 
included as predictor variables. A new functional scale developed as part of a 
previous study was used as the dependent variable administered in both the 
hospital and the home to determine whether the outcome generalized from the 
learning to a different environment.
RESULTS: Only disease severity was a negative predictor of treatment outcome at 
home. In the hospital setting none of the factors predicted the immediate effect 
of treatment but cognitive ability and age were determinants of whether the 
treatment effects were maintained in the long term.
CONCLUSIONS: Using cueing and cognitive strategies benefited younger and older 
patients with Parkinson's disease alike. However, the findings indicate 
targeting of treatment at patients with milder disease severity and providing 
follow-up treatment for older and cognitively less able patients.

DOI: 10.1191/0269215502cr573oa
PMID: 12501951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


919. Mt Sinai J Med. 2003 Jan;70(1):45-53.

Review of dementia.

Dugu M(1), Neugroschl J, Sewell M, Marin D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Box 1230, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One East 
100th Street, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Elderly persons are at increased risk for developing dementia, and this risk 
increases with age. It is important to understand the following points: (a). how 
to diagnose dementia; (b). the etiology of the most common dementias (including 
Alzheimer s disease, ischemic vascular dementia, and diffuse Lewy body 
dementia); (c). some medical conditions which could contribute to symptoms of 
dementia; (d). the pathophysiology of Alzheimer s disease; and (e). management 
problems faced by caregivers for dementia patients. This review aims to educate 
clinicians to focus on caregivers issues and the need for long-term planning.

PMID: 12516009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


920. Am J Epidemiol. 2003 Jan 15;157(2):149-57. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwf175.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam: 
changing incidence rates during the past 60 years.

Plato CC(1), Garruto RM, Galasko D, Craig UK, Plato M, Gamst A, Torres JM, 
Wiederholt W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0624, USA. drccplato@mindspring.com

In the 1950s, the incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS, or Lytico) 
and parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC, or Bodig) on the island of Guam was much 
higher than anywhere else in the world. From the late 1960s to the early 1980s, 
the incidence of both disorders has decreased. The objective of the present 
study was to ascertain whether the decreasing incidence continued until the end 
of the century (1999). The average annual incidence of ALS and PDC was 
calculated for each 5-year period from 1940 to 1999, utilizing registration 
records of all ALS and PDC cases on Guam during that period. The results of this 
study confirmed that the incidence of ALS declined steadily during the past 40 
years. The incidence of PDC also declined until the late 1980s but, unlike ALS, 
showed a slight increase from 1980 to 1999. The rapid decrease in incidence is 
not likely to be due to genetic factors. Instead, it is most likely to be the 
results of radical socioeconomic, ethnographic, and ecologic changes brought 
about by the rapid westernization of Guam.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwf175
PMID: 12522022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


921. Health News. 2002 Nov;8(11):7.

Lifestyle affects risk of two brain disorders.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 12523252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


922. Neurosci Lett. 2003 Jan 30;337(1):61-3. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(02)01296-x.

Absence of association between an intercellular adhesion molecule 1 gene E469K 
polymorphism and Alzheimer's disease in Finnish patients.

Mattila KM(1), Hiltunen M, Rinne JO, Mannermaa A, Röyttä M, Alafuzoff I, 
Laippala P, Soininen H, Lehtimäki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere 
University Hospital, Finland. kari.m.mattila@uta.fi

Increased expression of intercellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), a protein 
known to contribute to inflammatory responses, has been detected in the brain 
tissue of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and animals modelled to mimic 
AD or Parkinson's disease (PD). ICAM1 may, thus, be implicated in the 
pathogenesis of these disorders. Our purpose was to investigate whether genetic 
variants of the ICAM1 gene have a role in causing susceptibility to AD and/or 
PD. We genotyped the E469K polymorphism of ICAM1 in 196 AD, 52 PD and 202 
control patients of Finnish origin. The distributions of the genotype and allele 
frequencies of the polymorphism did not differ significantly between the AD, PD 
or the control patients. We therefore conclude that the E469K polymorphism of 
ICAM1 is not a risk factor for AD or PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(02)01296-x
PMID: 12524171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


923. Neurology. 2003 Jan 14;60(1):87-93. doi: 10.1212/wnl.60.1.87.

The impact of comorbid disease and injuries on resource use and expenditures in 
parkinsonism.

Pressley JC(1), Louis ED, Tang MX, Cote L, Cohen PD, Glied S, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, The School of Public Health, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
jp376@columbia.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2003 Oct 14;61(7):1023; author reply 1023-4.

BACKGROUND: Persons with parkinsonism have high rates of both associated and 
unrelated prevalent comorbid conditions. A better understanding of patterns of 
care and expenditures may aid in designing programs to enhance functioning, 
lengthen independent living, and manage costs.
METHODS: The authors linked national survey data of 24,831 elderly to nearly 1.9 
million Medicare claims. Persons with parkinsonism (n = 791) were identified 
from survey or Medicare encounters for paralysis agitans. Comorbid disease risk 
was measured using age-adjusted OR with 95% CI. Comorbidity cost ratios (ratio 
of average per person per year charges for parkinsonism alone vs with comorbid 
conditions) were developed to describe incremental costs of comorbidities.
RESULTS: Patients with parkinsonism were older (78.5 +/- 7.6 vs 75.1 +/- 8.3 
years, p < 0.0001) and had more injuries resulting in broken bones (35.6% vs 
19.5%, p < 0.0001), including broken hips (15.9% vs 5.8%, p < 0.0001), during 
the 5-year study. Broken hips were more prevalent among men (OR 3.4, 95% CI 2.5 
to 4.8) and women (OR 2.5, 95% CI 2.1 to 3.1) with than without parkinsonism. 
Among those with parkinsonism, comorbidity cost ratios demonstrated two- to 
threefold higher charges for dementia, broken bones, broken hip, and diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Comorbidity associated with parkinsonism is an under-recognized 
contribution to higher resource use and expenditures. Further study of injuries, 
dementia, and diabetes is required to assess whether public health interventions 
could reduce excess morbidity and expenditures associated with parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.60.1.87
PMID: 12525724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


924. Arch Neurol. 2003 Jan;60(1):59-64. doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.1.59.

Elevated plasma homocysteine levels in patients treated with levodopa: 
association with vascular disease.

Rogers JD(1), Sanchez-Saffon A, Frol AB, Diaz-Arrastia R.

Author information:
(1)Yarmen Center for Parkinson's Disease, Department of Neurology, Beth Israel 
Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hyperhomocysteinemia is a risk factor for vascular disease and 
potentially for dementia and depression. The most common cause of elevated 
homocysteine levels is deficiency of folate or vitamin B(12). However, patients 
with Parkinson disease (PD) may have elevated homocysteine levels resulting from 
methylation of levodopa and dopamine by catechol O-methyltransferase, an enzyme 
that uses S-adenosylmethionine as a methyl donor and yields 
S-adenosylhomocysteine. Since S-adenosylhomocysteine is rapidly converted to 
homocysteine, levodopa therapy may put patients at increased risk for vascular 
disease by raising homocysteine levels.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether elevations in plasma homocysteine levels caused 
by levodopa use are associated with increased prevalence of coronary artery 
disease (CAD), and to determine what role folate and vitamin B(12) have in 
levodopa-induced hyperhomocysteinemia.
DESIGN/METHODS: Subjects included 235 patients with PD followed up in a movement 
disorders clinic. Of these, 201 had been treated with levodopa, and 34 had not. 
Blood samples were collected for the measurement of homocysteine, folate, 
cobalamin, and methylmalonic acid levels. A history of CAD (prior myocardial 
infarctions, coronary artery bypass grafting, or coronary angioplasty 
procedures) was prospectively elicited. We analyzed parametric data by means of 
1-way analysis of variance or the t test, and categorical data by means of the 
Fisher exact test or chi(2) test.
RESULTS: Mean +/- SD plasma homocysteine levels were significantly higher in 
patients treated with levodopa (16.1 +/- 6.2 micro mol/L), compared with 
levodopa-naïve patients (12.2 +/- 4.2 micro mol/L; P<.001). We found no 
difference in the plasma concentration of folate, cobalamin, or methylmalonic 
acid between the 2 groups. Patients whose homocysteine levels were in the higher 
quartile (>or=17.7 micro mol/L) had increased prevalence of CAD (relative risk, 
1.75; 95% confidence interval, 1.08-2.70;P=.04).
CONCLUSIONS: Levodopa therapy, rather than PD, is a cause of 
hyperhomocysteinemia in patients with PD. Deficiency of folate or vitamin B(12) 
levels does not explain the elevated homocysteine levels in these patients. To 
our knowledge, this is the first report that levodopa-related 
hyperhomocysteinemia is associated with increased risk for CAD. These findings 
have implications for the treatment of PD in patients at risk for vascular 
disease, and potentially for those at risk for dementia and depression.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.60.1.59
PMID: 12533089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


925. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;(1):CD000442. doi: 10.1002/14651858.CD000442.

Selegiline for Alzheimer's disease.

Birks J(1), Flicker L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Geratology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK, OX2 6HE. 
jacqueline.birks@geratology.ox.ac.uk

Update of
    Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2000;(2):CD000442.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia in older 
people accounting for some 60% of cases with late-onset cognitive deterioration. 
It is now thought that several neurotransmitter dysfunctions are involved from 
an early stage in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease-associated cognitive 
decline. The efficacy of selegiline for symptoms of Alzheimer's disease remains 
controversial and is reflected by its low rate of prescription and the lack of 
approval by several regulatory authorities in Europe and elsewhere. Reasons for 
this uncertainty involve the modest overall effects observed in some trials, the 
lack of benefit observed in several trials, the use of cross-over designs which 
harbour methodological problems in a disease like dementia and the difficulty in 
interpreting results from trials when a variety of measurement scales are used 
to assess outcomes.
OBJECTIVES: The objective of this review is to assess whether or not selegiline 
improves the well-being of patients with Alzheimer's disease.
SEARCH STRATEGY: The Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Impairment Group Register 
of Clinical Trials, was searched using the terms 'selegiline', 'l-deprenyl', 
"eldepryl" and "monamine oxidase inhibitor-B". MEDLINE, PsycLIT and EMBASE 
electronic databases were searched with the above terms in addition to using the 
group strategy (see group details) to limit the searches to randomised 
controlled trials.
SELECTION CRITERIA: All unconfounded, double-blind, randomised controlled trials 
in which treatment with selegiline was administered for more than a day and 
compared to placebo in patients with dementia.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: An individual patient data meta-analysis of 
selegiline, Wilcock 2002 provides much of the data that are available for this 
review. Seven studies provided individual patient data and this was pooled with 
summary statistics from the published papers of the other nine studies. Where 
possible, intention-to-treat data were used but usually the meta analyses were 
restricted to completers' data (data on people who completed the study).
MAIN RESULTS: There are 17 included trials. There were very few significant 
treatment effects and these were all in favour of selegiline; cognition at 4-6 
weeks and 8-17 weeks, and activities of daily living at 4-6 weeks. There is 
little evidence of adverse effects caused by selegiline, and few withdrew from 
trials, apart from the Sano trial. The analyses were conducted on data 
available. There was no attempt to correct for missing patients because there 
were so few and withdrawal was probably unconnected with treatment. All trials 
examined the cognitive effects of selegiline, and in addition 12 trials examined 
the behavioural and mood effects. The meta-analysis revealed benefits on memory 
function, shown by improvement in the memory tests from several cognitive tests 
(the Randt Memory Index from Agnoli 1990 and Agnoli 1992, the BSRT from 
Sunderland 1992, prose recall from Filip 1991, ADAS-cog from Lawlor 1997, the 
Wechsler Memory Scale from Loeb 1990 and Mangoni 1991, the Rey -AVL from 
Piccinin 1990, and the MMSE from Sano 1995, Tariot 1998, Filip 1991, Freedman 
1996, Burke 1993 and Riekkinen 1993). The combined memory tests, and overall the 
combined cognitive tests, analysed using standardised mean differences, showed 
an improvement due to selegiline compared with placebo at 4-6 weeks (SMD 0.39, 
95%CI 0.07 to 0.72, P = 0.02, random effects model ) and 8-17 weeks, ( SMD 0.44, 
95%CI 0.04 to 0.84, P = 0.03, random effects model). The meta-analyses of 
emotional state show no treatment effects. Several studies assessed activities 
of daily living using several different scales, the GBS-motor function from 
Agnoli 1990, the NOSIE-daily living from Filip 1991, the BDS-daily living from 
Loeb 1990 and Mangoni 1991, the DS from Sano 1995 and PIADL from Tariot 1998. 
The combined tests, analysed using the standardised mean difference, showed an 
improvement due to selegiline at 4-6 weeks (SMD -0.27, 95% CIs -0.41 to -0.13, P 
= <.001). The global rating scales, the BDS used by Burke 1993 and Tariot 1998, 
and the GBS used by Agnoli 1990 and Agnoli 1992, and the GDS used by Freedman 
1996 and the CGI by Filip 1991, analysed using standardised mean differences 
showed no effect of selegiline. A variety of adverse effects were recorded, but 
very few patients left a trial as a direct result. Four studies reported no side 
effects. Mangoni 1991 reported poor tolerability for 3 patients out of 68 on 
treatment and 1 out of 51 on placebo, resulting in dropouts. Small numbers found 
equally in both groups reported anxiety, agitation, dizziness, nausea and 
dyspepsia. Piccinin 1990 reported that selegiline was well tolerated with few 
adverse reactions (dizziness and orthostatic hypotension) and no resulting drop 
outs. Burke 1993 and Loeb 1990 both reported that selegiline was very well 
tolerated with no serious side effects. Sano 1995 reported 49 categories of 
adverse events but found no differences between the 4 arms of the factorial 
trial. Freedman 1996 reported unequal numbers of dropouts in the trial with 7 
subjects withdrawing from the selegiline group and only 1 subject from the 
placebo group. The meta-analyses of the numbers suffering adverse effects, and 
of the numbers of withdrawals before the end of the trial show no difference 
between control and selegiline.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Despite its initial promise, ie the potential 
neuroprotective properties, and its role in the treatment of Parkinson's disease 
sufferers, selegiline for Alzheimer's disease has proved disappointing. Although 
there is no evidence of a significant adverse event profile, there is also no 
evidence of a clinically meaningful benefit for Alzheimer's disease sufferers. 
This is true irrespective of the outcome measure evaluated, ie cognition, 
emotional state, activities of daily living, and global assessment, whether in 
the short, or longer term (up to 69 weeks), where this has been assessed. There 
would seem to be no justification, therefore, to use it in the treatment of 
people with Alzheimer's disease, nor for any further studies of its efficacy in 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD000442
PMID: 12535396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


926. Exp Brain Res. 2003 Feb;148(3):308-19. doi: 10.1007/s00221-002-1291-6. Epub 2002 
Nov 30.

Proprioceptive sensory function in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease: 
evidence from proprioception-related EEG potentials.

Seiss E(1), Praamstra P, Hesse CW, Rickards H.

Author information:
(1)Behavioural Brain Sciences Centre, University of Birmingham, Birmingham B15 
2TT, UK.

In both Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease, proprioceptive sensory 
deficits have been suggested to contribute to the motor manifestations of the 
disease. Here, proprioceptive sensory function was investigated in Parkinson's 
disease patients, Huntington's disease patients, and healthy control subjects 
(each group n=8), using proprioception-related evoked potentials. 
Proprioception-related potentials were elicited by passive index finger 
movements and measured with high-density EEG. Conventional median nerve 
somatosensory evoked potentials (mnSEPs) were recorded in the same session. 
Analysis included amplitude and latency measures from selected scalp electrodes 
and dipole source reconstruction. We found a proprioception-related N90 
component of normal latency in both Parkinson's disease and Huntington's 
disease. The source strength of the underlying cortical generator was normal in 
Parkinson's disease, but marginally reduced in Huntington's disease. Using the 
source location of the N20-P20 component of the mnSEP as a landmark for 
postcentral area 3b, the N90 was localized to the precentral motor cortex. At a 
latency around 170-180 ms proprioception-related potentials were explained by 
bilateral sensory cortex activation with an altered distribution in Parkinson's 
disease and a reduction of ipsilateral activation in Huntington's disease. 
Together, the results show largely normal early proprioception-related 
potentials, but changes in the cortical processing of kinaesthetic signals at 
longer latencies in both diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00221-002-1291-6
PMID: 12541142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


927. Ann Clin Biochem. 2003 Jan;40(Pt 1):25-40. doi: 10.1258/000456303321016141.

Brain-specific proteins in cerebrospinal fluid for the diagnosis of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Verbeek MM(1), De Jong D, Kremer HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, 319 LKN, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.

Neurodegenerative disorders have traditionally been classified according to 
clinical criteria, e.g. as dementia syndromes (the best known is Alzheimer's 
disease) or as movement disorders (e.g. Parkinson's disease). Another 
subdivision is based on recent insights into the respective pathogenetic 
mechanisms, leading to the recognition of so-called tauopathies and 
alpha-synucleinopathies. It is this increased knowledge of the underlying 
(neuro)pathological mechanisms that has sparked interest in studies aimed at the 
identification of disease-specific biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) for 
this field of neurological disorders. This review deals with the recent progress 
that has been made in identification, quantification and subsequent validation 
of brain-specific proteins in CSF for the diagnosis of various neurodegenerative 
disorders. Development of disease-specific CSF biomarkers will undoubtedly add 
to the process of differential diagnosis early in the course of the disease.

DOI: 10.1258/000456303321016141
PMID: 12542908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


928. Exp Gerontol. 2003 Jan-Feb;38(1-2):119-28. doi: 10.1016/s0531-5565(02)00163-8.

Cognition enhancing or neuroprotective compounds for the treatment of cognitive 
disorders: why? when? which?

Lockhart BP(1), Lestage PJ.

Author information:
(1)Servier, Division of Cerebral Pathology, 125 Chemin de Ronde, 78290 
Croissy-sur-Seine, France. brian.lockhart@fr.netgrs.com

Neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Lewy-Body dementia, 
Parkinson's disease and cerebrovascular dementia result in an insidious 
cognitive and behavioural decline culminating in the development of severe 
dementia. Based on current population projections it has been estimated that by 
2050 the number of individuals over 65 will increase to 1.1 billion worldwide 
and as a consequence, the number of cases of dementia to 37 million. Faced with 
such an enormous public health and socio-economic burden it is evident that the 
importance of therapeutic intervention aimed at either finding a cure or 
preventing disease progression cannot be overstated. The aim of the present 
paper is to present an overview, in the context of a brain aging continuum, at 
what stage cognition enhancing and/or neuroprotective intervention strategies 
aimed at stabilising and/or preventing neurodegenerative disease could 
demonstrate potential clinical benefit. In particular, the clinical 
identification of patients with mild cognitive impairment and age-associated 
memory impairment which may represent a 'transition' state between normal aging 
and dementia is discussed as a potential clinical population cohort targeted for 
early intervention in dementia. Considering the wide spectrum of cognitive and 
psychotic effects in dementia juxtaposed with the neuropathological evolution of 
the disease, it is clear that a variety of therapeutic intervention(s) will be 
required in order, to at the least, stabilise disease progression. Evidently, 
since Alzheimer's disease is by far the most prevalent form of dementia, and 
will undoubtedly serve as the benchmark for any future treatment of dementia, an 
update of current symptomatic and disease-modifying therapeutic approaches 
(cholinergic, glutamatergic, nootropics, beta-amyloid cascade inhibitors) will 
be reviewed.

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(02)00163-8
PMID: 12543269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


929. Neurol Sci. 2002 Sep;23 Suppl 2:S65-6. doi: 10.1007/s100720200072.

Frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (FIRDA) in patients with dementia 
with Lewy bodies: a diagnostic tool?

Calzetti S(1), Bortone E, Negrotti A, Zinno L, Mancia D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, University of Parma, Parma, Italy.

The accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
remains poor, especially in early phases of the disease, in spite of applying 
current consensus diagnostic criteria. The need for supportive diagnostic tools 
is therefore warranted. In this study EEG recordings showed a main pattern of 
bilateral frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity (FIRDA) in 7 of 10 
patients, aged 58-83 years, 8 of whom were diagnosed as affected by "probable" 
and 2 by "possible" DLB. Conversely, the same EEG abnormality was found only in 
2 of 9 age-matched patients, 8 of whom had "probable" and 1 "possible" 
Alzheimer's disease, according to NINCDS-ADRDA criteria, taken as controls. The 
degree of cognitive impairment was comparable among the two groups of patients. 
If these findings will be confirmed in a larger series, FIRDA, even though an 
aspecific EEG pattern, could be of value in improving the diagnostic accuracy of 
DLB.

DOI: 10.1007/s100720200072
PMID: 12548346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


930. Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 2003 Jan;8(1):46-57. doi: 10.1053/scnp.2003.50006.

Dementia with Lewy bodies.

McKeith IG(1), Burn DJ, Ballard CG, Collerton D, Jaros E, Morris CM, McLaren A, 
Perry EK, Perry R, Piggott MA, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Newcastle, UK.

The objective was to summarize recent findings about the clinical features, 
diagnosis and investigation of dementia with Lewy (DLB) bodies, together with 
its neuropathology, neurochemistry and genetics. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
is a primary, neurodegenerative dementia sharing clinical and pathological 
characteristics with both Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Antiubiquitin immunocytochemical staining, developed in the early 1990s, allowed 
the frequency and distribution of cortical LBs to be defined. More recently, 
alpha-synuclein antibodies have revealed extensive neuritic pathology in DLB 
demonstrating a neurobiological link with other "synucleinopathies" including PD 
and multiple system atrophy (MSA). The most significant correlates of cognitive 
failure in DLB appear to be with cortical LB and Lewy neurites (LNs) rather than 
Alzheimer type pathology. Clinical diagnostic criteria for DLB, published in 
1996, have been subjected to several validation studies against autopsy 
findings. These conclude that although diagnostic specificity is high (range 79- 
100%, mean 92%), sensitivity is lower (range 0- 83 %, mean, 49%). Improved 
methods of case detection are therefore required. Fluctuating impairments in 
attention, visual recognition and construction are more indicative of DLB than 
AD. Relative preservation of medial temporal lobe volume on structural MRI and 
the use of SPECT tracers for regional blood flow and the dopamine transporter 
are the most reliable current biomarkers for DLB. There are no genetic or CSF 
tests recommended for the diagnosis of DLB at present. Between 15 and 20% of all 
elderly demented cases reaching autopsy have DLB, making it the most common 
cause of degenerative dementia after AD. Exquisite, not infrequently fatal, 
sensitivity to neuroleptic drugs and encouraging reports of the effects of 
cholinesterase inhibitors on cognitive, psychiatric and neurological features, 
mean that an accurate diagnosis of DLB is more than merely of academic interest. 
Dementia developing late in the course of PD shares many of the same clinical 
and pathological characteristics.

Copyright 2003, Elsevier Science (USA)

DOI: 10.1053/scnp.2003.50006
PMID: 12567332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


931. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2003 Jan;9(1):17-24. doi: 10.1017/s1355617703910022.

Prodromal frontal/executive dysfunction predicts incident dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Woods SP(1), Tröster AI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195, USA.

To identify the cognitive characteristics predictive of incident dementia in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), we examined the baseline neuropsychological profiles 
of 18 initially non-demented patients with PD who met diagnostic criteria for 
dementia (PDD) at one-year follow-up. PDD participants' baseline 
neuropsychological test scores were compared to the baseline performance of 18 
patients with PD who did not meet criteria for dementia at one-year follow-up 
(PDND) and 18 normal controls (NC). The three groups were matched on baseline 
demographic and disease variables. Relative to the PDND group, the incident PDD 
participants demonstrated significantly poorer performance on digits backward 
(Wechsler Memory Scale-Revised), word list learning and recognition (California 
Verbal Learning Test), and perseverative errors on the Wisconsin Card Sorting 
Test. Each of these baseline neuropsychological variables exhibited adequate 
diagnostic classification accuracy in predicting PDD and PDND group membership 
at follow-up. These results suggest that subtle frontal/executive dysfunction is 
evident during the immediate PDD prodrome and may be of prognostic value in 
identifying PD patients at risk for dementia. Accordingly, neuropsychological 
evaluation may facilitate early identification of PDD and thereby inform 
appropriate dispositional planning.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355617703910022
PMID: 12570354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


932. Folia Neuropathol. 2002;40(3):111-8.

Molecular genetics of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17).

Kowalska A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Polish Academy of Sciences, Poznań, Poland. 
annkowal@rose.man.poznan.pl

Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) is 
characterised by behavioural, cognitive and motor disturbances. Pathological 
changes in the brain include fronto-temporal atrophy with neuronal loss, grey 
white matter gliosis and superficial cortical spongiform. In addition, 
intraneuronal tau inclusions with the variable occurrence of glial inclusions 
are present in FTDP-17 brains. The pattern of inheritance in FTDP-17 is 
autosomal dominant with an early age of onset (45-65 years). The identification 
of mutations in the tau gene in FTDP-17 demonstrated that there is a direct link 
between tau dysfunction and neurodegeneration. To date, 14 missense mutations, a 
three base pair deletion (deltaK280) and seven splice site mutations have been 
found in over 50 FTDP-17 families from different ethnic groups. All of the known 
mutations occur in the C-terminal end of tau, with the majority affecting exons 
9-12, which encode the microtubule-binding repeats. The mutations have multiple 
effects on the biology and function of tau. These varied pathogenic mechanisms 
most likely explain the wide range of clinical and neuropathological features 
observed in different families with FTDP-17.

PMID: 12572916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


933. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2003;26:81-104. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.043002.094919. 
Epub 2003 Jan 24.

Epidemiology of neurodegeneration.

Mayeux R(1).

Author information:
(1)The Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, 630 West 168th 
Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. rpm2@columbia.edu

Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and motor neuron disease share a 
propensity to occur with increasing age and as either a sporadic or a familial 
disorder. A number of behavioral and environmental risk factors have been 
proposed for each disorder, but most associations lack consistency and 
specificity. Over the last decade the remarkable frequency of these disorders 
has become apparent, and the identification of mutations in genes has provided 
the means to understand their pathogenesis. Better and more accurate means to 
characterize and diagnose these diseases has greatly facilitated analytic 
epidemiology. The analysis of behavioral and genetic factors that may lower 
disease risk has led to clinical trials that are either in progress or being 
planned with the aim of preventing these disorders.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.26.043002.094919
PMID: 12574495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


934. Actas Esp Psiquiatr. 2003 Jan-Feb;31(1):48-52.

[The Charles Bonnet syndrome: a case report and a brief review].

[Article in Spanish]

Saiz Gonzáles D(1), Diaz Marsá M.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Psiquiatría Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, España. 
lolasaiz@yahoo.es

The Charles Bonnet syndrome (CBS) is a rare disease that also seems to be 
generally misdiagnosed. Initially described in the XVIII century by the 
philosopher with the same name, it consist in complex visual hallucinations in 
elderly people who suffer sensory deprivation with no other psychopathology. The 
hypothesis on the neurophysiology of hallucinations suggests, as in other 
diseases that present hallucinations, some implication of thalamus-cortex 
pathway release. Some authors have proposed CBS as an early marker of dementia 
and Parkinson's disease. Nevertheless, the results in functional neuroimaging 
are not conclusive. Regarding treatment, typical and atypical neuroleptics do 
not seem to be useful and recent studies suggest that the new anticonvulsants 
could be effcient. The patient should be informed about CBS as a 
<<non-psychiatric disease>>. In the case reported, the patient presented complex 
hallucinations with normal SPECT and neuropsychological examinations. The 
patient did not respond to treatment with risperidone, presenting a favorable 
evolucion with valpromide. Although further research is needed, this case report 
supports the efficacy of valpromide in CBS.

PMID: 12590373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


935. Ann Nucl Med. 2002 Dec;16(8):515-25. doi: 10.1007/BF02988628.

Clinical application of positron emission tomography for diagnosis of dementia.

Ishii K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Hyogo Brain and Heart Center, 
Himeji, Japan. ishii@hiabcd.go.jp

Clinical applications of PET studies for dementia are reviewed in this paper. At 
the mild and moderate stages of Alzheimer's disease (AD), glucose metabolism is 
reduced not only in the parietotemporal region but also in the posterior 
cingulate and precuneus. At the advanced stage of AD, there is also a metabolic 
reduction in the frontal region. In AD patients, glucose metabolism is 
relatively preserved in the pons, sensorimotor cortices, primary visual 
cortices, basal ganglia, thalamus and cerebellum. In patients with dementia with 
Lewy bodies, glucose metabolism in the primary visual cortices is reduced, and 
this reduction appears to be associated with the reduction pattern in AD 
patients. In patients with frontotemporal dementia, reduced metabolism in the 
frontotemporal region is the main feature of this disease, but reduced 
metabolism in the basal ganglia, and/or parietal metabolic reduction can be 
associated with the frontotemporal reduction. When corticobasal degeneration is 
associated with dementia, the reduction pattern of dementia is similar to the 
reduction pattern in AD and the hallmarks of diagnosing corticobasal 
degeneration associated with dementia are a reduced metabolism in the primary 
sensorimotor region and/or basal ganglia and an asymmetric reduction in the two 
hemispheres. FDG-PET is a very useful tool for the diagnosis of early AD and for 
the differential diagnosis of dementia. I also describe clinical applications of 
PET for the diagnosis of dementia in Japan.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02988628
PMID: 12593416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


936. Neurology. 2003 Feb 25;60(4):690-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000042785.02850.11.

Will caloric restriction and folate protect against AD and PD?

Mattson MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, Gerontology 
Research Center, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. mattsonm@grc.nia.nih.gov

Recent epidemiologic studies of different sample populations have suggested that 
the risk of AD and PD may be increased in individuals with high-calorie diets 
and in those with increased homocysteine levels. Dietary restriction and 
supplementation with folic acid can reduce neuronal damage and improve 
behavioral outcome in mouse models of AD and PD. Animal studies have shown that 
the beneficial effects of dietary restriction result, in part, from increased 
production of neurotrophic factors and cytoprotective protein chaperones in 
neurons. By keeping homocysteine levels low, folic acid can protect cerebral 
vessels and can prevent the accumulation of DNA damage in neurons caused by 
oxidative stress and facilitated by homocysteine. Although further studies are 
required in humans, the emerging data suggest that high-calorie diets and 
elevated homocysteine levels may render the brain vulnerable to 
neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000042785.02850.11
PMID: 12601113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


937. Eur J Neurol. 2003 Mar;10(2):159-63. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2003.00532.x.

Familial Parkinson's disease: a community-based study.

Kurz M(1), Alves G, Aarsland D, Larsen JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Central Hospital of Rogaland, Stavanger, Norway.

Genetic factors seem to be important in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease 
(PD). It is however, still controversial whether these factors also are 
reflected in a familial aggregation of PD. The aim of this study was to 
investigate the frequency of PD patients with a positive PD family history 
compared with two control groups. The included 245 PD patients were examined by 
neurologists and information was obtained through a semi-structured interview. 
The patients and the control groups were examined for the frequency of PD and 
dementia in their families. The 245 patients with PD were included in this 
study. A positive PD-family history could be obtained in 53 (21.6%) patients. 
The frequency was three- and four-fold increased as compared with the control 
groups (P < 0.001). Age at onset of disease was not different among patients 
with and without PD in the family. The frequency of dementia did not differ in 
the family of individuals with and without PD (P > 0.1). As a conclusion our 
study of PD in a community based population supports previous reports of a 
three- to fourfold increased risk for PD in the families of patients with the 
disease. Our results indicate that the familial aggregation of the disease is 
independent of the age of the proband.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2003.00532.x
PMID: 12603291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


938. Semin Nucl Med. 2003 Jan;33(1):77-85. doi: 10.1053/snuc.2003.127294.

Positron emission tomography and single-photon emission computed tomography 
brain imaging in the evaluation of dementia.

Van Heertum RL(1), Tikofsky RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.

The role of PET and SPECT brain imaging in the initial assessment and 
differential diagnosis of dementia is beginning to evolve rapidly. Numerous 
studies confirm the value of functional brain imaging, particularly with FDG-PET 
imaging, as a potentially cost-effective means of establishing an earlier 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. Such an approach should allow for a more 
objective means of establishing which patients will benefit from treatment with 
cholinesterase inhibitors. In the future, neuroreceptor and plaque burden 
imaging studies should further enhance the sensitivity and specificity of 
dementia detection and patient management.

DOI: 10.1053/snuc.2003.127294
PMID: 12605358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


939. Am J Epidemiol. 2003 Mar 1;157(5):409-14. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwf216.

Neurodegenerative diseases and exposure to pesticides in the elderly.

Baldi I(1), Lebailly P, Mohammed-Brahim B, Letenneur L, Dartigues JF, Brochard 
P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire Santé Travail Environnement, Institut de Santé Publique 
d'Epidémiologie et de Développement, Université Victor Segalen Bordeaux 2, 
Bordeaux, France. isabelle.baldi@isped.u-bordeaux2.fr

The authors investigated the hypothesis that exposure to pesticides could be 
related to central nervous system disorders in a prospective cohort study of 
1,507 French elderly (1992-1998). Lower cognitive performance was observed in 
subjects who had been occupationally exposed to pesticides. In men, the relative 
risks of developing Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease for occupational 
exposure assessed by a job exposure matrix were 5.63 (95% confidence interval: 
1.47, 21.58) and 2.39 (95% confidence interval: 1.02, 5.63), respectively, after 
confounding factors were taken into account. No association was found with 
having a primary job in agriculture or with environmental pesticide exposure, 
nor was an association found in women. These results suggest the presence of 
neurologic impairments in elderly persons who were exposed occupationally to 
pesticides.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwf216
PMID: 12615605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


940. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2003 Mar;9(4):225-31. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(02)00057-3.

Co-occurrence of essential tremor and Parkinson's disease: clinical study of a 
large kindred with autopsy findings.

Yahr MD(1), Orosz D, Purohit DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York University, 
Box 1139 One Gustave L Levy Place, New York, NY 10029-6574, USA. 
melvin.yahr@mssm.edu

A multigenerational family complex with an admixture of essential tremor (ET) 
and PD is presented. Medical information obtained either by historic 
documentation and/or examination was available for five generations and included 
36 members. Of these, 11 family members had tremor of the limbs and/or head. In 
all these instances ET made its first appearance at an early age, usually prior 
to the second decade of life. In one case focal dystonia of the hand, a possible 
prelude to PD occurred, while in three brothers of the third generation, two of 
them identical twins, classical Parkinson's disease (PD) developed. They had ET 
develop at an early age, which persisted and in their 50s began showing evidence 
of PD. Two decades later the twin brothers succumbed to cancer of the colon and 
at autopsy typical findings of PD with cell loss in the substantia nigra and 
Lewy-body formation positive for alpha-synuclein by immunohistochemistry was 
found. Additionally, more than the usual number of senile plaques and 
neurofibrillatory tangles were present without clinical evidence of dementia or 
significant decline in cognitive function. This unusual set of clinical and 
pathological circumstances can hardly be attributed to chance occurrence and 
raise the question of a specific genetic mutation and/or clustering, which may 
link ET with PD.

Copyright 2003 Elsevier Science Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(02)00057-3
PMID: 12618058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


941. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2003 Mar;5(2):131-147. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-003-0004-1.

Parkinson's Disease: Surgical Options.

Bronte-Stewart H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stanford University Medical Center, 300 Pasteur 
Drive, Room A-343, Stanford, CA 94305-5235, USA. hbs@stanford.edu

Surgical therapy for Parkinson's disease (PD) has been a treatment option for 
over 100 years. Advances in the knowledge of basal ganglia physiology and in 
techniques of stereotactic neurosurgery and neuroimaging have allowed more 
accurate placement of lesions or "brain pacemakers" in the sensorimotor regions 
of target nuclei. This, in turn, has led to improved efficacy with fewer 
complications than in the past. Currently, bilateral deep brain stimulation 
(DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) or the internal segment of the globus 
pallidus (GPi) is the preferred option (and is approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration) for the surgical treatment of PD. The most important predictors 
for outcome for DBS for PD are patient selection and electrode location. 
Patients should have a documented preoperative improvement from dopaminergic 
medication of at least 30% in the patient's Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale motor disability scores. A levodopa challenge may be needed to document 
the best "on" state. Dementia or active cognitive decline must be excluded. 
Active psychiatric disease should be treated preoperatively. Patients should be 
motivated, with good support systems, and committed to the postoperative 
management of DBS therapy. Deep brain stimulation should be considered when the 
patient begins to experience dyskinesia and on-off fluctuations despite optimal 
medical therapy. Deep brain stimulation is not a good option at the final stages 
of the disease because of the increased incidence of dementia and severe 
comorbidity. The DBS electrode should be placed in the sensorimotor region of 
the GPi or STN. Subthalamic nucleus and GPi DBS can improve all motor aspects of 
PD, as well as predictable "on" time, without dyskinesia or fluctuations. On 
average, STN DBS results in a greater reduction of dopaminergic medication 
compared with GPi DBS. Because of the smaller size of the target region, the 
pulse generator battery life is longer with STN then with GPi DBS. Deep brain 
stimulation programming is a skill that is readily learned and may be required 
of all neurologists in the future. Emerging surgical therapies are restorative, 
and they aim to replace or regenerate degenerating dopaminergic neurons. These 
include embryonic mesencephalic tissue transplantation, human embryonic stem 
cell transplantation, and gene-derived methods of intracerebral implantation of 
growth factors and dopamine- producing cell lines. It will be important to 
determine whether DBS, if performed before the onset of motor response 
complications to medical therapy, may prevent this stage of disease altogether 
or delay it for a significant period of time. The same question applies to the 
future with restorative therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-003-0004-1
PMID: 12628062


942. Arch Neurol. 2003 Mar;60(3):387-92. doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.3.387.

Prevalence and characteristics of dementia in Parkinson disease: an 8-year 
prospective study.

Aarsland D(1), Andersen K, Larsen JP, Lolk A, Kragh-Sørensen P.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Psychiatric Clinic, Central Hospital of 
Rogaland, PO 1163, Hillevag, N-4095 Stavanger, Norway. daa@post.rps.no

BACKGROUND: Few longitudinal studies of dementia in Parkinson disease (PD) have 
been reported, and the proportion of patients with PD who eventually develop 
dementia is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the 8-year prevalence, characteristics, and risk factors 
of dementia in patients with PD.
METHODS: Patients were recruited from an epidemiological study of PD in the 
county of Rogaland, Norway, using explicit criteria for PD. Subjects with 
cognitive impairment at disease onset were excluded. A semistructured 
caregiver-based interview, cognitive rating scales, and neuropsychological tests 
were used to diagnose dementia according to criteria from the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Revised Third Edition at baseline and 4 
and 8 years later. A population-based sample of 3295 subjects in the 
municipality of Odense, Denmark, was used as a comparison group and examined at 
baseline and after 2 and 5 years.
RESULTS: We included 224 patients with PD (116 women). At baseline, 51 patients 
(26%) had dementia. Fifty-five patients died, and 10 refused follow-up without 
their dementia status known. Forty-three and 28 new cases of dementia were 
identified at the 4- and 8-year evaluations, respectively. The 4-year prevalence 
of dementia in PD was nearly 3 times higher than in the non-PD group. The 8-year 
prevalence in PD was 78.2% (95% confidence interval [CI], 71.1-84.0). Risk 
factors for dementia were hallucinations before baseline (odds ratio [OR] = 3.1; 
95% CI, 1.6-6.2) and akinetic-dominant or mixed tremor/akinetic PD (OR = 3.3; 
95% CI, 1.2-8.5).
CONCLUSIONS: More than three quarters of this representative PD cohort developed 
dementia during the 8-year study period. Early hallucinations and 
akinetic-dominant PD were associated with an increased risk of dementia.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.60.3.387
PMID: 12633150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


943. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2003 Mar;16(1):59-64. doi: 
10.1177/0891988702250585.

Familial dementia with Lewy bodies with an atypical clinical presentation.

Bonner LT(1), Tsuang DW, Cherrier MM, Eugenio CJ, Du Jennifer Q, Steinbart EJ, 
Limprasert P, La Spada AR, Seltzer B, Bird TD, Leverenz JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Northwest Network Mental Illness Research, 
Education, and Clinical Center, University of Washington, Seattle 98108, USA.

The authors report a case of a 64-year-old male with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) pathology at autopsy who did not manifest 
the core symptoms of DLB until very late in his clinical course. His initial 
presentation of early executive and language dysfunction suggested a cortical 
dementia similar to frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Core symptoms of 
DLB including dementia, hallucination, and parkinsonian symptoms were not 
apparent until late in the course of his illness. Autopsy revealed both 
brainstem and cortical Lewy bodies and AD pathology. Family history revealed 7 
relatives with a history of dementia including 4 with possible or probable DLB. 
This case is unique because of the FTLD-like presentation, positive family 
history of dementia, and autopsy confirmation of DLB.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988702250585
PMCID: PMC1482838
PMID: 12641375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


944. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2003 May;5(3):231-239. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-003-0014-z.

Sleepiness and Unintended Sleep in Parkinson's Disease.

Rye DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University Sleep Disorders Laboratory, 1639 
Pierce Drive, WMRB-Suite 6000, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. drye@emory.edu

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and parkinsonian syndromes (eg, dementia 
with Lewy bodies, multisystem atrophy, and Shy-Drager syndrome) suffer from 
daytime sleepiness. Sleepiness in PD is common (10% to 50% of patients) and very 
real, often approaching levels observed in the prototypical disorder of 
sudden-onset sleep, viz, and narcolepsy with cataplexy. Physicians need to be 
vigilant in assessing parkinsonian patients for sleepiness, because treatment 
can dramatically enhance quality of life and prevent the significant morbidity 
and mortality that attends daytime sleepiness. Men with advanced disease, 
cognitive impairment, drug-induced psychosis, and orthostatic hypotension are 
most at risk for developing pathologic sleepiness. Because primary sleep 
disorders can coexist with Parkinsonism (eg, sleep apnea, insufficient or 
interrupted sleep), these potential causes should be carefully assessed with 
polysomnography and treated appropriately. Dopaminomimetics may exacerbate 
sleepiness in a small subset of patients. The primary pathologies involved in 
Parkinsonism appear to be the greatest contributors to the development of 
daytime sleepiness. Sleepiness in Parkinsonism, especially a narcolepsy-like 
phenotype, may necessitate treatment with wake-promoting agents, such as 
bupropion, modafinil, or traditional psychostimulants.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-003-0014-z
PMID: 12670412


945. Mov Disord. 2003 Apr;18(4):364-72. doi: 10.1002/mds.10379.

Olfaction in neurodegenerative disorder.

Hawkes C(1).

Author information:
(1)Essex Centre for Neuroscience, Oldchurch Hospital, Romford, Essex, United 
Kingdom. chrishawkes@msn.com

There has been an increase of interest in olfactory dysfunction since it was 
realised that anosmia was a common feature of idiopathic Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and Alzheimer-type dementia (AD). It is an intriguing possibility that the 
first sign of a disorder hitherto regarded as one of movement or cognition may 
be that of disturbed smell sense. In this review of PD, parkinsonian syndromes, 
essential tremor, AD, motor neurone disease (MND) and Huntington's chorea (HC) 
the following observations are made: 1). olfactory dysfunction is frequent and 
often severe in PD and AD; 2). normal smell identification in PD is rare and 
should prompt review of diagnosis unless the patient is female with 
tremor-dominant disease; 3). anosmia in suspected progressive supranuclear palsy 
and corticobasal degeneration is atypical and should likewise provoke diagnostic 
review; 4). hyposmia is an early feature of PD and AD and may precede motor and 
cognitive signs respectively; 5). subjects with anosmia and one ApoE-4 allele 
have an approximate 5-fold increased risk of later AD; 6). impaired smell sense 
is seen in some patients at 50% risk of parkinsonism; 7). smell testing in HC 
and MND where abnormality may be found, is not likely to be of clinical value; 
and 8). biopsy of olfactory nasal neurons shows non-specific changes in PD and 
AD and at present will not aid diagnosis.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10379
PMID: 12671941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


946. Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Jul;106(1):83-8. doi: 10.1007/s00401-003-0705-2. Epub 
2003 Apr 10.

Lewy body densities in the entorhinal and anterior cingulate cortex predict 
cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease.

Kövari E(1), Gold G, Herrmann FR, Canuto A, Hof PR, Bouras C, Giannakopoulos P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, HUG Belle-Idée, University of Geneva School of 
Medicine, Geneva, Switzerland. Eniko.Kovari@hcuge.ch

Previous studies reported an association between cortical Lewy body (LB) 
formation and dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD). However, it is unclear 
whether cognitive decline in this disorder is related to specific patterns of LB 
distribution within the cerebral cortex. Moreover, the prediction of cognitive 
status based on concomitant assessment of LB and Alzheimer's disease lesions has 
led to conflicting results. We performed a clinicopathological study in 22 
elderly PD patients in whom parkinsonism preceded cognitive decline by at least 
3 years. Cognitive status was assessed prospectively using the clinical dementia 
rating scale (CDR); quantitative assessment of LB, neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFT), and senile plaques (SP) was performed in Brodmann areas 9, 21, 24, 40 and 
the entorhinal cortex. Statistical analysis was performed using both correlation 
coefficients and logistic regression models. There was a highly significant 
correlation between CDR scores and regional LB scores in the entorhinal cortex 
and area 24. LB and SP densities in the entorhinal cortex accounted for 36.2% 
and 19.3% of the variability in CDR scores. LB densities in area 24 could 
explain 25.2% of this variability. NFT densities did not predict cognitive 
status. In multivariate models only LB densities in the entorhinal cortex and 
anterior cingulate cortex were significantly associated with CDR scores. These 
results imply that an assessment of LB pathology limited to the entorhinal 
cortex and area 24 may be sufficient to predict cognition in PD. They also 
suggest that LB formation in limbic areas may be crucial for the development of 
PD dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-003-0705-2
PMID: 12687392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


947. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2002;158(122):125-131.

[Psychic disorders].

[Article in French]

Pollak P(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble, 
INSERM U 318, Université Joseph Fourier de Grenoble, 38043 Grenoble Cedex 9.

Parkinson's disease is a neuropsychiatric disease with multiple psychic 
disorders. They mainly result from a combination between neuropathogical lesions 
and antiparkinsonian drugs. The most frequent psychic disorders are depression 
and psychosis. So far, pharmacological treatments of depression has been poorly 
evaluated. It is suggested that the first-line treatment of depression in 
Parkinson's disease is the class of the Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors. 
The occurrence of worsening in parkinsonism and agitation in rare cases 
necessitates a meticulous clinical follow-up. The treatment of psychosis is 
based on the reduction of antiparkinsonian medications, by tapering and 
stopping, if necessary, the drugs with the highest risk-to-benefit ratio first. 
When psychosis persists despite a simple levodopa monotherapy, then an 
antipsychotic drug is added. Clozapine is the only officially approved drug for 
psychosis in Parkinson's disease. Two double blind studies showed a clear 
antipsychotic effect without worsening of parkinsonism. Quetiapine, another 
atypical neuroleptic drug without risk of blood dyscrasia may prove to be as 
effective than clozapine. Olanzapine and risperidone can aggravate parkinsonism 
and should be used only as a last resort. Future studies will precise the place 
of anticholinesterases in the treatment of psychosis associated with dementia.

PMID: 12690323


948. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2002 Dec;158 Spec no 1:S125-31.

[Psychic disorders].

[Article in French]

Pollak P(1).

Author information:
(1)Département de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble, 
INSERM U 318, Université Joseph Fourier de Grenoble, 38043 Grenoble.

Parkinson's disease is a neuropsychiatric disease with multiple psychic 
disorders. They mainly result from a combination between neuropathological 
lesions and antiparkinsonian drugs. The most frequent psychic disorders are 
depression and psychosis. So far, pharmacological treatments of depression has 
been poorly evaluated. It is suggested that the first-line treatment of 
depression in Parkinson's disease is the class of the Selective Serotonin 
Reuptake Inhibitors. The occurrence of worsening in parkinsonism and agitation 
in rare cases necessitates a meticulous clinical follow-up. The treatment of 
psychosis is based on the reduction of antiparkinsonian medications, by tapering 
and stopping, if necessary, the drugs with the highest risk-to-benefit ratio 
first. When psychosis persists despite a simple levodopa monotherapy, then an 
antipsychotic drug is added. Clozapine is the only officially approved drug for 
psychosis in Parkinson's disease. Two double blind studies showed a clear 
antipsychotic effect without worsening of parkinsonism. Quetiapine, another 
atypical neuroleptic drug without risk of blood dyscrasia may prove to be as 
effective than clozapine. Olanzapine and risperidone can aggravate parkinsonism 
and should be used only as a last resort. Future studies will precise the place 
of anticholinesterases in the treatment of psychosis associated with dementia.

PMID: 12690672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


949. J Chem Neuroanat. 2003 Mar;25(3):161-73. doi: 10.1016/s0891-0618(03)00002-4.

Muscarinic receptors in basal ganglia in dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's 
disease and Alzheimer's disease.

Piggott MA(1), Owens J, O'Brien J, Colloby S, Fenwick J, Wyper D, Jaros E, 
Johnson M, Perry RH, Perry EK.

Author information:
(1)MRC/University of Newcastle Centre in Clinical Brain Ageing, MRC Building, 
Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate Road, NE4 6BE, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK. 
m.a.piggott@ncl.ac.uk

Derivatives of the muscarinic antagonist 3-quinuclidinyl-4-iodobenzilate (QNB), 
particularly [123I]-(R,R)-I-QNB, are currently being assessed as in vivo ligands 
to monitor muscarinic receptors in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB), relating changes to disease symptoms and to treatment 
response with cholinergic medication. To assist in the evaluation of in vivo 
binding, muscarinic receptor density in post-mortem human brain was measured by 
autoradiography with [125I]-(R,R)-I-QNB and [125I]-(R,S)-I-QNB and compared to 
M1 ([3H]pirenzepine) and M2 and M4 ([3H]AF-DX 384) receptor binding. Binding was 
calculated in tissue containing striatum, globus pallidus (GPe), claustrum, and 
cingulate and insula cortex, in cases of AD, DLB, Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
normal elderly controls. Pirenzepine, AF-DX 384 and (R,S)-I-QNB binding in the 
striatum correlated positively with increased Alzheimer-type pathology, and 
AF-DX 384 and (R,R)-I-QNB cortical binding correlated positively with increased 
Lewy body (LB) pathology; however, striatal pirenzepine binding correlated 
negatively with cortical LB pathology. M1 receptors were significantly reduced 
in striatum in DLB compared to AD, PD, and controls and there was a significant 
correlation between M1 and dopamine D2 receptor densities. [3H]AF-DX 384 binding 
was higher in the striatum and GPe in AD. Binding of [125I]-(R,R)-I-QNB, which 
may reflect increased muscarinic M4 receptors, was higher in cortex and 
claustrum in DLB and AD. [125I]-(R,S)-I-QNB binding was higher in the GPe in AD. 
Low M1 and D2 receptors in DLB imply altered regulation of the striatal 
projection neurons which express these receptors. Low density of striatal M1 
receptors may relate to the extent of movement disorder in DLB, and to a reduced 
risk of parkinsonism with acetylcholinesterase inhibition.

DOI: 10.1016/s0891-0618(03)00002-4
PMID: 12706204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


950. Arch Neurol. 2003 Apr;60(4):539-44. doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.4.539.

Parkinsonianlike signs and risk of incident Alzheimer disease in older persons.

Wilson RS(1), Schneider JA, Bienias JL, Evans DA, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center and Rush Institute for Healthy Aging and the 
Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush-Presbyterian-St Luke's Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rwilson@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: Parkinsonianlike signs are common in older persons, but little is 
known about how their severity or rate of progression is related to the 
development of Alzheimer disease (AD) or decline in cognition.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the association of progression of parkinsonianlike signs 
with incident AD and cognitive decline.
DESIGN: Longitudinal cohort study.
PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: For up to 8 years, 824 older Catholic clergy members 
without clinical evidence of AD or Parkinson disease at baseline underwent 
annual clinical evaluations that included a modified version of the Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), detailed cognitive function testing, 
and clinical classification of AD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinically diagnosed AD and change in global and specific 
measures of cognitive function.
RESULTS: During an average of 4.6 years of observation, 114 persons developed 
AD. The global UPDRS score increased in 79% of participants, who were divided 
into tertiles with the least, moderate, or most rapid progression. We examined 
the relationship of progression to disease risk in a proportional hazards model 
that controlled for baseline global UPDRS and demographic variables. Compared 
with the 21% without progression, risk of AD more than doubled in the subgroup 
with the least progression (P =.08), more than tripled in the moderate subgroup 
(P =.02), and increased more than 8-fold in the subgroup with the most rapid 
progression (P<.001). This effect was mainly due to worsening gait and rigidity. 
Rate of change on the global UPDRS measure was inversely correlated with rate of 
change on a global measure of cognitive function (r = -0.64).
CONCLUSION: Progression of parkinsonianlike signs in old age is associated with 
decline in cognitive function and the development of AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.60.4.539
PMID: 12707067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


951. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Other Motor Neuron Disord. 2002 Dec;3(4):244-7. doi: 
10.1080/146608202760839012.

Familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with a point mutation (G37R) of the 
superoxide dismutase 1 gene: a clinicopathological study.

Inoue K(1), Fujimura H, Ogawa Y, Satoh T, Shimada K, Sakoda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kasai Municipal Hospital, 1-13, Yokoo, Hojo-cho, 
Kasai, Hyogo 675-2393, Japan.

A familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FALS) patient with G37R mutation of 
superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene revealed an early onset and relatively slow 
progression. Neuropathological examination of this patient showed widespread 
neuronal degeneration extending to overall length of the spinal cord and the 
brainstem with extremely rare Lewy body-like inclusions (LBI), while there were 
no vacuoles in neurons, a characteristic feature in transgenic mice expressing 
G37R SOD1 mutation.

DOI: 10.1080/146608202760839012
PMID: 12710516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


952. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2003;16(1):46-51. doi: 10.1159/000069993.

In vivo dopamine pre-synaptic receptors and antioxidant activities in patients 
with Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and in controls. A 
preliminary report.

Tabet N(1), Walker Z, Mantle D, Costa D, Orrell M.

Author information:
(1)Postgraduate Medical School, Faculty of Health, University of Brighton, 
Falmer, Brighton BN1 9PH, UK. n.t.tabet@brighton.ac.uk

The degeneration of dopaminergic cells in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) may 
provide an important source of additional free radical generation. As a result, 
the oxidative stress status in DLB could be significantly enhanced. 
Subsequently, the levels of endogenous antioxidants, which are an indirect 
measure of free radical activities, may be different in DLB patients when 
compared with Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and controls. In this 
preliminary study, we measured the activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD), 
catalase (CAT), glutathione (GLU) and total antioxidant capacity in the blood of 
DLB, AD and control subjects. The state of nigrostriatal dopaminergic system was 
also assessed in vivo by using a radioactive ligand with an affinity for the 
dopamine pre-synaptic receptors and by imaging with single-photon emission 
tomography. Data obtained showed a decrease in dopamine pre-synaptic receptors 
in all the brain regions of DLB patients. The levels of SOD did not differ 
significantly between DLB, AD and control subjects. However, GLU levels were 
significantly higher in the DLB patients when compared with AD patients (p < 
0.05) and controls (p < 0.01). CAT blood levels were also higher in DLB when 
compared with AD, but this did not reach statistical significance. The results 
suggest that a different oxidative stress state may exist in DLB. This may occur 
due to increased free radical production from the degeneration of dopaminergic 
cells and auto-oxidation of dopamine, the availability of which may be 
maintained in early-stage DLB disease as a result of the compensatory increase 
in its turnover from the remaining dopaminergic cells.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000069993
PMID: 12714800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


953. J Alzheimers Dis. 2003 Apr;5(2):119-25. doi: 10.3233/jad-2003-5206.

Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 in an autopsy series of various dementing disorders.

Nielsen AS(1), Ravid R, Kamphorst W, Jørgensen OS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, DK-2100 Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) allele epsilon 4 is a risk factor for Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and has also been associated with impaired recovery from brain 
injury. Previous studies on APOE epsilon 4 in dementing disorders other than AD 
have been rather conflicting, in particular concerning frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD) and vascular dementia (VD). In the present study we determined APOE 
genotype in an autopsy series of demented subjects and non-demented controls 
from the Netherlands Brain Bank. We attempted to create as clear-cut diagnostic 
groups as possible and paid close attention to AD-type histopathological changes 
in all cases. In comparison with the APOE epsilon 4 allele frequency in controls 
(0.12; n=163 subjects), the APOE epsilon 4 allele frequency was significantly 
increased in AD (0.42; n=320, p<0.0001), as well as in AD with Lewy bodies 
(0.43; n=41, p<0.0001) and in demented subjects with no other neuropathological 
findings than AD-histopathology insufficient for a diagnosis of AD (0.29; n=41, 
p<0.001). However, the APOE epsilon 4 allele frequency was not significantly 
increased in FTD (0.18; n=49), VD (0.10; n=20) or in Lewy body disease without 
concomitant AD changes (0.13; n=12). As concerns dementing disorders, our 
results suggest that APOE epsilon 4 is selectively associated with the presence 
of AD-type histopathology.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2003-5206
PMID: 12719629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


954. J Alzheimers Dis. 2003 Apr;5(2):139-48. doi: 10.3233/jad-2003-5208.

Alpha-synuclein aggregation and neurodegenerative diseases.

Ma QL(1), Chan P, Yoshii M, Uéda K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neural Plasticity, Tokyo Institute of Psychiatry, Tokyo 
156-8585, Japan.

Alpha-synuclein is a neuronal protein originally identified in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) amyloid plaques in 1993 and named non-Abeta component precursor 
(NACP) [92]. Later, the discovery of two missense mutations (G88C and G209A), 
which resulted in Ala30Pro (A30P) and Ala53Thr (A53T) substitutions, of the 
alpha-synuclein gene in certain autosomal-dominant early onset familial 
Parkinson's disease (PD) has greatly promoted the understanding of the role of 
alpha-synuclein in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases, such as PD, 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and multiple system atrophy (MSA) [5,6,51,75]. 
At present, it is widely accepted that alpha-synuclein may play a central role 
in several neurodegenerative disorders because of the presence of insoluble 
alpha-synuclein as the major fibrillar component of inclusion bodies. From the 
cloning of the human alpha-synuclein cDNA in 1993 to the present, 
alpha-synuclein has been carefully documented in many aspects. In this article, 
we review the progress of studies on alpha-synuclein and its role in 
alpha-synuclein-related neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2003-5208
PMID: 12719631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


955. Age Ageing. 2003 May;32(3):259-64. doi: 10.1093/ageing/32.3.259.

Medical conditions as risk factors for pressure ulcers in an outpatient setting.

Margolis DJ(1), Knauss J, Bilker W, Baumgarten M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. dmargoli@cceb.med.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVES: the purpose of this study was to evaluate the likelihood that the 
presence of certain medical conditions in older ambulatory patients are 
associated with the risk of developing a new pressure ulcer.
DESIGN: a cohort study.
SETTING AND SUBJECTS: a large outpatient record database from the United Kingdom 
called the General Practice Research Database.
METHODS: the frequency of disease was reported as simple percentages and the 
associations between the medical conditions and the development of a pressure 
ulcer as instantaneous rate ratios.
RESULTS: we studied 75,168 older individuals. Pressure ulcers occurred in 1,211 
individuals. The medical conditions that were significantly associated with the 
development of a pressure ulcer after adjustment were: Alzheimer's disease, 
congestive heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, cerebral 
vascular accident, diabetes mellitus, deep venous thrombosis, hip fracture, hip 
surgery, limb paralysis, lower limb oedema, malignancy, malnutrition, 
osteoporosis, Parkinson's disease, rheumatoid arthritis, and urinary tract 
infections. Angina, hypertension, and pneumonia were inversely associated with 
the development of a pressure ulcer.
CONCLUSIONS: it is important that physicians recognise that patients with many 
medical conditions may be at higher risk for pressure ulcers so that even in the 
ambulatory care environment appropriate prevention and detection strategies can 
be directed towards the patients who are most likely to benefit.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/32.3.259
PMID: 12720610 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


956. Mov Disord. 2003 May;18(5):467-86. doi: 10.1002/mds.10459.

Movement Disorders Society Scientific Issues Committee report: SIC Task Force 
appraisal of clinical diagnostic criteria for Parkinsonian disorders.

Litvan I(1), Bhatia KP, Burn DJ, Goetz CG, Lang AE, McKeith I, Quinn N, Sethi 
KD, Shults C, Wenning GK; Movement Disorders Society Scientific Issues 
Committee.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorder Program, University of Louisville, KY 40205, USA. 
i.litvan@louisville.edu

As there are no biological markers for the antemortem diagnosis of degenerative 
parkinsonian disorders, diagnosis currently relies upon the presence and 
progression of clinical features and confirmation depends on neuropathology. 
Clinicopathologic studies have shown significant false-positive and 
false-negative rates for diagnosing these disorders, and misdiagnosis is 
especially common during the early stages of these diseases. It is important to 
establish a set of widely accepted diagnostic criteria for these disorders that 
may be applied and reproduced in a blinded fashion. This review summarizes the 
findings of the SIC Task Force for the study of diagnostic criteria for 
parkinsonian disorders in the areas of Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system atrophy, and 
corticobasal degeneration. In each of these areas, diagnosis continues to rest 
on clinical findings and the judicious use of ancillary studies.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10459
PMID: 12722160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


957. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2003 May;58(5):M425-31. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/58.5.m425.

Cardiovascular advantages among the offspring of centenarians.

Terry DF(1), Wilcox M, McCormick MA, Lawler E, Perls TT.

Author information:
(1)The New England Centenarian Study, Geriatrics Section, Boston Medical Center, 
88 East Newton Street, F-4, Boston, MA 02118, USA. laterry@bu.edu

Erratum in
    J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2008 Jul;63(7):706.

BACKGROUND: A significant component of the ability to survive to exceptional old 
age may be familial. This study assessed the prevalence of age-related diseases 
in the offspring of centenarians.
METHODS: The health histories of centenarian offspring (n=177) and controls 
(n=166) were assessed from 1997-2000 using a cross-sectional study design. The 
offspring of 192 centenarian subjects enrolled in the nationwide New England 
Centenarian Study were recruited and enrolled. Controls consisted of offspring 
whose parents were born in the same years as the centenarians but at least 1 of 
whom died at an average life expectancy. Prevalence of age-related diseases 
including heart disease, hypertension, diabetes, cancer, osteoporosis, stroke, 
dementia, cataracts, glaucoma, macular degeneration, depression, Parkinson's 
disease, thyroid disease, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were 
compared between the two groups.
RESULTS: Centenarian offspring had a 56% reduced relative prevalence of heart 
disease (odds ratio [OR] 0.44, 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.24, 0.80), a 66% 
reduced relative prevalence of hypertension (OR 0.34, 95% CI 0.21, 0.55), and 
59% reduced relative prevalence of diabetes (OR 0.41, 95% CI 0.15, 1.12) after 
multivariate adjusted analyses.
CONCLUSIONS: The offspring of centenarians demonstrate a markedly reduced 
prevalence of diseases associated with aging, in particular for cardiovascular 
disease and cardiovascular risk factors. Along with their parents, the 
centenarian offspring, who are in their 70s and 80s, may prove to be a valuable 
cohort to study genetic and environmental factors conducive to the ability to 
live to very old age in good health.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/58.5.m425
PMID: 12730251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


958. Curr Med Res Opin. 2003;19(2):69-82. doi: 10.1185/0300799039117029.

Rivastigmine: an update on therapeutic efficacy in Alzheimer's disease and other 
conditions.

Gabelli C(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Consortium Luigi Amaducci CRIC, Arcugnano (Vicenza), Italy. 
cgabelli@brainaging.it

The results of recent clinical trials with rivastigmine show that in the 
approved indication of mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease (AD), the drug is 
effective in the long term. Rivastigmine produces a significant delay in the 
decline of the three components of AD that have been identified by European 
guidelines as essential parameters for the assessment of therapeutic efficacy of 
medicinal products with this indication. These are cognitive function, the 
ability to perform the usual activities of daily living, and global judgement of 
the patient's condition by the patient himself, his caregiver and his doctor. 
Moreover, rivastigmine produces significant control of AD behavioural disorders. 
This further reduces caregiver burden, reduces the probability of 
institutionalisation, and enables the reduction or discontinuation of expensive 
and poorly tolerated antipsychotics. Recent trials also suggest that 
rivastigmine is effective in moderate to severe Alzheimer's disease, 'mixed' 
dementia (AD associated with vascular disorders) and Lewy body dementia. 
Preliminary investigations have also indicated that the drug may provide 
important benefits in patients with vascular dementia or dementia associated 
with Parkinson's disease. Pharmacoeconomic studies show that the therapeutic 
properties of rivastigmine result in economic savings for the care of demented 
patients living in the community.

DOI: 10.1185/0300799039117029
PMID: 12740150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


959. Arch Neurol. 2003 May;60(5):722-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.5.722.

A common NURR1 polymorphism associated with Parkinson disease and diffuse Lewy 
body disease.

Zheng K(1), Heydari B, Simon DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: NURR1 plays a key role in mesencephalic dopaminergic neuron 
development and survival. A homozygous NURR1 polymorphism (a single base-pair 
insertion in intron 6) (NI6P) has been reported to be associated with Parkinson 
disease (PD).
OBJECTIVE: To assess the association of the NI6P with PD and diffuse Lewy body 
disease.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Movement disorders clinic and tissue provided by brain banks.
PATIENTS: Patients with pathologically proven PD (n = 37) or diffuse Lewy body 
disease (n = 35), neuropathologically normal control subjects (n = 59), those 
clinically diagnosed as having PD (n = 66), and spousal controls (n = 29).
METHODS: Determining the frequency of heterozygotes and homozygotes for the NI6P 
by DNA sequencing and restriction endonuclease analyses.
RESULTS: Overall, 41 (39.8%) of the 103 patients with PD were heterozygotes 
compared with 22 (25.0%) of the 88 controls (P =.03), with a relative risk 
(estimated from the odds ratio) for PD of 2.03 (95% confidence interval, 
1.08-3.81) for heterozygotes vs wild type subjects. Heterozygotes were more 
frequent in the subgroup of patients with pathologically confirmed PD (18 
[48.6%] of 37) vs controls (14 [23.7%] of 59) (P =.01), with a relative risk for 
PD of 2.84 (95% confidence interval, 1.17-6.88) for heterozygotes vs wild type 
subjects. In patients clinically diagnosed as having PD, heterozygotes were more 
frequent in early-onset cases (onset at < or =45 years) (10 [55.6%] of 18) 
compared with late-onset cases (onset at >45 years) (10 [23.8%] of 42) (P =.02) 
or spousal controls (8 [27.6%] of 29) (P =.06), with a relative risk for 
early-onset PD of 4.17 (95% confidence interval, 1.13-15.33) for heterozygotes 
vs subjects with 2 wild type alleles. The homozygous NI6P was not associated 
with PD, but was present in 6 (17.1%) of the 35 patients with diffuse Lewy body 
disease compared with 3 (5.1%) of the 59 controls (P =.06).
CONCLUSIONS: The common heterozygous NI6P is associated with an increased risk 
of PD. An association of borderline significance was found for the homozygous 
NI6P and diffuse Lewy body disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.60.5.722
PMID: 12756136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


960. Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord. 2002 Aug;1(4):387-97. doi: 
10.2174/1568007023339283.

Human brain nicotinic receptors, their distribution and participation in 
neuropsychiatric disorders.

Graham AJ(1), Martin-Ruiz CM, Teaktong T, Ray MA, Court JA.

Author information:
(1)Joint MRC-University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Centre Development in Clinical 
Brain Ageing, MRC Building, Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE4 6BE, UK.

Mapping of nicotinic acetylcholine receptor (nAChR) subtypes and subunits in 
human brain is far from complete, however it is clear that multiple subunits are 
present (including alpha3, alpha4, alpha5, alpha6 and alpha7, beta2, alpha3 and 
beta4) and that these receptors are not solely distributed on neurones, but also 
on cerebral vasculature and astrocytes. It is important to elucidate subunit 
composition of receptors associated with different cell types and pathways 
within the human CNS in terms of potential nicotinic therapy for a range of both 
developmental and age-related disorders in which nAChR attenuation occurs. 
Reductions in nAChRs are reported in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, schizophrenia and autism, but may not be associated 
with reduced cortical cholinergic innervation observed in vascular dementia or 
occur at an early stage in Down's syndrome. Changes in nAChR expression in 
neuropsychiatric disorders appear to be brain region and subtype specific and 
have been shown in some instances to be associated with pathology and 
symptomatology. It is likely that deficits in alpha4-containing receptors 
predominate in cortical areas in Alzheimer's disease and autism, whereas 
reduction of alpha7 receptors may be more important in schizophrenia. Changes in 
astrocytic and vascular nAChR expression in neurodegenerative diseases should 
also be considered. Studies using both animal models and human autopsy tissue 
suggest that nAChRs can play a role in neuroprotection against age-related 
pathology. It is possible that the development of nAChR subtype specific drugs 
may lead to advances in therapy for both age-related and psychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.2174/1568007023339283
PMID: 12769611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


961. Curr Drug Targets CNS Neurol Disord. 2003 Apr;2(2):95-107. doi: 
10.2174/1568007033482959.

Biochemical and therapeutic effects of antioxidants in the treatment of 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Di Matteo V(1), Esposito E.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricerche Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Consorzio Mario Negri Sud, 
66030 Santa Maria Imbaro (Chieti), Italy.

Aging is a major risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases including 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). An unbalanced overproduction of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
may give rise to oxidative stress which can induce neuronal damage, ultimately 
leading to neuronal death by apoptosis or necrosis. A large body of evidence 
indicates that oxidative stress is involved in the pathogenesis of AD, PD, and 
ALS. Several studies have shown that nutritional antioxidants (especially 
vitamin E and polyphenols) can block neuronal death in vitro, and may have 
therapeutic properties in animal models of neurodegenerative diseases including 
AD, PD, and ALS. Moreover, clinical data suggest that nutritional antioxidants 
might exert some protective effect against AD, PD, and ALS. In this paper, the 
biochemical mechanisms by which nutritional antioxidants can reduce or block 
neuronal death occurring in neurodegenerative disorders are reviewed. Particular 
emphasis will be given to the role played by the nuclear transcription factor 
-kB (NF-kB) in apoptosis, and in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as AD, PD, and ALS. The effects of ROS and antioxidants on NF-kB 
function and their relevance in the pathophysiology of neurodegenerative 
diseases will also be examined.

DOI: 10.2174/1568007033482959
PMID: 12769802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


962. Neurology. 2003 May 27;60(10):1586-90. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000065889.42856.f2.

Influence of Alzheimer pathology on clinical diagnostic accuracy in dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Merdes AR(1), Hansen LA, Jeste DV, Galasko D, Hofstetter CR, Ho GJ, Thal LJ, 
Corey-Bloom J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego 92161, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2003 May 27;60(10):1571-2.
    Neurology. 2004 Jan 13;62(1):160; author reply 160.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether AD neurofibrillary pathology influences clinical 
diagnostic accuracy in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
BACKGROUND: Pathologic diagnosis of DLB mandates Lewy bodies but also allows for 
AD pathology in the form of plaques and tangles. Because clinical diagnostic 
accuracy of DLB remains low, the authors questioned whether the severity of AD 
pathology in the form of tangles might affect the clinician's ability to 
correctly diagnose DLB in life.
DESIGN/METHODS: Ninety-eight subjects with autopsy-proven DLB who had been 
evaluated annually at the University of California San Diego AD Research Center 
were identified. The clinical diagnosis used was the last diagnosis before 
death. Pathologic diagnosis of DLB was made according to Consensus guidelines, 
and Braak staging was used to assess the degree of neurofibrillary AD pathology. 
The clinical characteristics of subjects with DLB with low vs high Braak stages 
were compared and the clinical diagnostic accuracy for subjects stratified 
according to Braak stage was determined.
RESULTS: Only 27% of the subjects with DLB demonstrated both visual 
hallucinations and spontaneous extrapyramidal signs (EPS). The low Braak stage 
(0 to 2, n = 24) subjects had a higher frequency of visual hallucinations (65%) 
than did subjects with DLB with higher (3 to 6, n = 66) Braak stages (33%, p = 
0.008), and showed a slightly greater but not significant degree of EPS. 
Although clinical diagnostic accuracy for DLB was relatively low (49%), it was 
higher for subjects with low (75%) compared to high (39%) Braak stages (p = 
0.0039).
CONCLUSIONS: The degree of concomitant AD tangle pathology has an important 
influence on the clinical characteristics and, therefore, the clinical 
diagnostic accuracy of DLB.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000065889.42856.f2
PMID: 12771246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


963. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2003 May;159(5 Pt 2):3S19-23.

[Diagnostic criteria of parkinsonian syndromes].

[Article in French]

Tison F(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Haut-Lévèque, Pessac. 
francois.tison@chu-bordeaux.fr

Parkinson's disease constitutes 75p. 100 of all causes of parkinsonism. The 
disease is defined clinically by the UK Parkinson's Disease Brain Bank (UKPDSBB) 
which exclude secondary causes of parkinsonism and atypical primary parkinsonian 
syndromes. Any atypical sign, also commonly known as "red flags", should make 
the clinician aware of an alternative diagnosis: multiple system atrophy, 
progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration and parkinsonism 
associated with dementia such as dementia with diffuse Lewy body disease. 
Despite progress in designing validated clinical diagnosis criteria, such 
diseases remain difficult to diagnose in their early course.

PMID: 12773884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


964. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2003 May;159(5 Pt 2):3S83-6.

[Dopaminergic treatment and parkinsonian syndromes].

[Article in French]

Ghawche F(1), Durif F.

Author information:
(1)Fédération de Neurologie, Hôpital Gabriel Montpied, Clermont-Ferrand.

Chronic dopamine treatment usually provides partial and temporary improvement of 
extrapyramidal signs in about 40p.cent of the patients with multiple system 
atrophy. Exceptionally, dopamine agonists may provide a significant and 
persistent improvement in progressive supranuclear palsy. For patients with Lewy 
body dementia, levodopa often provides a significant improvement of the 
extrapyramidal syndrome in about 70p.cent of the treated patients. Dopamine 
treatment generally has no effect on secondary extrapyramidal syndromes caused 
by vascular parkinsonism or neuroleptics. Antiparkinsonian treatment can cause 
several complications, particularly degenerative parkinsonian syndromes with an 
increased frequency of cognitive disorders and dysautonomia. Consequently, 
antiparkinsonian agents should only be proposed within the framework of a 
differential diagnosis between parkinsonism and idiopathic Parkinson's disease 
then continued only if the risk/benefit ratio, systematically evaluated for each 
patient, is favorable.

PMID: 12773892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


965. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2003 Jun;9(5):265-70. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(02)00098-6.

Early and pre-symptomatic neuropsychological dysfunction in the PPND family with 
the N279K tau mutation.

Ferman TJ(1), McRae CA, Arvanitakis Z, Tsuboi Y, Vo A, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. ferman.tanis@mayo.edu

The N279K mutation on the tau gene of chromosome 17 leads to an inherited 
condition that involves pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration (PPND). Patients with 
PPND develop dementia, but the pattern and onset of cognitive dysfunction has 
not yet been delineated. Four affected patients underwent neurocognitive 
evaluation within the first 2 years of PPND motor onset; one of whom underwent 
five serial neurocognitive evaluations, and another who was not diagnosed with 
PPND until the third annual evaluation. Impaired letter fluency was found in the 
early stages of PPND and was also shown to precede the onset of motor symptoms 
by 2 years. Trail Making A (visual scanning and motor speed) and Trail Making B 
(divided attention) were impaired within the first 2 years of the disease in all 
but one patient, but this individual showed clinically significant decline on 
these tasks by the third year of the disease. Learning, memory, and timed 
visuospatial sequencing skills were variably affected. Results reveal 
disproportionate frontal-executive dysfunction early in PPND disease course, a 
pattern similar to what has been reported in other FTDP-17 kindreds and in 
sporadic PSP. In addition, results suggest that letter fluency may be a 
sensitive predictor of incipient PPND.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(02)00098-6
PMID: 12781592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


966. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2002 Nov;42(11):1073-6.

[Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism-dementia complex of the Kii 
Peninsula of Japan].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University School of Medicine, Edobashi, Tsu.

The Hohara village of the Kii peninsula is one of the high incidence ALS foci, 
and the high incidence was reported to have ended in early 1980s. However, we 
have found the ALS incidence rate has been still high, more than 100 times of 
the other areas of Japan. In addition, we have found many cases of 
parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC). ALS and PDC often occur simultaneously in a 
single patient or in a single family. Family history was positive in more than 
70% of patients. ALS and PDC showed common neuropathological findings consisting 
of ALS pathology and many neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) without senile plagues, 
and isoform pattern of NFT tau protein was similar to that of Alzheimer disease 
(AD), but different from that of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) or Pick's 
disease (PiD). Kii ALS/PDC may be a novel tauopathy that differ from AD, PSP or 
PiD.

PMID: 12784669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


967. Ann Nucl Med. 2003 Apr;17(2):79-89. doi: 10.1007/BF02988444.

PET studies in dementia.

Herholz K(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Universitätsklinik, Max-Planck-Institut für neurologische 
Forschung, Köln, Germany. karl.herholz@pet.mpin-koeln.mpg.de

Measurement of local cerebral glucose metabolism (lCMRGlc) by positron emission 
tomography (PET) and 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) has become a standard 
technique during the past 20 years and is now available at many university 
hospitals in all highly developed countries. Many studies have documented a 
close relation between lCMRGlc and localized cognitive functions, such as 
language and visuoconstructive abilities. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is 
characterized by regional impairment of cerebral glucose metabolism in 
neocortical association areas (posterior cingulate, temporoparietal and frontal 
multimodal association cortex), whereas primary visual and sensorimotor cortex, 
basal ganglia, and cerebellum are relatively well preserved. In a multicenter 
study comprising 10 PET centers (Network for Efficiency and Standardisation of 
Dementia Diagnosis, NEST-DD) that employed an automated voxel-based analysis of 
FDG PET images, the distinction between controls and AD patients was 93% 
sensitive and 93% specific, and even in very mild dementia (at MMSE 24 or 
higher) sensitivity was still 84% at 93% specificity. Significantly abnormal 
metabolism in mild cognitive deficit (MCI) indicates a high risk to develop 
dementia within the next two years. Reduced neocortical glucose metabolism can 
probably be detected with FDG PET in AD on average one year before onset of 
subjective cognitive impairment. In addition to glucose metabolism, specific 
tracers for dopamine synthesis (18F-F-DOPA) and for (11C-MP4A) are of interest 
for differentiation among dementia subtypes. Cortical acetylcholine esterase 
activity (AChE) activity is significantly lower in patients with AD or with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) than in age-matched normal controls. In LBD 
there is also impairment of dopamine synthesis, similar to Parkinson disease.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02988444
PMID: 12790355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


968. Neurology. 2003 Jun 10;60(11):1756-61. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000068010.82167.cf.

Longitudinal outcome of Parkinson's disease patients with psychosis.

Factor SA(1), Feustel PJ, Friedman JH, Comella CL, Goetz CG, Kurlan R, Parsa M, 
Pfeiffer R; Parkinson Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Albany Medical Center, NY 12205, USA. factors@mail.amc.edu

OBJECTIVES: To examine the long-term outcome of PD patients with psychosis 
requiring antipsychotic therapy; to explore predictors of mortality, nursing 
home placement, dementia, and persistent psychosis; and to compare outcomes of 
those with persistent psychosis vs those whose psychosis resolved.
METHODS: Baseline data available from 59 patients enrolled in the PSYCLOPS 
(PSychosis and CLOzapine in PD Study) trial included age, age at onset of PD, 
duration of PD and psychosis, character of psychosis, medications, living 
setting, and scores for Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, Hoehn and Yahr Scale, and Clinical Global 
Impression Scale. Longitudinal data were collected 26 months later regarding 
four outcomes: death, nursing home placement, diagnosis of dementia, and 
persistence of psychosis. Logistic regression was used to explore whether any 
baseline characteristics were associated with an increased likelihood of one of 
these outcomes.
RESULTS: At baseline, 56% of patients had an MMSE score of <25, 12% were in a 
nursing home, 95% had hallucinations, and 60% had paranoia. On follow-up, 25% 
were dead, nursing home placement occurred in 42%, psychosis was persistent in 
69%, and dementia was diagnosed in 68%. Select baseline characteristics 
predicted individual outcomes: Nursing home placement was associated with the 
presence of paranoia and older age; persistent psychosis was associated with 
younger age at onset of PD and longer disease duration; dementia was associated 
with older age at PD onset and lower initial MMSE score; no characteristics 
predicted death. Whether psychosis persisted or not had no significant effect on 
the development of the other three outcomes. The prevalence of hallucinations at 
follow-up was not different between groups currently receiving antipsychotics vs 
those on no treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Psychosis in PD requiring antipsychotic therapy is frequently 
associated with death, nursing home placement, development and progression of 
dementia, and persistence of psychosis. Still, it appears the prognosis has 
improved with atypical antipsychotic therapy based on the finding that 28% of NH 
patients died within 2 years compared with 100% in a previous study done prior 
to availability of this treatment.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000068010.82167.cf
PMID: 12796526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


969. J Neurol. 2003 Jun;250(6):733-40. doi: 10.1007/s00415-003-1074-4.

Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism with the P301S tau gene mutation in a 
Jewish family.

Lossos A(1), Reches A, Gal A, Newman JP, Soffer D, Gomori JM, Boher M, Ekstein 
D, Biran I, Meiner Z, Abramsky O, Rosenmann H.

Author information:
(1)The Agnes Ginges Center for Human Neurogenetics, Dept. of Neurology, Hadassah 
University Hospital, POB 12000, Jerusalem 91120, Israel. ALOS@HADASSAH.ORG.IL

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 
17q21-22 (FTDP-17) is an autosomal dominant tauopathy manifested by a variable 
combination of personality changes, cognitive decline and hypokinetic-rigid 
movement disorder. Significant clinical and pathological heterogeneity of 
FTDP-17 is related in part to more than 20 different pathogenic mutations 
identified in the tau gene. Among others, the P301S mutation has been previously 
reported in three families of European and one of Japanese origin presenting 
with different clinical phenotypes.
OBJECTIVES: To report a three-generation family of Jewish-Algerian origin with 
FTDP-17 due to the P301S tau mutation.
METHODS: Clinical, neuropsychological and neuroimaging evaluation of 3 patients, 
tau genotyping, and pathological study of the proband.
RESULTS: The 3 affected family members had a fairly stereotyped clinical course 
with early personality changes from their late 30s followed within a period of 
1-2 years by a progressive cognitive and motor deterioration eventually leading 
to a state of akinetic mutism or death 3-5 years after the initial symptoms. The 
main clinical manifestations included severe dementia and hypokinetic-rigid 
movement disorder associated with supranuclear gaze impairment, pyramidal signs 
and frontal release signs. Brain imaging disclosed a variable degree of 
frontotemporal atrophy, ventriculomegaly and regional cerebral hypoperfusion or 
glucose hypometabolism. Frontal lobe biopsy in the proband revealed weak tau 
immunoreactivity in a few cortical neurons, in rare neurites and in some glial 
cells with no neurofibrillary tangles. Molecular DNA analysis identified a P301S 
mutation in exon 10 of the tau gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The observed clinical features further expand the reported P301S 
phenotype and confirm a more aggressive course of the disease than in the other 
known tau mutations.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-003-1074-4
PMID: 12796837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


970. Cogn Behav Neurol. 2003 Jun;16(2):93-9. doi: 10.1097/00146965-200306000-00002.

Odor identification deficits in diffuse lewy body disease.

Westervelt HJ(1), Stern RA, Tremont G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown Medical School, 
Providence, Rhode Island 02903, USA. hwestervelt@lifespan.org

OBJECTIVES: To describe odor identification performance in patients with diffuse 
Lewy body disease and determine the clinical utility of odor identification 
tests in distinguishing diffuse Lewy body disease from Alzheimer disease.
BACKGROUND: The presence of olfactory deficits, especially odor identification 
deficits, has been well established in both Alzheimer disease and Parkinson 
disease. The presence of olfactory deficits in diffuse Lewy body disease is also 
likely given the overlap of clinical symptoms and neuropathology with Alzheimer 
disease and Parkinson disease. However, odor identification abilities have not 
been described previously in diffuse Lewy body disease.
METHODS: Nine patients from a clinic sample with diffuse Lewy body disease and 
nine carefully matched patients with Alzheimer disease were administered an odor 
identification task as part of their neuropsychologic evaluations.
RESULTS: Patients with diffuse Lewy body disease performed significantly worse 
than patients with Alzheimer disease on the odor identification test.
CONCLUSIONS: Odor identification deficits may be more prevalent and severe in 
people with diffuse Lewy body disease than in people with Alzheimer disease, and 
olfactory testing may be useful in antemortem differential diagnosis of the two 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1097/00146965-200306000-00002
PMID: 12799595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


971. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2003 May;51(5 Suppl Dementia):S305-13. doi: 
10.1046/j.1532-5415.5156.x.

Medical management of advanced dementia.

Tariot PN(1).

Author information:
(1)Program in Neurobehavioral Therapeutics, and Department of Psychiatry, Monroe 
Community Hospital, Rochester, NY, USA. pierre_tariot@urmc.rochester.edu

A cure for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is still far off, and clinicians face the 
burden of caring for patients at all stages of dementia for the foreseeable 
future. Those with advanced disease suffer neurological symptoms and signs that 
include incontinence; problems with gait and mobility; marked cognitive, 
language, and functional impairment; and in about 90% of patients, significant 
behavior problems. Dementia precludes the ability to initiate meaningful 
activities or social interactions. Whether patients are resident in the 
community or living in a nursing home, this composite reflects a highly complex 
medical and neuropsychiatric management challenge. Predictable medical 
conditions also must be addressed (i.e., those that accompany dementia, such as 
parkinsonism, and those that are prevalent in any aging population, such as 
hypertension). Clinicians can better address these problems with awareness of 
current treatment options. Placebo-controlled trials of some psychotropic agents 
have shown modest favorable effects on behavior problems. Use of 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors (AChEIs) to treat cognitive impairment and 
secondary behavioral symptoms derives primarily from results of 
placebo-controlled clinical trials. Trials in patients with moderate to severe 
AD, outpatients as well as nursing home residents, show overall effects similar 
to those seen in outpatients with milder dementia. Treatment with AChEIs may 
delay institutional placement. Memantine has shown benefit in trials in moderate 
to severe dementia, although it is not yet approved in the United States. 
Emerging data have expanded physicians' ability to use pharmacotherapy in 
patients with advanced dementia. Physicians need to enact the principle that 
something can be done for our afflicted parents and grandparents.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1532-5415.5156.x
PMID: 12801387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


972. Neuropsychology. 2003 Apr;17(2):230-9. doi: 10.1037/0894-4105.17.2.230.

Working memory in mild Alzheimer's disease and early Parkinson's disease.

Kensinger EA(1), Shearer DK, Locascio JJ, Growdon JH, Corkin S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences and the Clinical Research Center, 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge 02139, USA. ekensing@mit.edu

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) impair working memory 
(WM). It is unclear, however, whether the deficits seen early in the course of 
these diseases are similar. To address this issue, the authors compared the 
performance of 22 patients with mild AD, 20 patients with early PD and without 
dementia, and 112 control participants on tests of inhibition, short-term 
memory, and 2 commonly administered tests of WM. The results suggest that 
although mild AD and early PD both impair WM, the deficits may be related to the 
interruption of different processes that contribute to WM performance. Early PD 
disrupted inhibitory processes, whereas mild AD did not. The WM deficits seen in 
patients with AD may be secondary to deficits in other cognitive capacities, 
including semantic memory.

DOI: 10.1037/0894-4105.17.2.230
PMID: 12803428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


973. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2003 Jul;108(1):41-50. doi: 
10.1034/j.1600-0447.2003.00104.x.

Affective disorders in neurological diseases: a case register-based study.

Nilsson FM(1), Kessing LV, Sørensen TM, Andersen PK, Bolwig TG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, 
Copenhagen, Denmark. fmn@dadlnet.dk

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the temporal relationships between a range of 
neurological diseases and affective disorders.
METHOD: Data derived from linkage of the Danish Psychiatric Central Register and 
the Danish National Hospital Register. Seven cohorts with neurological index 
diagnoses and two control group diagnoses were followed for up to 21 years. The 
incidences of affective disorders in the different groups were compared with the 
control groups, using competing risks to consider the risk of affective disorder 
and the risk of death in the same analysis.
RESULTS: We found an increased incidence of affective disorders in dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, stroke and intracerebral haemorrhage compared 
with control groups. The association was found to be the strongest for dementia 
and Parkinson's disease. In hospitalized patients, with incident multiple 
sclerosis, the incidence of affective disorder was lower than the incidence in 
the control groups.
CONCLUSION: In neurological diseases there seems to be an increased incidence of 
affective disorders. The elevated incidence was found to be particularly high 
for dementia and Parkinson's disease (neurodegenerative diseases).

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0447.2003.00104.x
PMID: 12807376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


974. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003 Jul;74(7):852-6. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.74.7.852.

Lewy body cortical involvement may not always predict dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Colosimo C(1), Hughes AJ, Kilford L, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders, Institute of Neurology, 
London, UK.

BACKGROUND: The presence of Lewy bodies (LB) in the neocortex and limbic system 
in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) is commonly thought to be linked with 
cognitive impairment. The authors present here a series of patients with 
diagnosis of PD in life and no significant cognitive impairment who, at 
necropsy, satisfied the current neuropathological criteria for dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: Two hundred and seventy six brains with PD pathology were examined at 
the Queen Square Brain Bank in London between 1993 and 1999. The 
neuropathological diagnosis was PD, but 117 patients also had sufficient LB 
involvement above the brain stem to satisfy the current neuropathological 
criteria for DLB (50 patients had a neuropathological picture consistent with 
the limbic category of DLB and 67 with neocortical DLB). Forty eight cases were 
excluded who developed early cognitive impairment together with motor features 
of parkinsonism, 12 cases for lack of detailed clinical history, and 19 cases 
with coexistent features of advanced Alzheimer's disease changes. Thirty eight 
patients (13.8% of the total with PD pathology and 32.5 % of the total with DLB 
pathology) were found where there was no or very late cognitive impairment 
reported in the clinical records.
RESULTS: Selected cases were 24 men and 14 women, with a mean (SD) age at onset 
of parkinsonian symptoms of 60.1 (10.1) years and a mean disease duration of 
15.3 (5.5) years. At some time during the evolution of the disease 21 patients 
developed different degrees of cognitive impairment (after a mean disease 
duration of 12.2 (4.8) years). Clinical diagnosis at death was PD in 10 cases 
and PD with dementia in 11. In the remaining 17 patients no history of cognitive 
impairment was ever recorded in life and all of them had a clinical diagnosis of 
PD at death; in this subgroup, nine patients later revealed a neuropathological 
picture consistent with limbic (or transitional) category of DLB and eight with 
neocortical DLB. Interestingly, in all these patients the parkinsonian features 
including the response to dopaminergic drugs were indistinguishable from classic 
brain stem PD.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors demonstrate that the classic pathology of DLB can 
commonly be seen outside the generally accepted clinical spectrum for DLB and 
that important factors other than the absolute number of LB in the neocortex and 
limbic system influence the development of cognitive impairment in PD. 
Furthermore, the pathology of PD may be indistinguishable from that reported in 
DLB, suggesting that the two clinicopathological syndromes may be attributable 
to the same biological abnormality.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.74.7.852
PMCID: PMC1738521
PMID: 12810766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


975. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2001 Mar-Apr;2(2):60-5.

A comparison of the well-being of family caregivers of elderly patients 
hospitalized with physical impairments versus the caregivers of patients 
hospitalized with dementia.

Meller S(1).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Department, Chaim Shiba Medical Center Israel.

OBJECTIVES: This study investigated the differences between the level of 
well-being of caregivers of older patients hospitalized with dementia and the 
well-being of caregivers of older patients hospitalized with physical 
impairments. It also explored the relationships between social roles, religious 
faith, and well-being.
SETTING: Two groups were constructed to compare caregivers' well-being levels: 
caregivers of patients with dementia and caregivers of patients with physical 
impairments. The groups were caregivers of patients of two geriatric hospitals 
in central Israel. Patients were categorized by their medical files according to 
their medical diagnosis.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 107 caregivers participated in this research. Of that 
number, 46% were caregivers of patients with physical impairments while the 
other 54% were caregivers of patients with dementia. The patients with physical 
impairments suffered from stroke, hip fractures, Parkinson's disease, diabetes, 
and heart and lung diseases. The patients with dementia suffered from 
Alzheimer's disease or related dementia. Of the total number of patients, 67% 
were males and 33% were females.
INTERVENTION: The caregivers were asked to fill out a questionnaire that 
included 90 questions. Some of the questionnaires were given to the caregivers 
to be filled out at home.
MEASUREMENTS: The questionnaire integrated three subcategories: well-being, 
identity accumulation, and religious faith.
RESULTS: Differences were found only in the dimensions of social activity. 
Caregivers of the patients with physical impairments were found to attend 
synagogues and clubs more than caregivers of the patients with dementia did. The 
number of the caregivers' social roles were found to have been significantly 
related to caregivers' mental health. A negative correlation was found between 
the intensity of religious faith and the level of the caregivers' spouses' 
self-rated physical and mental health: those of stronger faith rated their 
physical health lower and were reported to have more symptoms of stress.
CONCLUSION: There are no significant differences between the level of well-being 
of caregivers of patients with dementia and caregivers of patients with physical 
impairments. Both groups of caregivers are at great risk of compromised physical 
and mental health, of decreased social activity, and of financial distresses. 
Various social roles and religious faith may enhance the caregiver's well-being. 
However, the spouse's religious faith has negative effects on their own 
well-being. These results call for welfare services and religious organizations 
to form support groups for family caregivers. They also make clear that all 
caregivers should benefit from the same social support if their older relatives 
are hospitalized.

PMID: 12812591


976. Mov Disord. 2003 Jul;18(7):758-63. doi: 10.1002/mds.10432.

Marked variation in clinical presentation and age of onset in a family with a 
heterozygous parkin mutation.

Tan LC(1), Tanner CM, Chen R, Chan P, Farrer M, Hardy J, Langston JW.

Author information:
(1)The Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, California 84089, USA.

Parkin gene mutations have been detected in families with early-onset autosomal 
recessive parkinsonism. We report a novel heterozygous 40 base pair deletion in 
exon 3 of the parkin gene that increases the susceptibility of carriers to 
develop parkinsonism/dystonia and manifests remarkable variability in regard to 
age of onset and phenotype in a single family. After identifying the new 
mutation in the proband of this kindred, family members were contacted and 
evaluated by a movement disorders specialist using standardized protocols and 
prospectively set diagnostic criteria. Importantly, examining physicians and 
family members were blinded to the genetic testing. Five affected members in two 
generations carried the parkin mutation. The proband and one of his brothers had 
disease onset at 24 years of age while another brother had disease at age 44. 
One exhibited multi-focal dystonia and parkinsonism of 17 years duration, 
another suffered a unilateral slowly progressive parkinsonism over 13 years 
while the third suffered dystonia-parkinsonism of recent onset. A sibling pair 
in the preceding generation had mild previously undiagnosed parkinsonism. 
Clinicians should be aware that patients carrying a parkin gene mutation may 
present with dystonia-parkinsonism or very subtle parkinsonism with a markedly 
varied age of onset.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10432
PMID: 12815654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


977. Mov Disord. 2003 Jul;18(7):784-90. doi: 10.1002/mds.10444.

Parkinson's disease is associated with hippocampal atrophy.

Camicioli R(1), Moore MM, Kinney A, Corbridge E, Glassberg K, Kaye JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, USA. rcamicio@ualberta.ca

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) may have hippocampal atrophy compared 
with controls. We compared hippocampal, and extra-hippocampal volumes between 
PD, PDD (patients with PD who have mild cognitive impairment or dementia), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and controls using volumetric magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI). Participants (10 patients with PD, 10 with PDD, 11 with AD, and 
12 control subjects) had an informant interview, neurological examination, and 
psychometric testing. Established, reliable methods were used to measure the 
hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus, temporal, frontal, and parieto-occipital 
lobes. Correction for intracranial volume was carried out before comparison. 
There was no age difference between groups (mean age, 74 years). On the Clinical 
Dementia Rating scale (CDR) cognitive impairment was mild (CDR = 0.5) in the 
majority of PDD and AD patients. Hippocampal (P < 0.0004) volumes were smaller 
in the patient groups. Effect sizes compared with the control group were: PD, 
0.66; PDD, 1.22; and AD, 1.81. The other volumes did not differ significantly. 
Among PD and PDD patients, recognition memory (r = 0.54, P = 0.015) and 
Mini-Mental State Examination scores (r = 0.56, P = 0.01) correlated with left, 
but not right hippocampal volume. In conclusion, hippocampal volume showed a 
pattern (Control > PD > PDD > AD) suggesting progressive hippocampal volume loss 
in PD. Volumetric MRI imaging might provide an early marker for dementia in PD.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10444
PMID: 12815657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


978. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2003 May;40(3):231-3. doi: 
10.3143/geriatrics.40.231.

[The cause of falls in elderly persons].

[Article in Japanese]

Tsuchida T(1), Mano Y.

Author information:
(1)Hokkaido University, Graduate School of Medicine.

We surveyed patients with Parkinson's disease living at home and elderly persons 
in hospital to find out causes of falls. In Parkinson's disease, the number of 
falls during the previous year increased with the progress of the grade of Hoehn 
and Yahr stage. The ratio of patients who had fractures due to falls was 0% in 
stage I & II, 30.2% in stage III, and 36.1% in stage IV. The ratio of patients 
who attached handrails was 30.1% in Hoehn and Yahr stage III, and 37.1% in stage 
IV; remodeling of hte bathroom was done in 30.7% and 51.0% remodeling of the 
laboratory was done in 42.5% and 53.8%, and bed adjustment in 24.3% and 43.8%. 
To prevent falls, we should advise patients to arrange the surroundings in which 
they spend the daytime such as their living room or bedroom. From the result of 
the ratios of patients in hospital who had falls and fractures due to falls, 
some associated risk factors of falls which could be prevented were found out. 
The ratio of patients who fell in the morning was reduced by interventions of 
nurses. The frequency of patients who fell was 41.5% in cerebrovascular disease, 
29.5% in dementia, 11.2% in bone and joint disease, and 9.0% in Parkinson's 
disease, however the frequency in hospitalized patients was 56.9%, 11.3%, 7.3%, 
6.3% respectively. Patients who had dementia had a tendency to fall. Further 
study is needed to help prevent of falls in dementia patients.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.40.231
PMID: 12822469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


979. Yonsei Med J. 2003 Jun 30;44(3):401-13. doi: 10.3349/ymj.2003.44.3.401.

Important link between dementia subtype and apolipoprotein E: a meta-analysis.

Bang OY(1), Kwak YT, Joo IS, Huh K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Ajou University, San 5, 
Woncheon-dong, Paldal-gu, Suwon, Kyungki-do 442-749, Korea. nmboy@unitel.co.kr

To evaluate the differential diagnostic role of apolipoprotein E (apoE) genotype 
in dementia, we carried out a meta- analysis of 78 case-control series, 
including our own new data. The dementia subjects were grouped into Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and non-AD. AD patients were subgrouped according to their 
subtypes, and non-AD patients into vascular dementia (VD), mixed dementia (MD), 
and non-AD non-VD dementia (NAVD). The apoE allele frequencies and apoE 
genotype-specific odds ratio (OR) of each group were estimated. The (4 allele 
frequency was higher in all of the dementia subgroups than in the elderly 
controls, and the associations with (4 allele were lower in the non-AD (OR 1.8) 
patients than in the AD (OR 4.2) patients. However, the apoE-related risk 
alsovaried as a function of the subgroup, in both the AD and non-AD groups; for 
AD, it was dependent on the subtype of AD (OR 2.3 - 11.3), and higher in late- 
onset and familial cases than in early-onset and sporadic cases, respectively; 
among non-AD patients, it was higher in MD (OR 2.6) than in VD (OR 1.3), and 
intermediate in NAVD (OR 1.9), in which a significant difference was also found 
between Lewy body dementia (LBD) type (OR 5.1) and non-LBD type (OR 1.3). In 
conclusion, variability in the apoE-related risk was found in both the AD and 
non-AD cases, depending on the subgroup. Therefore, precise subgrouping of both 
AD and non-AD patients should be performed, and this information should taken 
into consideration when interpreting the results of apoE genotyping.

DOI: 10.3349/ymj.2003.44.3.401
PMID: 12833577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


980. Ann Clin Psychiatry. 2003 Mar;15(1):33-48. doi: 10.1023/a:1023228626309.

Clozapine: a clinical review of adverse effects and management.

Iqbal MM(1), Rahman A, Husain Z, Mahmud SZ, Ryan WG, Feldman JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, State University of New York, Upstate Medical 
University, Syracuse, New York 13210, USA. iqbalmo@upstate.edu

Clozapine (Clozaril) is a novel and unique prototype atypical, tricyclic, 
dibenzodiazepine-derivative, antipsychotic agent. It has been proven effective 
and significantly superior to placebo, as well as to conventional neuroleptics, 
in several placebo-controlled, double-blind studies in treatment-resistant 
schizophrenia. It has also been found to produce an incidence of extrapyramidal 
symptoms (EPS) as low as that found with placebo. Approximately 30-60% of all 
schizophrenic patients who fail to respond to typical antipsychotics may respond 
to clozapine. It was the first major advance that marked a turning point in the 
treatment of schizophrenia and other psychotic disorders since the introduction 
of the typical antipsychotic agents, i.e., chlorpromazine and haloperidol in the 
1950s and 1960s, respectively. After its introduction in clinical studies in the 
United States in the early 1970s, it was withdrawn in 1974, and was not approved 
for clinical use in the United States until February 1990, because of the risk 
of agranulocytosis. Its novel pharmacological profile, lack of propensity to 
cause EPS in both short- and long-term uses, lack of effects on serum prolactin, 
and ameliorative effects on tardive dyskinesia have resulted in the expansion of 
its use from refractory schizophrenia to schizoaffective disorders, affective 
disorders, some neurological disorders, aggression, as well as psychosis in 
patients with dementia and parkinsonism. This review covers the history, 
pharmacology, management of side effects, and fetal and neonatal effects of 
clozapine.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1023228626309
PMID: 12839431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


981. Epidemiology. 2003 Jul;14(4):420-6; discussion 427-8. doi: 
10.1097/01.EDE.0000078446.76859.c9.

Neurodegenerative diseases in welders and other workers exposed to high levels 
of magnetic fields.

Håkansson N(1), Gustavsson P, Johansen C, Floderus B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, 
Sweden. niclas.hakansson@imm.ki.se

Comment in
    Epidemiology. 2004 Mar;15(2):253-4; author reply 254.

BACKGROUND: Previous work has suggested an increase in risk of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) and Alzheimer's disease among workers exposed to 
extremely low-frequency magnetic fields (ELF-MF). We evaluated the relation 
between ELF-MF from occupational exposures and mortality from neurodegenerative 
diseases.
METHODS: The study was based on a cohort of Swedish engineering industry 
workers, comprising 537,692 men and 180,529 women. The cohort was matched 
against the 3 most recent censuses and The Causes of Death Registry. Levels of 
ELF-MF exposure were obtained by linking occupation according to the censuses to 
a job exposure matrix. We used 4 levels of exposure and considered both the 
primary and contributing causes of death, 1985-96.
RESULTS: The risk of Alzheimer's disease as primary or contributing cause of 
death increased with increasing exposure to ELF-MF among both men and women, 
with a relative risk (RR) of 4.0 and a 95% confidence interval (95% CI) of 
1.4-11.7 in the highest exposure group for both sexes combined. There was a RR 
of 2.2 (95% CI: 1.0-4.7) for ALS in the highest exposure group with the 
suggestion of an exposure-response relationship. No evidence of increased risk 
was seen for Parkinson's disease or multiple sclerosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings support previous observations of an increased risk of 
Alzheimer's disease and ALS among employees occupationally exposed to ELF-MF. 
Further studies based on morbidity data are warranted.

DOI: 10.1097/01.EDE.0000078446.76859.c9
PMID: 12843765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


982. Neurology. 2003 Jul 8;61(1):24-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000072330.07328.d6.

Parkinsonian signs in older people: prevalence and associations with smoking and 
coffee.

Louis ED(1), Luchsinger JA, Tang MX, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. 
EDL2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Cigarette smoking and coffee consumption may reduce the risk of PD. 
Parkinsonian signs (tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia) occur in 30 to 40% of the 
elderly.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether there was an association between cigarette 
smoking, coffee consumption, and parkinsonian signs in a community population of 
older people.
METHODS: Data on smoking were collected and a neurologic examination performed 
on 1,339 residents > or = 65 years of age in the Washington Heights-Inwood 
community in northern Manhattan, NY. Parkinsonian signs were rated with an 
abbreviated Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, resulting in a 
parkinsonian sign score. Coffee consumption was assessed with a semiquantitative 
food-frequency questionnaire, and caffeine consumption was determined. Analyses 
were cross-sectional.
RESULTS: Mean age was 76.6 years. Parkinsonian signs were present in 537 
(40.1%). The odds for presence of parkinsonian signs was lower in smokers than 
nonsmokers (odds ratio [OR] = 0.58, 95% CI = 0.47 to 0.73). Smokers had a lower 
mean parkinsonian sign score than nonsmokers (p < 0.001). Coffee drinking and 
caffeine consumption were not associated with the presence of parkinsonian 
signs. The odds for presence of parkinsonian signs remained lower in smokers (OR 
= 0.75, 95% CI = 0.57 to 0.99) after adjusting for age, gender, ethnicity, years 
of education, adjusted daily caffeine consumption, and dementia.
CONCLUSION: The reduced risk of parkinsonian signs in cigarette smokers could 
reflect a protective effect of smoking on age-related parkinsonian signs in the 
elderly or an aversion to smoking in elderly persons with mild parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000072330.07328.d6
PMID: 12847151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


983. Lancet Neurol. 2003 Apr;2(4):229-37. doi: 10.1016/s1474-4422(03)00351-x.

Dementia associated with Parkinson's disease.

Emre M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. 
muratemre@superonline.com <muratemre@superonline.com>

Dementia affects about 40% of patients with Parkinson's disease; the incidence 
of dementia in these patients is up to six times that in healthy people. 
Clinically, the prototype of dementia in PD is a dysexecutive syndrome. Loss of 
cholinergic, dopaminergic, and noradrenergic innervation has been suggested to 
be the underlying neurochemical deficits. Nigral pathology alone is probably not 
sufficient for the development of dementia. Although there is some controversy 
with regard to the site and type of pathology involved, dementia is likely to be 
associated with the spread of pathology to other subcortical nuclei, the limbic 
system, and the cerebral cortex. On the basis of more recent studies, the main 
pathology seems to be Lewy-body-type degeneration with associated cellular and 
synaptic loss in cortical and limbic structures. Alzheimer's disease-type 
pathology is commonly associated with dementia but less predictive. Recent 
evidence from small studies suggests that cholinesterase inhibitors may be 
effective in the treatment of dementia associated with PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s1474-4422(03)00351-x
PMID: 12849211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


984. Ideggyogy Sz. 2003 May 20;56(5-6):144-54.

[Diagnostic criteria and differential diagnosis of Parkinson disease].

[Article in Hungarian]

Takáts A(1).

Author information:
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi Kar, Neurológiai Klinika, H-1083 
Budapest, Balassa u. 6. annam@neur.sote.hu

The clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease is based on the identification of 
some combination of the clinical motor signs of bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor 
and postural instability. Three levels of diagnostic confidence are 
differentiated: possible, probable, and definite. The diagnosis of possible and 
probable Parkinson's disease based on clinical criteria alone, while definite 
diagnosis requires neuropathologic confirmation. To differentiate Parkinson's 
disease (idiopathic Parkinsonian syndrome) and other Parkinsonian syndromes is 
of increasing importance considering the therapy and life expectancy of the 
patients. Recently the functional imaging technics have been more and more 
helpful in the early differential diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 12861955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


985. Neurol Res. 2003 Jul;25(5):533-7. doi: 10.1179/016164103101201788.

An autopsied case of dementia with Lewy bodies with supranuclear gaze palsy.

Nakashima H(1), Terada S, Ishizu H, Tanabe Y, Yokota O, Ishihara T, Takata H, 
Ihara Y, Hayabara T, Kuroda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

A 66-year-old man had suffered from a slow and steady decline in both physical 
and cognitive function for four years. He showed bradykinesia and small step 
gait with supranuclear vertical gaze palsy, especially upward gaze palsy. He was 
started on levodopa therapy but without response. A diagnosis of progressive 
supranuclear palsy was clinically suspected. He died at age 69. Pathologically, 
many alpha-synuclein positive inclusions were detected both in the brain stem 
and cerebral cortices, and the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies was made. 
Scattered alpha-synuclein-positive inclusions and threads, which may be a 
pathological substrate for supranuclear gaze palsy, were identified in the 
rostal midbrain. From a review of five cases of dementia with Lewy bodies with 
supranuclear gaze palsy including this case, the absence of falls in the early 
stage of the disease, fluctuation of cognition, hallucination and vertical gaze 
palsy with a more severe defect in the upward direction distinguished dementia 
with Lewy bodies with vertical gaze palsy from progressive supranuclear palsy. 
In the differential diagnosis of parkinsonism with gaze palsy, clinicians should 
consider dementia with Lewy bodies with gaze palsy as well as progressive 
supranuclear palsy.

DOI: 10.1179/016164103101201788
PMID: 12866204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


986. Arch Neurol. 2003 Jul;60(7):958-64. doi: 10.1001/archneur.60.7.958.

Age but not diagnosis is the main predictor of plasma amyloid beta-protein 
levels.

Fukumoto H(1), Tennis M, Locascio JJ, Hyman BT, Growdon JH, Irizarry MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02129, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Plasma amyloid beta-protein Abeta42 levels are increased in patients 
with familial Alzheimer disease (AD) mutations, and high levels reportedly 
identify individuals at risk to develop AD.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether there are characteristic changes in plasma 
Abeta40 and Abeta42 levels in sporadic AD, and to examine the relationship of 
plasma Abeta measures with clinical, demographic, and genetic variables in a 
prospectively characterized outpatient clinic population.
PATIENTS: A total of 371 outpatients with sporadic AD (n = 146), mild cognitive 
impairment (n = 37), or Parkinson disease (n = 96) and nondemented control cases 
(n = 92).
METHODS: We collected plasma samples and determined Abeta40 and Abeta42 levels 
by sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay with the use of the capture 
antibody BNT77 (anti-Abeta11-28) and the detector antibodies horseradish 
peroxidase-linked BA27 (anti-Abeta40) and BC05 (anti-Abeta42).
RESULTS: Mean Abeta40 and Abeta42 levels increased significantly with age in 
each diagnostic group. When covaried for age, mean plasma levels of Abeta40 and 
Abeta42 did not differ significantly among the 4 diagnostic groups. Within the 
mild cognitive impairment and AD groups, Abeta40 and Abeta42 levels did not 
correlate with duration of memory impairment or with cognitive test scores. The 
Abeta measures were not influenced by family history of AD, apolipoprotein E 
genotype, or current medication use of cholinesterase inhibitors, vitamin E, 
statins, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, or estrogen.
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma Abeta measures increase with age, but, in contrast to 
reports on familial AD, plasma Abeta measures were neither sensitive nor 
specific for the clinical diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment or sporadic AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.60.7.958
PMID: 12873852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


987. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003 Aug;74(8):1148-51. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.74.8.1148.

Prospective Belgian study of neurodegenerative and vascular dementia: APOE 
genotype effects.

Engelborghs S(1), Dermaut B, Goeman J, Saerens J, Mariën P, Pickut BA, Van den 
Broeck M, Serneels S, Cruts M, Van Broeckhoven C, De Deyn PP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Memory Clinic, Middelheim General Hospital, 
Antwerp, Belgium.

OBJECTIVE: The authors conducted a prospective study of neurodegenerative and 
vascular dementia in Belgium. Strict diagnostic inclusion criteria were used to 
include well defined patients and controls. The results of apolipoprotein E 
(APOE) genotype effect on risk and clinical characteristics are presented.
METHODS: APOE genotyping was performed in patients with probable Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) (n=504), frontotemporal dementia (FTD) (n=47), vascular dementia 
(VaD) (n=152), mixed dementia (n=132), mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (n=44), 
Parkinson's disease (PD) (n=30), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) (n=17), and 
multisystem atrophy (MSA)/progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) (n=12).
RESULTS: The APOE allele frequencies of this Belgian control population (epsilon 
2: 6.9%; epsilon 3: 76.2%; epsilon 4: 16.9%) did not differ from those reported 
for other white populations. AD, MCI, and mixed dementia patients had higher 
APOE epsilon 4 (32.9%, 38.6%, and 28.4% respectively) and lower APOE epsilon 3 
(62.2%, 53.4%, and 66.3%) frequencies compared with controls, whereas only AD 
and mixed dementia patients had lower APOE epsilon 2 frequencies (4.9% and 
5.3%). Apart from a borderline significant different distribution of APOE allele 
frequencies in VaD patients compared with controls, no other differences were 
detected. The influence of APOE epsilon 4 on clinical features of dementia was 
limited to lower age at onset in AD patients and a less pronounced negative 
correlation between age at onset and number of epsilon 4 alleles in MCI and 
mixed dementia patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirmed the risk association between APOE epsilon 4 
and AD. The observation that APOE epsilon 4 is associated with mixed dementia 
reflected the role of AD in the aetiopathogenesis of this condition. Although 
MCI is an aetiologically heterogeneous syndrome, the increased APOE epsilon 4 
frequencies indicated that a large proportion of the MCI patients included in 
the study might be predisposed to develop AD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.74.8.1148
PMCID: PMC1738626
PMID: 12876259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


988. Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Oct;106(4):348-56. doi: 10.1007/s00401-003-0737-7. Epub 
2003 Jul 16.

Variability and heterogeneity in Alzheimer's disease with cotton wool plaques: a 
clinicopathological study of four autopsy cases.

Yokota O(1), Terada S, Ishizu H, Ujike H, Ishihara T, Namba M, Hayashi Y, 
Nishinaka T, Namba R, Nakashima H, Uéda K, Checler F, Kuroda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. oyokota1@yahoo.co.jp

We describe three cases of early- (cases 1-3, 28-39 years) and one of late-onset 
(case 4, 76 years) Alzheimer's disease (AD) with 'cotton wool' plaques (CWPs) 
but without a family history indicating autosomal dominant inheritance. The 
early-onset cases, but not the late-onset case, showed remarkable aggression, 
disinhibition, and impulsiveness. Spastic paraparesis was observed in only one 
early-onset case. Hematoxylin-eosin-stained sections showed numerous CWPs, 
especially in the temporal cortex, in all cases. Bielschowsky-stained sections 
showed neurofibrillary tangles and minor neuritic changes surrounding the CWPs 
in three cases, but not in case 2. Gallyas-Braak-stained sections showed weak 
argyrophilia in homogeneous material of the CWPs in cases 2 and 4. Quantitative 
analysis demonstrated that Abeta42 was deposited more predominantly than Abeta40 
in three cases. However, in case 2, approximately twice as much Abeta40 as 
Abeta42 was deposited. Tau immunostaining demonstrated neuritic changes in three 
cases, but not in case 2. alpha-Synuclein-positive Lewy bodies (LBs) and 
astrocytic lesions containing non-Abeta component of AD amyloid (NAC), a central 
fragment of alpha-synuclein, were found in case 3. In conclusion, (1) a frontal 
lobe syndrome-like personality change may be one of the characteristic clinical 
features of early-onset CWP-AD, (2) the deposition pattern of Abeta40 and 
Abeta42 in CWP-AD is more variable than that of presenilin-1-linked cases, (3) 
Abeta deposition can result in development of dementia without tau pathology, 
and (4) CWP-AD with LBs and several other neurodegenerative disorders with LBs 
share a common process involving alpha-synuclein and NAC deposition.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-003-0737-7
PMID: 12883830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


989. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2003 Jun;23(3):111-9.

[New aspects of neuroprotective effects of nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs].

[Article in Japanese]

Asanuma M(1), Miyazaki I, Tsuji T, Ogawa N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain Science, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine 
and Dentistry, 2-5-1, Shikatacho, Okayama, 700-8558 Japan.

Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) exert anti-inflammatory, analgesic 
and antipyretic activities and are involved in the suppression of prostaglandin 
synthesis by inhibiting cyclooxygenase (COX), a prostaglandin synthesizing 
enzyme. It has been recently revealed that NSAIDs also possess inhibitory 
effects on the generating system of nitric oxide radicals and modulating effects 
on transcription factors and nuclear receptors which are related to inflammatory 
reactions. Since it has been reported that inflammatory processes are associated 
with the pathophysiology of several neurodegenerative diseases and that NSAIDs 
inhibit amyloid beta-protein-induced neurotoxicity to reduce the risk for 
Alzheimer's disease, a number of studies have been conducted focusing on the 
neuroprotective effects of NSAIDs. It has been clarified that the drugs exert 
neuroprotective effects, which are not related to their COX-inhibiting property, 
on pathophysiology of various neurological disorders. In this article, new 
aspects of neuroprotective effects of NSAIDs have been reviewed, especially, in 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, discussing various pharmacological 
effects of NSAIDs other than their inhibitory action on COX.

PMID: 12884751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


990. J Child Neurol. 2003 Jun;18(6):429-32. doi: 10.1177/08830738030180061301.

Unusual early-onset Huntingtons disease.

Vargas AP(1), Carod-Artal FJ, Bomfim D, Vázquez-Cabrera C, Dantas-Barbosa C.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Sarah Hospital, Brasilia, DF, Brazil.

Huntington's disease is an autosomal dominant progressive neurodegenerative 
disorder characterized by involuntary movements, cognitive decline, and 
behavioral disorders leading to functional disability. In contrast to patients 
with adult onset, in which chorea is the major motor abnormality, children often 
present with spasticity, rigidity, and significant intellectual decline 
associated with a more rapidly progressive course. An unusual early-onset 
Huntington's disease case of an 11-year-old boy with severe hypokinetic/rigid 
syndrome appearing at the age of 2.5 years is presented. Clinical diagnosis was 
confirmed by polymerase chain reaction study of the expanded IT-15 allele with a 
compatible size of 102 cytosine-adenosine-guanosine repeats L-Dopa mildly 
ameliorated rigidity, bradykinesia, and dystonia. We conclude that Huntington's 
disease should be included in the differential diagnoses of regressive syndromes 
of early childhood.

DOI: 10.1177/08830738030180061301
PMID: 12886981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


991. Mov Disord. 2003 Aug;18(8):884-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.10455.

Extrapyramidal features in Parkinson's disease with and without dementia and 
dementia with Lewy bodies: A cross-sectional comparative study.

Burn DJ(1), Rowan EN, Minett T, Sanders J, Myint P, Richardson J, Thomas A, 
Newby J, Reid J, O'Brien JT, McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Regional Neurosciences Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

Risk factors predicting an increased risk of dementia in Parkinson's disease 
(PD) are not fully established. The dementia associated with PD (PDD) closely 
resembles dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Based upon a high frequency of 
non-dopaminergic mediated clinical features in DLB, we predicted that a motor 
subtype comprising postural instability and balance problems would be more 
common in PDD. We examined extrapyramidal, cognitive, and affective features in 
38 PD, 43 PDD, and 26 DLB patients in a cross-sectional study design. Motor 
subtype was subdivided into postural-instability gait difficulty (PIGD) or 
tremor (TD) dominant. The PIGD-subtype was more common in PDD (88% of cases) and 
DLB (69% of cases) groups compared with the PD group (38% of cases), in which TD 
and PIGD sub-types were more equally represented (P < 0.001). Although the mean 
depression scores overall were modest, PDD patients scored significantly higher 
than PD, but not DLB patients (Cornell; P = 0.006, and Geriatric Depression 
scale, GDS-15; P = 0.001), while within the PD group, those patients with a PIGD 
subtype had greater depression scores than the TD subtype (GDS-15; P < 0.05). We 
conclude that non-dopaminergic motor features are frequent in PDD. 
Neurodegeneration within the cholinergic system is likely to mediate many of 
these motor problems, as well as playing a significant role in determining the 
neuropsychiatric symptomatology of both PDD and DLB.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10455
PMID: 12889077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


992. Ann Neurol. 2003 Aug;54(2):267-71. doi: 10.1002/ana.10662.

Herpesviruses in brains in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Hemling N(1), Röyttä M, Rinne J, Pöllänen P, Broberg E, Tapio V, Vahlberg T, 
Hukkanen V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Virology, University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2004 Feb;55(2):299-300; author reply 300-1.

We evaluated the association of HSV-1, HHV-6, and VZV with Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Brain specimens for viral DNA polymerase 
chain reaction represented 34 patients with AD, 40 with PD, and 40 controls. One 
AD patient (2.9%) was positive for HSV-1 DNA, 88.2% for HHV-6 DNA, and 26.5% for 
VZV DNA; 17.5% of PD patients were HSV-1 DNA-positive and 75% HHV-6-positive, 
whereas 40% had VZV DNA. Twenty-five percent of the controls were positive for 
HSV-1 DNA, 87.5% for HHV-6, and 27.5% for VZV. HSV-1, VZV, or HHV-6 DNA in 
brains was no additional risk factor for AD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10662
PMID: 12891684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


993. Mol Aspects Med. 2003 Aug-Oct;24(4-5):293-303. doi: 
10.1016/s0098-2997(03)00024-4.

4-hydroxynonenal and neurodegenerative diseases.

Zarkovic K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, School of Medicine, University of Zagreb, 
Clinical Medical, Center Zagreb, Kispaticeva 12, 10000 Zagreb, Croatia. 
kamelijazarkovic@yahoo.com

The development of oxidative stress, in which production of highly reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) overwhelms antioxidant defenses, is a feature of many 
neurological diseases: ischemic, inflammatory, metabolic and degenerative. 
Oxidative stress is increasingly implicated in a number of neurodegenerative 
disorders characterized by abnormal filament accumulation or deposition of 
abnormal forms of specific proteins in affected neurons, like Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), Pick's disease, Lewy bodies related diseases, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS), and Huntington disease. Causes of neuronal death in 
neurodegenerative diseases are multifactorial. In some familiar cases of ALS 
mutation in the gene for Cu/Zn superoxide dismutase (SOD1) can be identified. In 
other neurodegenerative diseases ROS have some, usually not clear, role in early 
pathogenesis or implications on neuronal death in advanced stages of illness. 
The effects of oxidative stress on "post-mitotic cells", such as neurons may be 
cumulative, hence, it is often unclear whether oxidative damage is a cause or 
consequence of neurodegeneration. Peroxidation of cellular membrane lipids, or 
circulating lipoprotein molecules generates highly reactive aldehydes among 
which one of most important is 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE). The presence of HNE is 
increased in brain tissue and cerebrospinal fluid of AD patients, and in spinal 
cord of ALS patients. Immunohistochemical studies show presence of HNE in 
neurofibrilary tangles and in senile plaques in AD, in the cytoplasm of the 
residual motor neurons in sporadic ALS, in Lewy bodies in neocortical and brain 
stem neurons in Parkinson's disease (PD) and in diffuse Lewy bodies disease 
(DLBD). Thus, increased levels of HNE in neurodegenerative disorders and 
immunohistochemical distribution of HNE in brain tissue indicate 
pathophysiological role of oxidative stress in these diseases, and especially 
HNE in formation of abnormal filament deposites.

DOI: 10.1016/s0098-2997(03)00024-4
PMID: 12893007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


994. Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Oct;106(4):374-82. doi: 10.1007/s00401-003-0750-x. Epub 
2003 Aug 2.

Age-associated prevalence and risk factors of Lewy body pathology in a general 
population: the Hisayama study.

Wakisaka Y(1), Furuta A, Tanizaki Y, Kiyohara Y, Iida M, Iwaki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Neurological Institute, Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 
812-8582, Japan. w-yoshi@np.med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Oct;106(4):383-4.

In dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), the Lewy bodies (LBs) are an essential 
substrate. Although LB pathology has gained increasing attention as one of the 
major causes of dementia, little is known about the exact prevalence of LB 
pathology in the general population. In addition, the pathology of 
Alzheimer-type dementia (ATD) is frequently associated with DLB. To investigate 
the prevalence of LB pathology in a community-based population and to evaluate 
the relationship between LB and ATD pathology, we performed an analysis of 102 
consecutive autopsy cases. The survey extended over 2.5 years and autopsy rate 
was 70.5%. LB pathology was detected using alpha-synuclein immunohistochemistry 
and was assessed based on consensus guidelines for DLB. ATD pathology was 
evaluated by both CERAD and NIA-RI criteria. Twenty-nine subjects were 
clinically demented. LB pathology was present in 23 (22.5%) of 102 cases, and in 
12 (41.4%) of the demented subjects. The LB score was not significantly 
different between DLB cases and non-demented subjects with LB pathology (nd-LB), 
while the Braak stages were significantly different between the two groups. 
Prevalence of LB pathology constantly increased with age. DLB cases accompanying 
severe ATD pathology showed more rapid increase of LB scores than did DLB cases 
without severe ATD pathology. Moreover, DLB cases with severe ATD pathology had 
poorer prognoses than those without severe ATD pathology. Our results suggested 
that aging and severe ATD pathology have a strong effect on the evolution of LB 
pathology.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-003-0750-x
PMID: 12904992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


995. Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Oct;106(4):383-4. doi: 10.1007/s00401-003-0751-9. Epub 
2003 Aug 2.

Age-associated prevalence and risk factors of Lewy body pathology in a general 
population.

Jellinger KA.

Comment on
    Acta Neuropathol. 2003 Oct;106(4):374-82.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-003-0751-9
PMID: 12904993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


996. Brain Res Bull. 2003 Aug 15;61(3):235-42. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(03)00086-8.

CSF markers for pathogenic processes in Alzheimer's disease: diagnostic 
implications and use in clinical neurochemistry.

Blennow K(1), Vanmechelen E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Göteborg, SE-431 80 
Mölndal, Sweden. KAJ.BLENNOW@NEURO.GU.SE

In view of current (acetylcholine esterase (AChE) inhibitors) and future (e.g. 
gamma-secretase inhibitors) therapeutic compounds for treatment of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), the development and evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
biomarkers for AD has become a rapidly growing research field. Diagnostic 
biomarkers for AD would be especially valuable as aids to diagnosis early in the 
course of the disease, when correct diagnosis is difficult, and when therapeutic 
compounds have the greatest potential for being effective. This paper reviews 
CSF biomarkers for AD, with emphasis on their role in the clinical diagnosis. 
The two most studied biochemical markers, CSF-tau and CSF-Abeta42, have high 
sensitivity to identify AD, but the specificity against other dementias is 
lower. The addition of phosphorylated tau (P-Tau) seems to increase the 
specificity for the diagnosis of AD, since normal levels are found in both 
frontotemporal and Lewy body dementia, and in cerebrovascular disease. These CSF 
markers may be useful as diagnostic aids, especially to discriminate early or 
incipient AD from age-associated memory impairment, depression, and some 
secondary dementias.

DOI: 10.1016/s0361-9230(03)00086-8
PMID: 12909293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


997. Brain Res Bull. 2003 Aug 15;61(3):243-53. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(03)00087-x.

Advances in the development of biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease: from CSF 
total tau and Abeta(1-42) proteins to phosphorylated tau protein.

Hampel H(1), Goernitz A, Buerger K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Alzheimer Memorial Center and Geriatric Psychiatry 
Branch, Ludwig-Maximilian University, D-80336 Munich, Germany. 
hampel@psy.med.uni-muenchen.de

Advances have been made to establish biological markers of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Measurement of total tau (t-tau) and beta-amyloid(1-42) (Abeta(1-42)) in 
the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) seems useful to discriminate early and incipient 
AD from age-associated memory-impairment, depression, and some secondary 
dementias. New immunoassays to detect different phosphorylated tau epitopes 
(p-tau) have recently been developed. P-tau phosphorylated at threonine 231 
(p-tau(231)) showed improvements compared to t-tau in the early detection of AD 
in subjects with mild cognitive impairment. As p-tau(231) declined during the 
course of AD, it may have potential to track disease progression. Additionally, 
p-tau(231) improved differential diagnosis between AD, frontotemporal dementia, 
and geriatric major depression. P-tau phosphorylated at threonine 181 improved 
diagnostic accuracy between AD and dementia with Lewy bodies. P-tau 
phosphorylated at serine 199 demonstrated high discriminative power between AD 
and non-Alzheimer's dementia. P-tau phosphorylated at serine 306/serine 404 
improved differential diagnosis between AD and vascular dementia. A comparative 
study of the different p-tau epitopes is currently under way. In summary, first 
clinical multi-center studies suggest that measurement of phosphorylated tau 
proteins may significantly improve early and differential diagnosis and may come 
close to fulfilling proposed criteria of a biological marker for AD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0361-9230(03)00087-x
PMID: 12909294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


998. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2003 Jan-Feb;37(1):173-84.

[Fronto-temporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17): 
clinical criteria].

[Article in Polish]

Wszolek ZK(1), Krygowska-Wajs A, Barcikowska M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.

Frontotemporal dementia and Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) is a 
congenital degenerative disease of the central nervous system. Molecular 
genetics studies have indicated the presence of 26 various mutations of the tau 
protein gene. At present 61 families with this syndrome are known. The clinical 
criteria proposed in this paper were developed on the grounds of the author's 
own research as well as detailed review of the literature. The criteria 
include;--clinical symptoms: personality and behavior disorders, Parkinsonism 
rather resistant to treatment with Levodopa less frequently also speech 
disorders and epilepsy,--an early onset and rapid progression of the 
disease,--positive family history,--heterogeneity of clinical symptoms both 
among patients within the same family and among families with the same 
mutation,--heterogeneity of the clinical picture depending on the type of 
mutation. Although FTDP-17 is and extremely rare clinical syndrome, it is noted 
all over the world. In Poland nobody has been diagnosed with this condition yet. 
The aim of this paper is to acquaint the readers of Neurologia i Neurochirurgia 
Polska with the FTDP-17. The syndrome has considerably contributed to our 
understanding of pathogenesis of many sporadic degenerative diseases of the 
brain, including such frequent conditions as Alzheimer's disease, Pick's disease 
the the Steel-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome, corticobasal degeneration, and 
other ones. Undoubtedly further research into the FTDP-17 will contribute to the 
development of a successful treatment for these devastating degenerative 
diseases of the c.n.s.

PMID: 12910839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


999. Neurology. 2003 Aug 12;61(3):424. doi: 10.1212/wnl.61.3.424.

The association of incident dementia with mortality in PD.

Jellinger K.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2002 Dec 10;59(11):1708-13.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.61.3.424
PMID: 12913222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1000. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2003;2003(3):CD003672. doi: 
10.1002/14651858.CD003672.

Cholinesterase inhibitors for dementia with Lewy bodies.

Wild R(1), Pettit T, Burns A.

Author information:
(1)Trafford General Hospital, Moorside Unit, Moorside Road, Davyhulme, 
Manchester, UK, M41 5SL.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) was first described in 1983, and 
clinical diagnostic criteria were published in the early to mid 1990s. It has 
been suggested DLB may account for up to 15-25% of cases of dementia among 
people aged over 65, although autopsy suggests much lower rates. Characteristic 
symptoms are dementia, marked fluctuation of cognitive ability, early and 
persistent visual hallucinations and spontaneous motor features of Parkinsonism. 
Falls, syncope, transient disturbances of consciousness, neuroleptic 
sensitivity, and hallucinations in other modalities are also common. This 
combination of features can be difficult to manage as neuroleptics can make the 
Parkinsonian and cognitive symptoms worse. There is evidence to suggest that the 
cholinesterase inhibitors may be beneficial in this disorder; small case series 
indicate that cholinesterase inhibitors are safe, and will improve both 
cognitive deficits and neuropsychiatric symptoms in DLB.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the use of cholinesterase inhibitors in DLB.
SEARCH STRATEGY: The trials were identified from a search of the Specialized 
Register of the Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group on 25 February 
2002 using the terms 'lewy body', 'Lewy bodies' and 'Lewy'. This register 
contains records from all major health care databases and trial databases and is 
updated regularly.
SELECTION CRITERIA: Randomized, double-blind trials in which treatment with 
cholinesterase inhibitors was administered and compared with alternative 
interventions in patients with DLB are included.
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS: Two reviewers (TP, RW) independently assessed 
quality of trials according to criteria described in the Cochrane Collaboration 
Handbook. Each drug was to be examined separately, and together as a group. We 
also analysed data by time to outcome measurement; short-term (up to one month), 
medium term (one month up to six months) and long term (Six months and longer). 
The primary outcome measures of interest are in the following areas: 
neuropsychiatric features. i.e. psychiatric symptoms and behavioural 
disturbances, cognitive function, activities of daily living, global 
assessments, quality of life, including maintaining role and social functioning, 
effect on carers, safety as measured by incidence of adverse events and side 
effects, acceptability of treatment as measured by withdrawal from trials, and 
by patient/carer assessment, institutionalization and death.
MAIN RESULTS: There was one included trial (McKeith 2000f) of rivastigmine 
compared with placebo on 120 patients. Neuropsychiatric InventoryThe 10-item 
test found no significant difference between the two groups in change of scores 
from baseline using intention-to-treat (ITT) analysis at 20 weeks and last 
observation carried forward (LOCF) analysis. The treatment effect was 
statistically significant in favour of rivastigmine if only observed cases (OC) 
were analysed (WMD -6.94, 95% CI -11.59 to -2.29, P=0.003). There were similar 
results for the NPI-4, with only the OC analysis showing a significant 
superiority of rivastigmine to placebo at 20 weeks (WMD -3.75, 95%CI -6.62 to 
-0.88, P=0.01).MMSE:Analysis of these results showed no statistically 
significant difference between the two groups at 20 weeks.CGC-plus:Analysis of 
the proportion of patients who had no change or became worse found no 
statistically significant difference between the two groups at 20 weeks for the 
ITT, LOCK and OC analyses. Adverse Events:The placebo group experienced 
significantly fewer adverse events than the treatment group (54/59 vs 46/61,OR 
3.52, 95%CI 1.19 to 10.43). However, using ITT analysis of 20-week data, there 
was no significant difference between the two groups when serious adverse events 
were considered. There were no significant differences in death rates between 
the two groups at 20 weeks.Drop-out Rates:Analysis of these results showed no 
difference between the two groups at 20 weeks using ITT analysis.
REVIEWER'S CONCLUSIONS: Patients with dementia with Lewy bodies who suffer from 
behavioural disturbance oS CONCLUSIONS: Patients with dementia with Lewy bodies 
who suffer from behavioural disturbance or psychiatric problems may benefit from 
rivastigmine if they tolerate it, but the evidence is weak. Further trials using 
rivastigmine are needed, as are trials of other cholinesterase inhibitors in 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1002/14651858.CD003672
PMCID: PMC7389676
PMID: 12917981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Professor Burns has been involved in clinical 
trials on cholinesterase inhibitors for Alzheimer's Disease, and has received 
research honoraria and hospitality from Pfizer, Eisai, Novartis, Bristol Myers 
Squibb, AstraZeneca, Janssen‐Cilag. He holds no shares in any pharmaceutical 
company.