2801. Neurourol Urodyn. 2012 Sep;31(7):1128-34. doi: 10.1002/nau.22208. Epub 2012 Mar 
30.

Receiver operating characteristic analysis of sphincter electromyography for 
parkinsonian syndrome.

Yamamoto T(1), Sakakibara R, Uchiyama T, Yamaguchi C, Nomura F, Ito T, 
Yanagisawa M, Yano M, Awa Y, Yamanishi T, Hattori T, Kuwabara S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 
Chiba, Japan. tatsuya-yamamoto@mbc.nifty.com

AIMS: We performed receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis to determine 
the ability of sphincter electromyography (EMG) to distinguish multiple system 
atrophy (MSA) from other parkinsonisms. The following was determined: (1) the 
appropriate motor unit potential (MUP) parameter among duration, phase, and 
amplitude; (2) the desirable parameter of our duration criteria; that is, more 
than 20% MUPs having >10 ms duration (criteria a) or mean duration >10 ms 
(criteria b).
METHODS: We retrospectively reviewed 441 case records where sphincter EMG were 
performed in patients with parkinsonian syndromes: MSA, n = 263; Parkinson's 
disease, n = 129; dementia with Lewy bodies, n = 25; and progressive 
supranuclear palsy, n = 24. We performed ROC analysis of the data sets.
RESULTS: The area under the curve used to differentiate MSA from other 
parkinsonian syndromes was 0.68 in duration, 0.57 in phase, and 0.51 in 
amplitude, respectively; these values were statistically significant. With 
regard to our duration criteria, area under the curve was 0.69 for the average 
duration of MUPs (criteria b) and 0.67 for percentage of MUPs of duration >10 ms 
(criteria a); these values were also statistically significant.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that duration is appropriate parameter for the 
differentiation of MSA. However, the area under the curve of the mean duration 
was insufficient to confirm the diagnosis; sphincter EMG should be used as a 
supportive diagnostic tool for the diagnosis of MSA.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/nau.22208
PMID: 22473520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2802. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012 Apr;2(4):a006171. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a006171.

The neuropsychological profile of Alzheimer disease.

Weintraub S(1), Wicklund AH, Salmon DP.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease Center (CNADC), Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. 
sweintraub@northwestern.edu

Neuropsychological assessment has featured prominently over the past 30 years in 
the characterization of dementia associated with Alzheimer disease (AD). 
Clinical neuropsychological methods have identified the earliest, most 
definitive cognitive and behavioral symptoms of illness, contributing to the 
identification, staging, and tracking of disease. With increasing public 
awareness of dementia, disease detection has moved to earlier stages of illness, 
at a time when deficits are both behaviorally and pathologically selective. For 
reasons that are not well understood, early AD pathology frequently targets 
large-scale neuroanatomical networks for episodic memory before other networks 
that subserve language, attention, executive functions, and visuospatial 
abilities. This chapter reviews the pathognomonic neuropsychological features of 
AD dementia and how these differ from "normal," age-related cognitive decline 
and from other neurodegenerative diseases that cause dementia, including 
cortical Lewy body disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and 
cerebrovascular disease.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a006171
PMCID: PMC3312395
PMID: 22474609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2803. Brain Nerve. 2012 Apr;64(4):356-63.

[Olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson disease and REM sleep behavior disorder].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyamoto T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Dokkyo Medical University Koshigaya Hospital, 
Koshigaya, Saitama, Japan.

Olfactory dysfunction is an appealing biomarker for Parkinson disease (PD) 
because of the high prevalence (>90%) among PD patients and the relative ease of 
testing, as compared to other putative biomarkers such as neuroimaging of the 
dopamine system. Hyposmia develops during the early stages of PD and, therefore, 
may be one of the most sensitive markers for the early diagnosis of PD. Sniffin' 
Sticks, the University of Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test, and the Odor 
Stick Identification test for the Japanese, a short and simple nonlexical, 
olfactory identification test, can be useful for diagnosing PD and for 
discriminating between PD and other parkinsonian syndromes. REM sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) is indicative of the development of neurodegenerative diseases 
involving synuclein pathology, including PD, multiple system atrophy, and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Reduced odor identification was comparable in 
patients with PD, DLB, and RBD, but distinct from that in healthy subjects. 
Further, insights obtained from a deeper understanding of the pathophysiology of 
olfactory dysfunction in PD and RBD may lead to a deeper understanding of the 
mechanism underlying Lewy neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 22481508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2804. Brain Nerve. 2012 Apr;64(4):433-43.

[Electroencephalogram and event-related potential analyses in Parkinson 
disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Kamei S(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

This article reviews recent quantitative electroencephalogram (qEEG) and 
event-related potential (ERP) analyses in Parkinson disease (PD). We reported 
the first qEEG evaluation in PD not only employing multiple logistic regression 
analysis but also estimating the distribution of qEEG changes (Serizawa K, et 
al: 2008). We calculated the spectral ratio, i.e., the sum of the power values 
in the alpha and beta waves divided by the sum of the values in the slow waves. 
The significant predictive variables in PD were the spectral ratios at all 
electrode locations except for the frontal pole. The PD patients presented 
diffuse slowing in the qEEG as compared with age-adjusted normal controls. We 
also assessed the relationship between the progression of PD and qEEG (Morita A, 
et al: 2009). At all electrode locations, the spectral ratio significantly 
decreased with the progression of PD. Moreover, we studied qEEG alterations in 
PD patients with executive dysfunction (ExD) (Kamei S et al: 2010) and cognitive 
impairment (Morita A, et al: 2011). An increase in slow waves was observed in 
the frontal and frontal-pole locations in patients with ExD and presented in all 
locations in those with dementia. A recent report showed that qEEG findings have 
the potential for use as a predictive biomarker for the incidence of dementia in 
PD (Klassen BT, 2011). QEEG analysis is thus not only useful as a tool for 
studying pathophysiological findings but also as a predictive biomarker for 
dementia. ERP is a also useful tool for the evaluation of neuropsychological 
impairments in PD. P3 is elicited by target in the classic oddball task. P3b 
findings in PD have shown inconsistent results, with certain studies showing no 
changes and others showing prolonged P3b latency, and decreases and increases in 
P3b amplitude. However, prolonged P3b latency in PD patients with dementia have 
been consistently observed. Visual cognitive dysfunction and facial expression 
recognition in PD have been recently assessed with ERP techniques. ERP has a 
high potential for use in the detailed evaluation of cognitive dysfunction in 
PD.

PMID: 22481516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2805. Brain Nerve. 2012 Apr;64(4):453-61.

[Does early detection of non-motor symptoms facilitate early treatment of 
Parkinson's disease?].

[Article in Japanese]

Hasegawa K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization, Sagamihara National 
Hospital, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder. 
The risk of developing of PD increases with age, it is estimated that the 
prevalence rate is approximately 150/100,000 in Japan. Recently, non-motor 
symptoms such as anosmia, autonomic failure, sleep disorders, sensory problems, 
depression, anxiety, cognitive disorders (including dementia), and psychosis are 
interested in the pathogenetic process of PD. According to the Braak's 
hypothesis, these non-motor symptoms precede the onset of the classic motor 
symptoms of PD. Many studies have shown that the number of neurons in the 
substantia nigra is decreased to approximately -40 to -60% in number when the 
motorsymptoms of PD are developed. In this article, review of special references 
regarding the natural history of PD shows that non-motor symptoms are the 
prodromal signs of PD. If disease modification therapy and/or disease prevention 
therapy is approved in the future, an early and accurate diagnosis of PD is 
needed. Accurate early diagnostic biomarkers including symptoms, some compounds, 
and radiological markers need to be identified.

PMID: 22481518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2806. Brain Nerve. 2012 Apr;64(4):462-73.

[Corticobasal syndrome: recent advances and future directions].

[Article in Japanese]

Aiba I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Higashinagoya 
National Hospital, Meitou-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder 
described by Rebeiz et al. It is characterized by progressive, asymmetric, 
cortical (eg, apraxia, alien limb phenomena, cortical sensory loss, and 
myoclonus), and extrapyramidal (eg, rigidity, bradykinesia, dystonia, and 
tremor) dysfunction. However, CBD has many clinical phenotypes, and the features 
used for predicting CBD have low sensitivity. Therefore, the term corticobasal 
syndrome (CBS) has been used to characterize such clinical features, whereas the 
term CBD is used to refer to the pathological disorder. The most frequent causes 
of CBS are CBD, followed by Alzheimer's disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43 pathology (sporadic and familial), 
Pick's disease, Lewy body disease, frontotemporal lobar degeneration with fused 
in sarcoma-positive inclusions, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, and mutations in the 
microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) and progranulin (GRN) genes. The 
topography of neurodegeneration dictates the clinical syndrome not according to 
the underlying pathology. Researchers have attempted to develop fluid biomarkers 
or imaging analysis for diagnosing CBS. The aim of this review was to highlight 
recent advances in CBS diagnosis and discuss future directions.

PMID: 22481519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2807. Front Psychol. 2012 Apr 3;3:98. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00098. eCollection 2012.

A comparison of facial emotion processing in neurological and psychiatric 
conditions.

Bediou B(1), Brunelin J, d'Amato T, Fecteau S, Saoud M, HÃ©naff MA, Krolak-Salmon 
P.

Author information:
(1)UniversitÃ© de Lyon Lyon, France.

Patients suffering from various neurological and psychiatric disorders show 
different levels of facial emotion recognition (FER) impairment, sometimes from 
the early phases of the disease. Investigating the relative severity of deficits 
in FER across different clinical and high-risk populations has potential 
implications for the diagnosis and treatment of these diseases, and could also 
allow us to understand the neurobiological mechanisms of emotion perception 
itself. To investigate the role of the dopaminergic system and of the 
frontotemporal network in FER, we reanalyzed and compared data from four of our 
previous studies investigating FER performance in patients with frontotemporal 
dysfunctions and/or dopaminergic system abnormalities at different stages. The 
performance of patients was compared to the performance obtained by a specific 
group of matched healthy controls using Cohen's d effect size. We thus compared 
emotion and gender recognition in patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI), Alzheimer's disease (AD) at the mild 
dementia stage, major depressive disorder, Parkinson's disease treated by l-DOPA 
(PD-ON) or not (PD-OFF), remitted schizophrenia (SCZ-rem), first-episode 
schizophrenia treated by antipsychotic medication (SCZ-ON), and drug-naÃ¯ve 
first-episode schizophrenia (SCZ-OFF), as well as in unaffected siblings of 
patients with schizophrenia (SIB). The analyses revealed a pattern of 
differential impairment of emotion (but not gender) recognition across 
pathological conditions. On the one hand, dopaminergic medication seems not to 
modify the moderate deficits observed in SCZ and PD groups (ON vs. OFF), 
suggesting that the deficit is independent from the dopaminergic system. On the 
other hand, the observed increase in effect size of the deficit among the aMCI, 
AD, and FTD groups (and also among the SIB and SCZ-rem groups) suggests that the 
deficit is dependent on neurodegeneration of the frontotemporal neural networks. 
Our transnosographic approach combining clinical and high-risk populations with 
the impact of medication provides new information on the trajectory of impaired 
emotion perception in neuropsychiatric conditions, and on the role of the 
dopaminergic system and the frontotemporal network in emotion perception.

DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2012.00098
PMCID: PMC3318183
PMID: 22493587


2808. Mol Neurodegener. 2012 Apr 11;7:13. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-7-13.

Glutathione S-transferase omega genes in Alzheimer and Parkinson disease risk, 
age-at-diagnosis and brain gene expression: an association study with 
mechanistic implications.

Allen M(1), Zou F, Chai HS, Younkin CS, Miles R, Nair AA, Crook JE, Pankratz VS, 
Carrasquillo MM, Rowley CN, Nguyen T, Ma L, Malphrus KG, Bisceglio G, Ortolaza 
AI, Palusak R, Middha S, Maharjan S, Georgescu C, Schultz D, Rakhshan F, Kolbert 
CP, Jen J, Sando SB, Aasly JO, Barcikowska M, Uitti RJ, Wszolek ZK, Ross OA, 
Petersen RC, Graff-Radford NR, Dickson DW, Younkin SG, Ertekin-Taner N.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Florida, Department of Neuroscience, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: Glutathione S-transferase omega-1 and 2 genes (GSTO1, GSTO2), 
residing within an Alzheimer and Parkinson disease (AD and PD) linkage region, 
have diverse functions including mitigation of oxidative stress and may underlie 
the pathophysiology of both diseases. GSTO polymorphisms were previously 
reported to associate with risk and age-at-onset of these diseases, although 
inconsistent follow-up study designs make interpretation of results difficult. 
We assessed two previously reported SNPs, GSTO1 rs4925 and GSTO2 rs156697, in AD 
(3,493 ADs vs. 4,617 controls) and PD (678 PDs vs. 712 controls) for association 
with disease risk (case-controls), age-at-diagnosis (cases) and brain gene 
expression levels (autopsied subjects).
RESULTS: We found that rs156697 minor allele associates with significantly 
increased risk (odds ratio = 1.14, p = 0.038) in the older ADs with 
age-at-diagnosis > 80 years. The minor allele of GSTO1 rs4925 associates with 
decreased risk in familial PD (odds ratio = 0.78, p = 0.034). There was no other 
association with disease risk or age-at-diagnosis. The minor alleles of both 
GSTO SNPs associate with lower brain levels of GSTO2 (p = 4.7 Ã 10-11-1.9 Ã 
10-27), but not GSTO1. Pathway analysis of significant genes in our brain 
expression GWAS, identified significant enrichment for glutathione metabolism 
genes (p = 0.003).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that GSTO locus variants may lower brain GSTO2 
levels and consequently confer AD risk in older age. Other glutathione 
metabolism genes should be assessed for their effects on AD and other chronic, 
neurologic diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-7-13
PMCID: PMC3393625
PMID: 22494505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2809. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Feb;34(2):408-18. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.02.029. Epub 2012 Apr 10.

Cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease is associated with slowing of 
resting-state brain activity: a longitudinal study.

Olde Dubbelink KT(1), Stoffers D, Deijen JB, Twisk JW, Stam CJ, Berendse HW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, VU University Medical 
Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. kte.oldedubbelink@vumc.nl

The pathophysiological mechanisms of Parkinson's disease (PD)-related dementia 
(PDD) are still poorly understood. Previous studies using electroencephalography 
(EEG) and magnetoencephalography (MEG) have demonstrated widespread slowing of 
oscillatory brain activity as a neurophysiological characteristic of PD-related 
dementia. Here, we use MEG to longitudinally study early changes in oscillatory 
brain activity in initially nondemented PD patients that may be associated with 
cognitive decline. Using a longitudinal design, resting-state MEG recordings 
were performed twice at an approximate 4-year interval in 14 healthy controls 
and 49 PD patients. Changes in peak frequency and in relative spectral power for 
10 brain regions were analyzed in relation to clinical measures of cognitive and 
motor function. In contrast to healthy controls, PD patients showed a slowing of 
the dominant peak frequency. Furthermore, analysis per frequency band revealed 
an increase in theta power over time, along with decreases in alpha1 and alpha2 
power. In PD patients, decreasing cognitive performance was associated with 
increases in delta and theta power, as well as decreases in alpha1, alpha2, and 
gamma power, whereas increasing motor impairment was associated with a theta 
power increase only. The present longitudinal study revealed widespread 
progressive slowing of oscillatory brain activity in initially nondemented PD 
patients, independent of aging effects. The slowing of oscillatory brain 
activity strongly correlated with cognitive decline and therefore holds promise 
as an early marker for the development of dementia in PD.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.02.029
PMID: 22495052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2810. Neurosci Lett. 2012 May 16;516(2):226-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.03.093. 
Epub 2012 Apr 6.

Combination of p53(ser15) and p21/p21(thr145) in peripheral blood lymphocytes as 
potential Alzheimer's disease biomarkers.

Tan M(1), Wang S, Song J, Jia J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuan Wu Hospital of the Capital Medical University, 
Beijing 100053, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is still difficult to be precisely diagnosed in its 
early stage to date. Establishing of reliable and manageable disease-specific 
biological markers is required to improve diagnostic accuracy. Based on the 
hypothesis of cell cycle regulatory failure at the early stage of AD, we tested 
whether cell cycle regulating proteins p53, p21 and their phosphorylated forms 
p53(ser15), p21(thr145) were changed in AD patients and whether these proteins 
could be used as diagnostic biomarkers. Western bolt, Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA), immunofluorescent staining and flow cytometry (FCM) 
analysis were employed to analyze levels of these proteins in peripheral blood 
lymphocytes (PBLs) from 95 controls, 94 AD, 12 Parkinson's disease (PD) and 15 
vascular dementia (VaD) patients. Compared with controls, p53(ser15) and 
p21(thr145) levels were significantly increased and p21 level was significantly 
decreased in PBLs of AD patients but not in PD or VaD, while p53 was increased 
in both AD and VaD patients. The receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve 
analysis showed that the specificity and sensitivity were 76% and 84% for p53, 
88% and 82% for p53(ser15), 80% and 75% for p21 and 84% and 68% for p21(thr145) 
in identifying AD patients. The relatively high diagnostic accuracy support 
these proteins, especially p53(ser15) and p21 in PBLs may become potential 
biomarkers for diagnosis of AD.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.03.093
PMID: 22503900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2811. Folia Neuropathol. 2012;50(1):74-84.

Expression of immunohistochemical markers on microglia in Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease and Alzheimer's disease: morphometric study and review of the 
literature.

Wojtera M(1), SobÃ³w T, KÅoszewska I, Liberski PP, Brown DR, Sikorska B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Old Age Psychiatry and Psychotic Disorders, Medical University 
of Lodz, 8/10 CzechosÅowacka st., 92-216 Lodz, Poland. voymart@wp.pl

INTRODUCTION: Microglia are the resident immune cells of the CNS. They are 
involved in the pathogenesis of diverse neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease, prion diseases as well as 
multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and AIDS dementia complex. 
Activated microglia up-regulate many surface receptors such as the major 
histocompatibility complex (MHC) or complement receptors and secrete a variety 
of soluble biologically active factors, which are either neurotrophic (e.g. 
Glia-Derived Neurotrophic Factor [GDNF]) or proinflammatory and neurotoxic (e.g. 
tumour necrosis factor alpha [TNF-Î±], interleukin 1Î² [IL-1Î²], nitric oxide [NO], 
superoxide, eicosanoids, quinolinic acid).
AIM: The aim of this work was to assess differences in the expression of 
microglial markers (ferritin, CD68, and HLA-DR) between AD and Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease (CJD) brains.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Analyses were performed on 65 slices derived from 26 
brains [46 CJD (20 brains), 12 AD (4 brains) and 7 controls (2 brains)]. Slices 
were labelled immunohistochemically using anti-ferritin, anti-HLA-DR and 
anti-CD68 antibodies. The nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test was used to assess 
quantitative differences between groups.
RESULTS: The expression of microglia markers (HLA-DR and CD68) is more 
noticeable in CJD than in AD or control brains. There is no difference between 
AD and controls. The latter statement is only true in the case of using HLA-DR 
or CD-68 labelling. Furthermore, ferritin is not a recommended marker in this 
context.
CONCLUSIONS: CNS inflammation is more prominent in CJD than in AD or controls. 
The lack of differences between AD and controls may result from a relatively 
advanced neurodegeneration in AD brains. In late phases of AD, inflammation is 
no longer present, in contrast to the early stages of the disease.

PMID: 22505366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2812. Ann Neurol. 2012 Apr;71(4):560-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.22691.

Symptoms of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder are associated with 
cholinergic denervation in Parkinson disease.

Kotagal V(1), Albin RL, MÃ¼ller ML, Koeppe RA, Chervin RD, Frey KA, Bohnen NI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. 
vikaskot@med.umich.edu

OBJECTIVE: Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is common in 
Parkinson disease (PD), but its relationship to the varied neurotransmitter 
deficits of PD and prognostic significance remain incompletely understood. RBD 
and cholinergic system degeneration are identified independently as risk factors 
for cognitive impairment in PD. We aimed to assess the association between 
cholinergic denervation and symptoms of RBD in PD patients without dementia.
METHODS: Eighty subjects with PD without dementia (age, 64.6 Â± 7.0 years; range, 
50-82 years; 60 males, 20 females; mean Montreal Cognitive Assessment Test 
[MoCA] score, 26.2 Â± 2.1; range 21-30) underwent clinical assessment, 
neuropsychological testing, and [(11)C]methylpiperidyl propionate 
acetylcholinesterase and [(11)C]dihydrotetrabenazine (DTBZ) vesicular monoamine 
transporter type 2 positron emission tomography (PET) imaging. 
(11)C3-Amino-4-(2-dimethylaminomethyl-phenylsulfaryl)-benzonitrile (DASB) 
serotonin transporter PET imaging was performed in a subset of 35 subjects. The 
presence of RBD symptoms was determined using the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven of 80 subjects (33.8%) indicated a history of RBD 
symptoms. Subjects with and without RBD symptoms showed no significant 
differences in age, motor disease duration, MoCA, Unified Parkinson Disease 
Rating Scale motor scores, or striatal DTBZ binding. Subjects with RBD symptoms, 
in comparison to those without, exhibited decreased neocortical, limbic 
cortical, and thalamic cholinergic innervation (0.0213 Â± 0.0018 vs 0.0236 Â± 
0.0022, t = 4.55, p < 0.0001; 0.0388 Â± 0.0029 vs 0.0423 Â± 0.0058, t = 2.85, p = 
0.0056; 0.0388 Â± 0.0025 vs 0.0427 Â± 0.0042, t = 4.49, p < 0.0001, respectively). 
Brainstem and striatal DASB binding showed no significant differences between 
groups.
INTERPRETATION: The presence of RBD symptoms in PD is associated with relative 
neocortical, limbic cortical, and thalamic cholinergic denervation although not 
with differential serotoninergic or nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation. The 
presence of RBD symptoms may signal cholinergic system degeneration.

Copyright Â© 2011 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22691
PMCID: PMC3727906
PMID: 22522445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2813. Neurol Sci. 2012 Dec;33(6):1329-35. doi: 10.1007/s10072-012-1086-x. Epub 2012 
Apr 17.

Iowa Gambling Task in patients with early-onset Parkinson's disease: strategy 
analysis.

Gescheidt T(1), CzekÃ³ovÃ¡ K, UrbÃ¡nek T, MareÄek R, Mikl M, KubÃ­kovÃ¡ R, TeleckÃ¡ S, 
AndrlovÃ¡ H, HusÃ¡rovÃ¡ I, BareÅ¡ M.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral and Social Neuroscience Research Group, CEITEC-Central European 
Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.

The aim of our study was to analyse decision making in early-onset Parkinson's 
disease (PD) patients performing the Iowa Gambling Task (IGT). We compared 19 
patients with early-onset PD (â¤ 45 years) on dopaminergic medication (no 
evidence of depression, dementia, executive dysfunction according to the Tower 
of London test and the Stroop test, or pathological gambling) with 20 
age-matched controls. A computer version of the IGT was employed. The PD 
patients achieved slightly lower IGT scores than the control group. A detailed 
analysis based on 'shift frequencies' between the individual decks showed that 
the patients tended to change their preferences for the decks more frequently, 
with a higher preference for the 'disadvantageous' deck B. Control subjects 
seemed to develop a more effective strategy. These differences could be caused 
by the poorer ability of the patients to develop any strategy at all. We 
observed changes in decision making during IGT performance in patients with 
early-onset PD, although they had no executive dysfunction as measured by 
established neuropsychological tests. The more detailed analysis employed in the 
present study could lead to a more accurate study of IGT performance and 
application of IGT in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-012-1086-x
PMID: 22526761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2814. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Jul 15;318(1-2):171-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.04.002. Epub 
2012 Apr 26.

The frontotemporal dementias in a tertiary referral center: classification and 
demographic characteristics in a series of 232 cases.

Ioannidis P(1), Konstantinopoulou E, Maiovis P, Karacostas D.

Author information:
(1)B' Department of Neurology, AHEPA University Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) comprises of behavioral 
variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) and primary progressive aphasia (PPA) 
with its 3 main variants, namely nonfluent/agrammatic (naPPA), semantic (svPPA) 
and logopenic (lvPPA). Recently a clinical syndrome with predominant right 
temporal atrophy was recognized (rvFTD). FTLD often overlaps with parkinsonism 
plus syndromes such as corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP), as well as with motor neuron disease (FTD-MND). While 
FTLD syndromes were thought to be rare and difficult to diagnose ante mortem, 
revised diagnostic criteria as well as recent studies highlighted the 
plausibility of accurate clinical diagnosis.
METHODS: 232 FTLD patients were assessed from January 1, 2003 to December 31, 
2010 in the Neurology Department of a tertiary referral center. Patients were 
classified as bvFTD, naPPA, svPPA, lvPPA, CBD/PSP and rvFTD and their 
demographic characteristics were analyzed.
RESULTS: From the 232 patients, 111 (47.8%) were diagnosed with bvFTD, 56 
(24.1%) with naPPA, 21 (9.1%) with svPPA, 6 (2.6%) with lvPPA, 20 (8.6%) with 
CBD or PSP and 18 (7.8%) with rvFTD. 44% of the patients were under 65 years old 
at onset of symptoms, while only 4.3% reported family history of dementia. FTLD 
subgroups did not differ with respect to demographic characteristics, but early 
onset cases had higher educational level.
DISCUSSION: FTLD represents a syndrome with different but clinically 
distinguishable phenotypes. Cultural, educational and socioeconomic status 
differences might regulate patients' access to medical care and therefore 
influence age of reported onset and prevalence of FTLD in clinical studies. High 
clinical alertness and sensitive neuropsychological tests could lead to timely 
clinical diagnosis in a common presenile type of dementia.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.04.002
PMID: 22541253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2815. Alzheimers Dement. 2012 May;8(3):172-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.002.

An investigation of PreMCI: subtypes and longitudinal outcomes.

Loewenstein DA(1), Greig MT, Schinka JA, Barker W, Shen Q, Potter E, Raj A, 
Brooks L, Varon D, Schoenberg M, Banko J, Potter H, Duara R.

Author information:
(1)Wien Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders, Mount Sinai Medical 
Center, Miami Beach, FL, USA. dloewenstein@att.net

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To investigate the clinical features and rates of progression 
of conditions that are not considered to be normal, but do not fulfill criteria 
for mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We longitudinally evaluated 269 elderly subjects who did not meet 
formal criteria for MCI at baseline but had: (1) a clinical history suggesting 
MCI without neuropsychological deficits (PreMCI-Clinical); or (2) 
neuropsychological deficits on one or more memory measures in conjunction with a 
negative clinical examination (amnestic PreMCI-NP) or were normal on both 
neuropsychological and clinical examination.
RESULTS: The rate of progression to MCI or dementia over an average of 2- to 3 
years was 3.7% for no cognitive impairment subjects, whereas it was 
significantly greater for all PreMCI subtypes (22.0% for PreMCI-Clinical, 38.9% 
for amnestic PreMCI-NP subjects with two or more memory impairments). Among 
PreMCI subjects as a whole, lower baseline scores on object memory and category 
fluency tests were the best predictors of progression to MCI or dementia. 
Cardiovascular risk factors, Parkinsonian symptoms, and hippocampal atrophy were 
not associated with progression.
CONCLUSION: Distinct PreMCI subtypes defined on the basis of clinical and 
neuropsychological evaluations were found to have distinct characteristics, but 
both subtypes demonstrated elevated risk for progression to MCI or dementia. 
Despite the lack of evidence of clinical impairment, subjects with 
neuropsychological deficits in two memory domains were particularly at increased 
risk for progression of their deficits.

Copyright Â© 2012 The Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.03.002
PMCID: PMC3341845
PMID: 22546351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest.


2816. Can J Neurol Sci. 2012 May;39(3):304-10. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100013421.

Clinical overlap between Jakob-Creutzfeldt disease and Lewy body disease.

Tartaglia MC(1), Johnson DY, Thai JN, Cattaruzza T, Wong K, Garcia P, Dearmond 
SJ, Miller BL, Geschwind MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, California, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Sporadic Jakob-Creutzfeldt disease (sCJD) and dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) have overlapping clinical symptoms that can lead to their 
misdiagnosis. We delineated the clinical overlap between sCJD and DLB, and 
assessed the value of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to differentiate between 
them.
METHODS: Medical records, MRI, electroencephalogram (EEG) and cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) were reviewed from 56 sCJD and 30 DLB subjects.
RESULTS: 46% of sCJD subjects met probable DLB criteria and 40% of DLB subjects 
met probable CJD criteria. A greater proportion of sCJD subjects had cerebellar 
signs (66% vs. 10%, p<0.001), myoclonus (64% vs. 30%, p=0.002), and visual 
symptoms (other than hallucinations) (61% vs. 7%, p<0.001), whereas more DLB 
subjects had hallucinations (70% vs. 39%, p=0.007) and fluctuations (57% vs. 
23%, p=0.002). Cortical and/or basal ganglia MRI diffusion weighted imaging 
hyperintensities consistent with sCJD were seen in 96% of sCJD subjects but in 
none with DLB. Logistic regression in sCJD revealed that those meeting probable 
DLB criteria were more likely to have occipital lobe involvement on MRI (OR 1.4, 
p=0.058, model p=0.022). Parietal lobe involvement on MRI was a predictor of 
"Other Focal Cortical signs" (OR 1.9, p=0.021). EEG and CSF assessments lacked 
sensitivity for sCJD as 48% of sCJD patients had a negative EEG; 67% of the 36 
sCJD patents with a CSF evaluation had a negative or inconclusive 14-3-3 result. 
Too few DLB patients had EEG or CSF to assess their utility.
CONCLUSION: Sporadic CJD and DLB have significant symptom overlap. MRI helps 
differentiate these diseases and is related to the signs/symptoms observed in 
sCJD.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100013421
PMCID: PMC3590309
PMID: 22547509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2817. Sleep. 2012 May 1;35(5):667-73. doi: 10.5665/sleep.1828.

Decision making and executive functions in REM sleep behavior disorder.

Delazer M(1), HÃ¶gl B, Zamarian L, Wenter J, Ehrmann L, Gschliesser V, Brandauer 
E, Poewe W, Frauscher B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Innsbruck, Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: This study was designed to assess decision making and 
executive functions in patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder 
(iRBD). IRBD is often seen as an early sign of later evolving neurodegenerative 
disease, most importantly Parkinson disease (PD) and Lewy body dementia (DLB). 
It has been proposed that iRBD patients show a cognitive profile similar to 
patients with PD.
DESIGN: All participants performed an extensive test battery tapping executive 
functions as well as the IOWA gambling task, which measures decision making 
under ambiguity.
SETTING: University hospital sleep disorders center.
PARTICIPANTS: 16 iRBD patients and 45 age- and education-matched controls.
INTERVENTION: N.A.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Compared with controls, iRBD patients showed 
disadvantageous decision making under ambiguity and did not learn by feedback 
over the task. IRBD patients' decision pattern was characterized by the lack of 
a consistent strategy, as indicated by frequent shifts between the single 
choices. A high proportion of iRBD patients (75%) showed random performance or 
worse even at the end of the task. No group differences were found in tasks 
assessing information sampling, flexibility and categorization, problem solving, 
and impulsivity.
CONCLUSIONS: As suggested by the present investigation, iRBD patients may show 
difficulties in decision making under ambiguity in a stage when other cognitive 
functions are relatively well preserved. Whether this is driven by subgroups of 
patients prone to develop PD or DLB has to be assessed by follow-up 
investigations.

DOI: 10.5665/sleep.1828
PMCID: PMC3321426
PMID: 22547893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2818. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;2012:258454. doi: 10.1155/2012/258454. Epub 2012 Apr 
4.

Hormone replacement therapy and risk for neurodegenerative diseases.

Dye RV(1), Miller KJ, Singer EJ, Levine AJ.

Author information:
(1)Longevity Center, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Sciences, David 
Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, CA 
90025, USA.

Over the past two decades, there has been a significant amount of research 
investigating the risks and benefits of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) with 
regards to neurodegenerative disease. Here, we review basic science studies, 
randomized clinical trials, and epidemiological studies, and discuss the 
putative neuroprotective effects of HRT in the context of Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, frontotemporal dementia, and HIV-associated neurocognitive 
disorder. Findings to date suggest a reduced risk of Alzheimer's disease and 
improved cognitive functioning of postmenopausal women who use 17Î²-estradiol. 
With regards to Parkinson's disease, there is consistent evidence from basic 
science studies for a neuroprotective effect of 17Î²-estradiol; however, results 
of clinical and epidemiological studies are inconclusive at this time, and there 
is a paucity of research examining the association between HRT and 
Parkinson's-related neurocognitive impairment. Even less understood are the 
effects of HRT on risk for frontotemporal dementia and HIV-associated 
neurocognitive disorder. Limits to the existing research are discussed, along 
with proposed future directions for the investigation of HRT and 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/258454
PMCID: PMC3324889
PMID: 22548198


2819. Neuromolecular Med. 2012 Sep;14(3):194-204. doi: 10.1007/s12017-012-8181-2. Epub 
2012 May 3.

Sleep disturbances in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Rothman SM(1), Mattson MP.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Intramural Research 
Program, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. rothmansm@mail.nih.gov

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are the two most common 
neurodegenerative disorders and exact a burden on our society greater than 
cardiovascular disease and cancer combined. While cognitive and motor symptoms 
are used to define AD and PD, respectively, patients with both disorders exhibit 
sleep disturbances including insomnia, hypersomnia and excessive daytime 
napping. The molecular basis of perturbed sleep in AD and PD may involve damage 
to hypothalamic and brainstem nuclei that control sleep-wake cycles. 
Perturbations in neurotransmitter and hormone signaling (e.g., serotonin, 
norepinephrine and melatonin) and the neurotrophic factor BDNF likely contribute 
to the disease process. Abnormal accumulations of neurotoxic forms of amyloid 
Î²-peptide, tau and Î±-synuclein occur in brain regions involved in the regulation 
of sleep in AD and PD patients, and are sufficient to cause sleep disturbances 
in animal models of these neurodegenerative disorders. Disturbed regulation of 
sleep often occurs early in the course of AD and PD, and may contribute to the 
cognitive and motor symptoms. Treatments that target signaling pathways that 
control sleep have been shown to retard the disease process in animal models of 
AD and PD, suggesting a potential for such interventions in humans at risk for 
or in the early stages of these disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/s12017-012-8181-2
PMCID: PMC4544709
PMID: 22552887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2820. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2012 May;2(5):a006148. doi: 
10.1101/cshperspect.a006148.

The clinical problem of symptomatic Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive 
impairment.

Tarawneh R(1), Holtzman DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, 
St. Louis,Missouri, USA; Hope Center for Neurological Disorders, Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis,St. Louis, Missouri, USA; The Knight 
Alzheimerâs Disease Research Center, Washington University School of 
Medicine,St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.

Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly. 
Clinicopathological studies support the presence of a long preclinical phase of 
the disease, with the initial deposition of AD pathology estimated to begin 
approximately 10-15 years prior to the onset of clinical symptoms. The hallmark 
clinical phenotype of AD is a gradual and progressive decline in two or more 
cognitive domains, most commonly involving episodic memory and executive 
functions, that is sufficient to cause social or occupational impairment. 
Current diagnostic criteria can accurately identify AD in the majority of cases. 
As disease-modifying therapies are being developed, there is growing interest in 
the identification of individuals in the earliest symptomatic, as well as 
presymptomatic, stages of disease, because it is in this population that such 
therapies may have the greatest chance of success. The use of informant-based 
methods to establish cognitive and functional decline of an individual from 
previously attained levels of performance best allows for the identification of 
individuals in the very mildest stages of cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1101/cshperspect.a006148
PMCID: PMC3331682
PMID: 22553492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2821. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3500-12. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds161. Epub 2012 May 
3.

Evidence for a role of the rare p.A152T variant in MAPT in increasing the risk 
for FTD-spectrum and Alzheimer's diseases.

Coppola G(1), Chinnathambi S, Lee JJ, Dombroski BA, Baker MC, Soto-Ortolaza AI, 
Lee SE, Klein E, Huang AY, Sears R, Lane JR, Karydas AM, Kenet RO, Biernat J, 
Wang LS, Cotman CW, Decarli CS, Levey AI, Ringman JM, Mendez MF, Chui HC, Le Ber 
I, Brice A, Lupton MK, Preza E, Lovestone S, Powell J, Graff-Radford N, Petersen 
RC, Boeve BF, Lippa CF, Bigio EH, Mackenzie I, Finger E, Kertesz A, Caselli RJ, 
Gearing M, Juncos JL, Ghetti B, Spina S, Bordelon YM, Tourtellotte WW, Frosch 
MP, Vonsattel JP, Zarow C, Beach TG, Albin RL, Lieberman AP, Lee VM, Trojanowski 
JQ, Van Deerlin VM, Bird TD, Galasko DR, Masliah E, White CL, Troncoso JC, 
Hannequin D, Boxer AL, Geschwind MD, Kumar S, Mandelkow EM, Wszolek ZK, Uitti 
RJ, Dickson DW, Haines JL, Mayeux R, Pericak-Vance MA, Farrer LA; Alzheimer's 
Disease Genetics Consortium; Ross OA, Rademakers R, Schellenberg GD, Miller BL, 
Mandelkow E, Geschwind DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Rare mutations in the gene encoding for tau (MAPT, microtubule-associated 
protein tau) cause frontotemporal dementia-spectrum (FTD-s) disorders, including 
FTD, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome, and a 
common extended haplotype spanning across the MAPT locus is associated with 
increased risk of PSP and Parkinson's disease. We identified a rare tau variant 
(p.A152T) in a patient with a clinical diagnosis of PSP and assessed its 
frequency in multiple independent series of patients with neurodegenerative 
conditions and controls, in a total of 15 369 subjects. Tau p.A152T 
significantly increases the risk for both FTD-s (n = 2139, OR = 3.0, CI: 
1.6-5.6, P = 0.0005) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) (n = 3345, OR = 2.3, CI: 
1.3-4.2, P = 0.004) compared with 9047 controls. Functionally, p.A152T (i) 
decreases the binding of tau to microtubules and therefore promotes microtubule 
assembly less efficiently; and (ii) reduces the tendency to form abnormal 
fibers. However, there is a pronounced increase in the formation of tau 
oligomers. Importantly, these findings suggest that other regions of the tau 
protein may be crucial in regulating normal function, as the p.A152 residue is 
distal to the domains considered responsible for microtubule interactions or 
aggregation. These data provide both the first genetic evidence and functional 
studies supporting the role of MAPT p.A152T as a rare risk factor for both FTD-s 
and AD and the concept that rare variants can increase the risk for relatively 
common, complex neurodegenerative diseases, but since no clear significance 
threshold for rare genetic variation has been established, some caution is 
warranted until the findings are further replicated.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds161
PMCID: PMC3392107
PMID: 22556362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2822. Front Neurol. 2012 May 1;3:68. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2012.00068. eCollection 2012.

Clinico-pathological correlations of the most common neurodegenerative 
dementias.

Taipa R(1), Pinho J, Melo-Pires M.

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Unit, Hospital de Santo AntÃ³nio, Centro Hospitalar do Porto 
Porto, Portugal.

Neurodegenerative dementias are a group of neurological disorders characterized 
by deterioration in several cognitive domains in which there is selective and 
progressive loss of specific populations of neurons. The precise neurobiological 
basis for the different neurodegenerative dementias remains unknown. It is 
expected that different pathologies reflect different mechanisms, at least early 
in the neurodegeneration process. The next decades promise treatments directed 
to causes and mechanisms, bringing an outstanding challenge to clinicians due to 
heterogeneous clinical presentations with the same molecular pathology. The 
purpose of this brief review is to describe the key neuropathological features 
of the most common neurodegenerative dementias (Alzheimer disease, dementia with 
Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease dementia, and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration) and the relationship with the clinical syndromes described in 
clinico-pathological studies. We expect this overview contributes for the 
understanding of this broad topic integrating the two ends of the spectrum: 
clinical and pathological.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2012.00068
PMCID: PMC3340570
PMID: 22557993


2823. Brain. 2012 Jun;135(Pt 6):1860-70. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws093. Epub 2012 May 4.

How does parkinsonism start? Prodromal parkinsonism motor changes in idiopathic 
REM sleep behaviour disorder.

Postuma RB(1), Lang AE, Gagnon JF, Pelletier A, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, QC H3G 1A4, Canada.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Jul;8(7):355.
    J Neurol. 2012 Dec;259(12):2761-3.

Parkinsonism, as a gradually progressive disorder, has a prodromal interval 
during which neurodegeneration has begun but cardinal manifestations have not 
fully developed. A systematic direct assessment of this interval has never been 
performed. Since patients with idiopathic REM sleep behaviour disorder are at 
very high risk of parkinsonism, they provide a unique opportunity to observe 
directly the development of parkinsonism. Patients with idiopathic REM sleep 
behaviour disorder in an ongoing cohort study were evaluated annually with 
several quantitative motor measures, including the Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale, Purdue Pegboard, alternate-tap test and timed up-and-go. Patients 
who developed parkinsonism were identified from this cohort and matched 
according to age to normal controls. Their results on motor testing from the 
preceding years were plotted, and then assessed with regression analysis, to 
determine when markers first deviated from normal values. Sensitivity and 
specificity of quantitative motor markers for diagnosing prodromal parkinsonism 
were assessed. Of 78 patients, 20 developed parkinsonism. On regression 
analysis, the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale first intersected normal 
values at an estimated 4.5 years before diagnosis. Voice and face akinesia 
intersected earliest (estimated prodromal intervalâ=â9.8 years), followed by 
rigidity (4.4 years), gait abnormalities (4.4 years) and limb bradykinesia (4.2 
years). Quantitative motor tests intersected normal values at longer prodromal 
intervals than subjective examination (Purdue Pegboardâ=â8.6 years, 
alternate-tapâ=â8.2, timed up-and-goâ=â6.3). Using Purdue Pegboard and the 
alternate-tap test, parkinsonism could be detected with 71-82% sensitivity and 
specificity 3 years before diagnosis, whereas a Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale score >4 identified prodromal parkinsonism with 88% sensitivity and 
94% specificity 2 years before diagnosis. Removal of action tremor scores 
improved sensitivity to 94% and specificity to 97% at 2 years before diagnosis 
(cut-off >3). Although distinction between conditions was often difficult, 
prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies appeared to have a slower progression than 
Parkinson's disease (prodromal intervalâ=â6.0 versus 3.8 years). Using a cut-off 
of Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale >3 (excluding action tremor), 25% of 
patients with 'still-idiopathic' REM sleep behaviour disorder demonstrated 
evidence of possible prodromal parkinsonism. Therefore, using direct assessment 
of motor examination before parkinsonism in a REM sleep behaviour disorder, we 
have estimated a prodromal interval of â¼4.5 years on the Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale; other quantitative markers may detect parkinsonism 
earlier. Simple quantitative motor measures may be capable of reliably detecting 
parkinsonism, even before a clinical diagnosis can be made by experienced 
movement disorders neurologists.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws093
PMID: 22561644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2824. Autophagy. 2012 Jun;8(6):987-8. doi: 10.4161/auto.20256. Epub 2012 May 7.

Lysosomal dysfunction in neurodegeneration: the role of ATP13A2/PARK9.

Usenovic M(1), Krainc D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Charlestown, MA, 
USA.

Comment on
    Usenovic M, Tresse E, Mazzulli JR, Taylor JP, Krainc D. Deficiency of 
ATP13A2 leads to lysosomal dysfunction, Î±-synuclein accumulation, and 
neurotoxicity. J Neurosci. 2012;32:4240â6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5575-11.2012.

Neuronal homeostasis and survival critically depend on an efficient 
autophagy-lysosomal degradation pathway, especially since neurons cannot reduce 
the concentration of misfolded proteins and damaged organelles by cell division. 
While increasing evidence implicates lysosomal dysfunction in the pathogenesis 
of neurodegenerative disorders, the molecular underpinnings of the role of 
lysosomes in neurodegeneration remain largely unknown. To this end, studies of 
neurodegenerative disorders caused by mutations in lysosomal proteins offer an 
opportunity to elucidate such mechanisms and potentially identify specific 
therapeutic targets. One of these disorders is Kufor-Rakeb syndrome, caused by 
mutations in the lysosomal protein ATP13A2/PARK9 and characterized by 
early-onset Parkinsonism, pyramidal degeneration and dementia. We found that 
loss of ATP13A2 function results in impaired lysosomal function and, 
consequently, accumulation of SNCA/Î±-synuclein and neurotoxicity. Our results 
suggest that targeting of ATP13A2 to lysosomes to enhance lysosomal function may 
result in neuroprotection in Kufor-Rakeb syndrome. From a broader perspective, 
these findings, together with other recent studies of lysosomal dysfunction in 
neurodegeneration, suggest that strategies to upregulate lysosomal function in 
neurons represent a promising therapeutic approach for neurodegenerative 
disorders.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.20256
PMCID: PMC3427268
PMID: 22561922 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2825. Molecules. 2012 May 7;17(5):5289-309. doi: 10.3390/molecules17055289.

The pharmacological properties and therapeutic use of apomorphine.

RibariÄ S(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pathophysiology, Medical Faculty, University of Ljubljana, 
ZaloÅ¡ka 4, SI-1000 Ljubljana, Slovenia. samo.ribaric@mf.uni-lj.si

Apomorphine (APO) is an aporphine derivative used in human and veterinary 
medicine. APO activates Dâ, D(2S), D(2L), Dâ, Dâ, and Dâ receptors (and is thus 
classified as a non-selective dopamine agonist), serotonin receptors (5HT(1A), 
5HT(2A), 5HT(2B), and 5HT(2C)), and Î±-adrenergic receptors (Î±(1B), Î±(1D), Î±(2A), 
Î±(2B), and Î±(2C)). In veterinary medicine, APO is used to induce vomiting in 
dogs, an important early treatment for some common orally ingested poisons 
(e.g., anti-freeze or insecticides). In human medicine, it has been used in a 
variety of treatments ranging from the treatment of addiction (i.e., to heroin, 
alcohol or cigarettes), for treatment of erectile dysfunction in males and 
hypoactive sexual desire disorder in females to the treatment of patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Currently, APO is used in patients with advanced PD, 
for the treatment of persistent and disabling motor fluctuations which do not 
respond to levodopa or other dopamine agonists, either on its own or in 
combination with deep brain stimulation. Recently, a new and potentially 
important therapeutic role for APO in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease has 
been suggested; APO seems to stimulate AÎ² catabolism in an animal model and cell 
culture, thus reducing the rate of AÎ² oligomerisation and consequent neural cell 
death.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules17055289
PMCID: PMC6268166
PMID: 22565480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2826. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;31(2):439-45. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120082.

Comparison of xMAP and ELISA assays for detecting cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers 
of Alzheimer's disease.

Wang LS(1), Leung YY, Chang SK, Leight S, Knapik-Czajka M, Baek Y, Shaw LM, Lee 
VM, Trojanowski JQ, Clark CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA. lswang@mail.med.upenn.edu

The best-studied biomarkers of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are the 
pathologically-linked cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) proteins amyloid-Î² 42 
(AÎ²(1-42)), total tau (t-tau), and tau phosphorylated on amino acid 181 
(p-tau(181)). Many laboratories measure these proteins using enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Multiplex xMAP Luminex is a semi-automated assay 
platform with reduced intra-sample variance, which could facilitate its use in 
CLIA-approved clinical laboratories. CSF concentrations of these three 
biomarkers reported using xMAP technology differ from those measured by the most 
commonly used ELISA, confounding attempts to compare results. To develop a model 
for converting between xMAP and ELISA levels of the three biomarkers, we 
analyzed CSF samples from 140 subjects (59 AD, 30 controls, 34 with mild 
cognitive impairment, and 17 with Parkinson's disease, including 1 with 
dementia). Log-transformation of ELISA and xMAP levels made the variance 
constant in all three biomarkers and improved the linear regression: t-tau 
concentrations were highly correlated (r = 0.94); p-tau(181) concentrations by 
ELISA can be better predicted using both the t-tau and p-tau(181) xMAP values (r 
= 0.96) as compared to p-tau(181) concentrations alone (r = 0.82); correlation 
of AÎ²(1-42) concentrations was relatively weaker but still high (r = 0.77). 
Among all six protein/assay combinations, xMAP AÎ²(1-42) had the best accuracy 
for diagnostic classification (88%) between AD and control subjects. In 
conclusion, our study demonstrates that multiplex xMAP is an appropriate assay 
platform providing results that can be correlated with research-based ELISA 
values, facilitating the incorporation of this diagnostic biomarker into routine 
clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120082
PMCID: PMC3660971
PMID: 22571982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2827. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2012 Jun 1;11(4):482-9. doi: 
10.2174/187152712800792767.

Alzheimer's disease and type 2 diabetes: exploring the association to obesity 
and tyrosine hydroxylase.

Priyadarshini M(1), Kamal MA, Greig NH, Reale M, Abuzenadah AM, Chaudhary AG, 
Damanhouri GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Aligarh Muslim 
University, UP, India. medha.priyadarshini@gmail.com

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are two 
debilitating health disorders afflicting millions worldwide. Recent research has 
revealed similarities between AD and T2DM. Both these protein conformational 
disorders are associated with obesity, insulin resistance, inflammation and 
endoplasmic reticulum stress, en-route initiation and/or stage aggravation. In 
this mini review we have tried to summarize studies describing obesity, insulin 
resistance and glucocorticoid imbalance as common patho-mechanisms in T2DM and 
AD. A reduction in tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) in the brain has been found to 
occur in Parkinson's disease (PD). AD, T2DM and PD share common risk factors 
like depression. Thus, whether TH is involved in the 'state of cognitive 
depression' that is the hallmark of AD and often accompanies PD and T2DM is also 
explored.

DOI: 10.2174/187152712800792767
PMCID: PMC5002347
PMID: 22583431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflicts 
of interest.


2828. Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 May 15;8(6):329-39. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.80.

Olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson disease.

Doty RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Smell and Taste Center, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. doty@mail.med.upenn.edu

Olfactory dysfunction is among the earliest nonmotor features of Parkinson 
disease (PD). Such dysfunction is present in approximately 90% of early-stage PD 
cases and can precede the onset of motor symptoms by years. The mechanisms 
responsible for olfactory dysfunction are currently unknown. As equivalent 
deficits are observed in Alzheimer disease, Down syndrome, and the 
Parkinson-dementia complex of Guam, a common pathological substrate may be 
involved. Given that olfactory loss occurs to a lesser extent or is absent in 
disorders such as multiple system atrophy, corticobasal degeneration, and 
progressive supranuclear palsy, olfactory testing can be useful in differential 
diagnosis. The olfactory dysfunction in PD and a number of related diseases with 
smell loss correlates with decreased numbers of neurons in structures such as 
the locus coeruleus, the raphe nuclei, and the nucleus basalis of Meynart. These 
neuroanatomical findings, together with evidence for involvement of the 
autonomic nervous system in numerous PD-related symptoms, suggest that deficits 
in cholinergic, noradrenergic and serotonergic function may contribute to the 
olfactory loss. This Review discusses the current understanding of olfactory 
dysfunction in PD, including factors that may be related to its cause.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2012.80
PMID: 22584158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2829. Brain Res Bull. 2013 Mar;92:29-40. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.04.011. Epub 
2012 May 12.

Cognitive deficits in animal models of basal ganglia disorders.

Brooks SP(1), Dunnett SB.

Author information:
(1)Brain Repair Group, School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Museum Avenue, 
Cardiff CF10 3AX, Wales, UK. brookssp@cardiff.ac.uk

The two most common neurological disorders of the basal ganglia are Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD). The most overt symptoms of these 
diseases are motoric, reflecting the loss of the striatal medium spiny neurons 
in HD and ascending substantia nigra dopaminergic cells in PD. However, both 
disease processes induce insidious psychiatric and cognitive syndromes that can 
manifest well in advance of the onset of motor deficits. These early deficits 
provide an opportunity for prophylactic therapeutic intervention in order to 
retard disease progression from the earliest possible point. In order to exploit 
this opportunity, animal models of HD and PD are being probed for the specific 
cognitive deficits represented in the disease states. At the neuronal level, 
these deficits are typically, but not exclusively, mediated by disruption of 
parallel corticostriatal loops that integrate motor information with sensory and 
higher order, "executive" cognitive functions. Dysfunction in these systems can 
be probed with sensitive behavioural tests that selectively probe these 
cognitive functions in mouse models with focal lesions of striatal or cortical 
regions, or of specific neurotransmitter systems. Typically these tests were 
designed and validated in rats. With the advent of genetically modified mouse 
models of disease, validated tests provide an opportunity to screen mouse models 
of disease for early onset cognitive deficits. This review seeks to draw 
together the literature on cognitive deficits in HD and PD, to determine the 
extent to which these deficits are represented in the current animal models of 
disease, and to evaluate the viability of selecting cognitive deficits as 
potential therapeutic targets. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 
'Animal Models'.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.04.011
PMID: 22588013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2830. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Aug 1;21(15):3461-73. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds177. Epub 2012 May 
15.

A greatly extended PPARGC1A genomic locus encodes several new brain-specific 
isoforms and influences Huntington disease age of onset.

Soyal SM(1), Felder TK, Auer S, Hahne P, Oberkofler H, Witting A, Paulmichl M, 
Landwehrmeyer GB, Weydt P, Patsch W; European Huntington Disease Network.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Paracelsus Medical University, 
Strubergasse 21, 5020 Salzburg, Austria.

PGC-1Î± has been implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disorders. 
Several single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located in two separate haplotype 
blocks of PPARGC1A have shown associations with Huntington's disease (HD) and 
Parkinson's disease, but causative SNPs have not been identified. One SNP 
(rs7665116) was located in a highly conserved 233 bp region of intron 2. To 
determine whether rs7665116 is located in an alternative exon, we performed 
5'-RLM-RACE from exon 3 and discovered multiple new transcripts that initiated 
from a common novel promoter located 587 kb upstream of exon 2, but did not 
contain the conserved region harboring rs7665116. Using real-time polymerase 
chain reaction, RNase protection assays and northern blotting, we show that the 
majority of these transcripts are brain specific and are at least equally or 
perhaps more abundant than the reference sequence PPARGC1A transcripts in whole 
brain. Two main transcripts containing independent methionine start codons 
encode full-length brain-specific PGC-1Î± proteins that differ only at their 
N-termini (NTs) from PGC-1Î±, encoded by the reference sequence. Additional 
truncated isoforms containing these NTs that are similar to NT-PGC-1Î± exist. 
Other transcripts may encode potential dominant negative forms, as they are 
predicted to lack the second LXXLL motif that serves as an interaction site for 
several nuclear receptors. Furthermore, we show that the new promoter is active 
in neuronal cell lines and describe haplotypes encompassing this region that are 
associated with HD age of onset. The discovery of such a large PPARGC1A genomic 
locus and multiple isoforms in brain warrants further functional studies and may 
provide new tissue-specific targets for treating neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds177
PMID: 22589246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2831. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2012 Dec;119(12):1467-76. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-012-0816-9. Epub 2012 May 17.

Proteasome inhibition leads to early loss of synaptic proteins in neuronal 
culture.

Bajic N(1), Jenner P, Ballard CG, Francis PT.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age Related Diseases, Guy's Campus, King's College London, 
St. Thomas Street, London, SE1 1UL, UK.

Erratum in
    J Neural Transm. 2013 Jul;120(7):1135.

A dysfunctional ubiquitin proteasome system may be a mediating factor of disease 
progression in Lewy body dementia (LBD). The effects of proteasome inhibition 
using lactacystin and epoxomicin in primary neuronal culture were studied to 
assess the validity of this model to reflect the cortical pathology of LBD. 
Treatment of primary cortical neurons with 5 Î¼M lactacystin for 24 h led to a 38 
% reduction in the levels of Î²-III-tubulin (p < 0.05), a 48 % reduction in the 
levels of synaptophysin (p < 0.05) and a 74 % reduction in the levels of drebrin 
(p < 0.01), when compared to controls. Results for epoxomicin were similar. The 
loss of neuronal protein occurred prior to any loss of mitochondrial activity or 
cell death. The results are reflective of the loss of synapses and the synaptic 
changes observed in LBD, which may be an early event in the neurodegeneration of 
LBD. The similarities with the pathological changes in LBD highlight the 
possibility that this model can potentially provide a platform to test novel 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0816-9
PMID: 22592936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2832. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Sep;33(9):2231.e7-2231.e14. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.04.006. Epub 2012 May 16.

The MAPT p.A152T variant is a risk factor associated with tauopathies with 
atypical clinical and neuropathological features.

Kara E(1), Ling H, Pittman AM, Shaw K, de Silva R, Simone R, Holton JL, Warren 
JD, Rohrer JD, Xiromerisiou G, Lees A, Hardy J, Houlden H, Revesz T.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Laboratories and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK.

Microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) mutations have been shown to underlie 
frontotemporal dementia and a variety of additional sporadic tauopathies. We 
identified a rare p.A152T variant in MAPT exon 7 in two (of eight) patients with 
clinical presentation of parkinsonism and postmortem finding of neurofibrillary 
tangle pathology. Two siblings of one patient also carried the p.A152T variant, 
and both have progressive cognitive impairment. Further screening identified the 
variant in two other cases: one with pathologically confirmed corticobasal 
degeneration and another with the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease with 
dementia. The balance of evidence suggests this variant is associated with 
disease, but the very varied phenotype of the cases with the mutation is not 
consistent with it being a fully penetrant pathogenic mutation. Interestingly, 
this variation results in the creation of a new phosphorylation site that could 
cause reduced microtubule binding. We suggest that the A152T variant is a risk 
factor associated with the development of atypical neurodegenerative conditions 
with abnormal tau accumulation.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.04.006
PMCID: PMC3657164
PMID: 22595371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2833. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;30 Suppl 2:S283-304. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-111568.

Apolipoprotein E genotype: the innocent bystander or active bridge between 
metabolic syndrome and cognitive impairment?

Frisardi V(1).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Unit and Gerontology-Geriatrics Research Laboratory, Department of 
Medical Sciences, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, 
Foggia, Italy. vfrisardi@yahoo.com

Apolipoprotein E [ApoE, APOE (gene)] is a multifunctional protein of the lipid 
and lipoprotein transport system mainly involved in metabolism of dietary 
lipids. Its polymorphic variants are considered a genetic risk factor of 
cognitive impairment in several neurodegenerative disorders such as Lewy body 
dementia, Huntington's disease, and Alzheimer's disease, as well as in vascular 
dementia and cerebrovascular disease. The precise mechanism by which APOE 
affects neurodegeneration is still unclear. Epidemiological and experimental 
studies demonstrated an influence of APOE on metabolic parameters but, to the 
best of our knowledge, no data are available about the exact role in humans of 
the effect of APOE on metabolic-cognitive syndrome (MCS). The latter is a model 
of cognitive impairment linked to metabolic syndrome identifying a grey zone 
between metabolic disorders and neuropathological process driving late-life 
cognitive decline. Although it may be a daring project that does not reach a 
final conclusion because of disease complexity, I hope to elucidate whether APOE 
may have a prominent role in MCS, going beyond the simple addition of separate 
mechanisms already known.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-111568
PMID: 22596266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2834. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;31(2):387-99. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-111748.

[11C]-MP4A PET cholinergic measurements in amnestic mild cognitive impairment, 
probable Alzheimer's disease, and dementia with Lewy bodies: a Bayesian method 
and voxel-based analysis.

Marcone A(1), Garibotto V, Moresco RM, Florea I, Panzacchi A, Carpinelli A, 
Virta JR, Tettamanti M, Borroni B, Padovani A, Bertoldo A, Herholz K, Rinne JO, 
Cappa SF, Perani D.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurosciences Department, San Raffaele Turro Hospital, San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

Non-invasive approaches for positron emission tomography (PET) parametric 
imaging of acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity have been developed and applied 
to the investigation of dementia, mainly Alzheimer's disease (AD), but also 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), not including, however, patients in the early 
disease stage. The few cholinergic PET studies on mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) did not provide clinical follow-up. One limitation of the methods used so 
far is the relatively low sensitivity in measuring subcortical or deep cortical 
structures, which might represent specific disease markers. Here we assessed 
AChE activity with [11C]-MP4A and PET by a maximum a posteriori Bayesian method 
(MAPB) based on a 2-tissue compartment-3-rate-constant reference region model. 
30 subjects were included: 10 multi-domain amnestic MCI (aMCI) with a follow up 
of 2 years, 7 probable AD (pAD), 4 DLB subjects, and 9 healthy controls. Regions 
of interest and voxel-based statistical parametric mapping analyses revealed 
significant and widespread AChE reductions in several cortical regions and in 
the hippocampus in all pAD subjects and aMCI subjects who progressed to AD 
(converters). Noteworthy, hippocampal AChE activity correlated significantly 
with long-term verbal and non-verbal memory in both aMCI converters and pAD. The 
pattern was more heterogeneous in early DLB patients, with only 2 out of 4 cases 
showing a severe or intermediate reduction of AChE activity. The comparable AChE 
reductions in pAD and aMCI converters indicate the presence of a widespread 
impairment of the cholinergic system already in the MCI phase. A more variable 
degree of cholinergic dysfunction is present in early DLB.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-111748
PMID: 22596267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2835. Biopolymers. 2012 Aug;97(8):577-88. doi: 10.1002/bip.22055.

Implications of protein structure instability: from physiological to 
pathological secondary structure.

Sukhanova A(1), Poly S, Shemetov A, Bronstein I, Nabiev I.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine, Trinity College Dublin, Dublin 8, Ireland. 
nanomedicine.mephi@gmail.com

Proteins are folded during their synthesis; this process may be spontaneous or 
assisted. Both phenomena are carefully regulated by the "housekeeping" mechanism 
and molecular chaperones to avoid the appearance of misfolded proteins. 
Unfolding process generally occurs during physiological degradation of protein, 
but in some specific cases it results from genetic or environmental changes and 
does not correspond to metabolic needs. The main outcome of these phenomena is 
the appearance of nonfunctional pathologically unfolded proteins with a strong 
tendency to aggregation. Moreover, for some of these unfolded proteins, the 
agglomeration that follows initial proteins association may give rise to highly 
structured soluble aggregates. These aggregates have been identified as the main 
cause of the so-called amyloidosis or amyloid diseases, such as Alzheimer's, 
Parkinson's, and Creutzfeldt-Jakob diseases, and type II diabetes mellitus. 
Although some common mechanisms of amyloid protein aggregation have been 
identified, the roles of the environmental conditions inducing amyloidosis 
remain to be clarified. In this review, we will summarize recent studies 
identifying the origin of amyloid nucleation and will try to predict the 
therapeutic prospects that may be opened by elucidation of the amyloidosis 
mechanisms.

Copyright Â© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bip.22055
PMID: 22605549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2836. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2012 May;Chapter 2:Unit 2D.11. doi: 
10.1002/9780470151808.sc02d11s21.

In vitro generation of three-dimensional substrate-adherent embryonic stem 
cell-derived neural aggregates for application in animal models of neurological 
disorders.

Hargus G(1), Cui YF, DihnÃ© M, Bernreuther C, Schachner M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology Hamburg, University Medical Center 
Hamburg-Eppendorf, University of Hamburg, Hamburg, Germany.

In vitro-differentiated embryonic stem (ES) cells comprise a useful source for 
cell replacement therapy, but the efficiency and safety of a translational 
approach are highly dependent on optimized protocols for directed 
differentiation of ES cells into the desired cell types in vitro. Furthermore, 
the transplantation of three-dimensional ES cell-derived structures instead of a 
single-cell suspension may improve graft survival and function by providing a 
beneficial microenvironment for implanted cells. To this end, we have developed 
a new method to efficiently differentiate mouse ES cells into neural aggregates 
that consist predominantly (>90%) of postmitotic neurons, neural progenitor 
cells, and radial glia-like cells. When transplanted into the excitotoxically 
lesioned striatum of adult mice, these substrate-adherent embryonic stem 
cell-derived neural aggregates (SENAs) showed significant advantages over 
transplanted single-cell suspensions of ES cell-derived neural cells, including 
improved survival of GABAergic neurons, increased cell migration, and 
significantly decreased risk of teratoma formation. Furthermore, SENAs mediated 
functional improvement after transplantation into animal models of Parkinson's 
disease and spinal cord injury. This unit describes in detail how SENAs are 
efficiently derived from mouse ES cells in vitro and how SENAs are isolated for 
transplantation. Furthermore, methods are presented for successful implantation 
of SENAs into animal models of Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
spinal cord injury to study the effects of stem cell-derived neural aggregates 
in a disease context in vivo.

DOI: 10.1002/9780470151808.sc02d11s21
PMID: 22605646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2837. J Neuroimaging. 2013 Jan;23(1):28-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2012.00722.x. 
Epub 2012 May 18.

In vivo detection of cortical microinfarcts on ultrahigh-field MRI.

Ii Y(1), Maeda M, Kida H, Matsuo K, Shindo A, Taniguchi A, Tomimoto H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine, Mie, 
Japan. ii-y@clin.medic.mie-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Cortical microinfarcts (CMIs) are detected as small foci 
restricted to the cerebral cortex in autopsy brains. CMIs are thought to be 
caused by cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) in the elderly and may be a risk for 
dementia. We aimed to visualize CMIs, which remain invisible on conventional 
MRI, using double inversion recovery (DIR) and 3-dimensional fluid attenuated 
inversion recovery (3D-FLAIR) on 3-Tesla MRI.
METHODS: We prospectively performed DIR and 3D-FLAIR images in 70 subjects with 
Alzheimer disease (AD; n = 47), mild cognitive impairment (n = 14), AD with 
cerebrovascular disease (CVD; n = 3), vascular dementia (VaD; n = 2), 
CAA-associated intracerebral hemorrhage (ICH; n = 2) and one each of normal 
pressure hydrocephalus and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
Susceptibility-weighted imaging (SWI) was performed to detect cerebral 
microbleeds (CMBs).
RESULTS: Nine subjects (five of AD and one each of AD with CVD, ICH, VaD, and 
DLB) had small intracortical high signal lesions on both DIR and 3D-FLAIR 
images. All the nine subjects accompanied multiple lobar CMBs. These 
intracortical lesions were located in close proximity to CMBs, and were 
suggested to be CMIs.
CONCLUSIONS: DIR and 3D-FLAIR images may open a way to visualize CMIs.

Copyright Â© 2012 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2012.00722.x
PMID: 22607584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2838. BMJ. 2012 May 22;344:e3427. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e3427.

Derivation and validation of updated QFracture algorithm to predict risk of 
osteoporotic fracture in primary care in the United Kingdom: prospective open 
cohort study.

Hippisley-Cox J(1), Coupland C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Primary Care, University Park, Nottingham, UK. 
julia.hippisley-cox@nottingham.ac.uk

Comment in
    BMJ. 2012;344:e4191.

OBJECTIVE: To develop and validate an updated version of the QFracture algorithm 
for estimating the risk of a patient sustaining an osteoporotic fracture or hip 
fracture in a primary care population.
DESIGN: Prospective open cohort study using routinely collected data from 420 
general practices in the United Kingdom to develop updated QFracture scores and 
207 practices to validate scores. Cox's proportional hazards model was used in 
the derivation cohort to derive risk equations using several explanatory 
variables. We calculated measures of calibration and discrimination using the 
validation cohort.
PARTICIPANTS: 3,142,673 patients in derivation cohort and 1,583,373 in 
validation cohort, aged 30-100 years, who contributed 23,608,337 and 11,732,106 
person years of observation, respectively. We identified 59,772 incident 
diagnoses of osteoporotic fracture in the derivation cohort and 28,685 in the 
validation cohort.
OUTCOMES: Incident diagnosis of osteoporotic fracture (vertebral, distal radius, 
proximal humerus, or hip) and incident hip fracture recorded in general practice 
records or linked cause of death records.
RESULTS: We found significant independent associations with overall fracture 
risk in women for age, body mass index, ethnic origin, alcohol intake, smoking 
status, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease or asthma, any cancer, 
cardiovascular disease, dementia, diagnosis or treatment for epilepsy, history 
of falls, chronic liver disease, Parkinson's disease, rheumatoid arthritis or 
systemic lupus erythematosus, chronic renal disease, type 1 diabetes, type 2 
diabetes, previous fracture, endocrine disorders, gastrointestinal 
malabsorption, any antidepressants, corticosteroids, unopposed hormone 
replacement therapy, and parental history of osteoporosis. Risk factors for hip 
fracture in women were similar except for gastrointestinal malabsorption and 
parental history of hip fracture. Risk factors for men were largely the same as 
those for women but also included care home residence. The updated hip fracture 
algorithm explained 71.7% (95% confidence interval 71.1% to 72.3%) of the 
variation in women and 70.4% (69.3% to 71.5%) in men. D statistic values for hip 
fracture were high for women (3.26, 3.21 to 3.31) and men (3.15, 3.06 to 3.24), 
and higher than for osteoporotic fracture. Values for the area under the 
receiver operating characteristics curves for hip fracture were 0.89 for women 
and 0.88 for men, compared with 0.79 and 0.71 for osteoporotic fracture, 
respectively. The updated algorithms performed better than the 2009 algorithms.
CONCLUSIONS: Two QFracture algorithms were updated to predict risk of 
osteoporotic and hip fracture in primary care populations to include ethnic 
origin, all classes of antidepressants, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
epilepsy, dementia, Parkinson's disease, cancer, systemic lupus erythematosus, 
chronic renal disease, type 1 diabetes, previous fragility fracture, and care 
home residence. These updated algorithms showed improved performance compared 
with previous QFracture algorithms reported in 2009.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.e3427
PMID: 22619194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2839. Nihon Rinsho. 2012 May;70(5):785-9.

[Searching for biomarkers to diagnose dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Yanagisawa K(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Development of Advanced Medicine for Dementia, National Center for 
Geriatrics and Gerontology.

A decrease in the concentration of amyloid beta-protein-42 and an increase in 
that of tau or phosphorylated tau in addition to volumetry on MRI and amyloid 
imaging by PET are available biomarkers. However, we need better biomarkers to 
detect very early stage of Alzheimer disease to develop disease modifying drugs, 
which should be used 10 or 15 years prior to emergence of clinical symptoms. In 
terms of biomarkers for other dementing neurodegenerative diseases, including 
synucleinopathies such as dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple system atrophy, 
and tauopathies such as progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal 
degeneration, synuclein, TDP-43, progranulin and tau may be candidate proteins 
for possible biomarkers for these diseases.

PMID: 22620001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2840. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2012 Sep;18(5):787-98. doi: 10.1017/S135561771200046X. 
Epub 2012 May 24.

Everyday action impairment in Parkinson's disease dementia.

Giovannetti T(1), Britnell P, Brennan L, Siderowf A, Grossman M, Libon DJ, 
Bettcher BM, Rouzard F, Eppig J, Seidel GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 
19122, USA. tgio@temple.edu

This study examined everyday action impairment in participants with Parkinson's 
disease dementia (PDD) by comparison with participants with Parkinson's 
disease-no dementia (PD) or Alzheimer's disease (AD) and in reference to a 
neuropsychological model. Participants with PDD (n = 20), PD (n = 20), or AD (n 
= 20) were administered performance-based measures of everyday functioning that 
allowed for the quantification of overall performance and error types. Also, 
caregiver ratings of functional independence were obtained. On performance-based 
tests, the PDD group exhibited greater functional impairment than the PD group 
but comparable overall impairment relative to the AD group. Error patterns did 
not differ between PDD and PD participants but the PDD group demonstrated a 
higher proportion of commission errors and lower proportion of omission errors 
relative to the AD group. Hierarchical regression analyses showed omission 
errors were significantly predicted by neuropsychological measures of episodic 
memory, whereas commission errors were predicted by both measures of general 
dementia severity (MMSE) and executive control. Everyday action impairment in 
PDD differs quantitatively from PD but qualitatively from AD and may be 
characterized by a relatively high proportion of commission errors-an error type 
associated with executive control deficits. (JINS, 2012, 18, 1-12).

DOI: 10.1017/S135561771200046X
PMCID: PMC3648638
PMID: 22621995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2841. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2012 Jul;119(7):861-75. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-012-0820-0. Epub 2012 May 24.

CSF and clinical hallmarks of subcortical dementias: focus on DLB and PDD.

Stefani A(1), Brusa L, Olivola E, Pierantozzi M, Martorana A.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, UniversitÃ  di Roma Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. 
stefani@uniroma2.it

Dementia has become a relevant problem associated with the elderly in our 
countries. Increased interest in the field has yielded a copious literature, so 
far mostly centered on Alzheimer's dementia. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis 
combined with neuropsychology, even in absence of neuroimaging, represents the 
gold standard to reach a diagnosis when cortical cognitive impairment prevails. 
In view of this, low levels of CSF amyloid peptides Î² (AÎ²) and high tau/AÎ² 
protein ratio, despite prominent impairment of executive functions or 
concomitant vascular burden, facilitate the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. 
Conversely, an early cognitive impairment occurring in patients suffering from 
Parkinson's disease (PD) or Lewy body disorders (LBDs), both diagnoses posed on 
pure clinical grounds, remains quite elusive in term of biomarkers or 
neuropsychological assessment. Whether PD with dementia (PDD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) represent further steps along with a continuum of the same 
progressive degeneration due to Lewy bodies deposition, rather then the 
association of Lewy bodies and AÎ² pathology, remains a challenging issue. Aim of 
this work is to set a state-of-the-art on the neuropsychological profiles of 
both or DLB. Then, we will focus on the ongoing controversies about the 
specificity of the standard CSF biomarkers if applied to extrapyramidal 
disorders. Our conclusions are that the CSF pattern, in PDD and DLB, can 
certainly be distinct from that in AD, though mechanisms leading to dementia 
could be shared among them. It is possible that, by combining imaging tracers, 
neuropsychologically careful assessment and renewed CSF biomarkers, DLB can be 
better distinguished in subgroups, depending on the presence or absence of a 
relevant amyloid burden. However, more complete data, possibly collected in 
fieri during the progressive derangement of cognitive abilities, are needed to 
improve our ability to decipher and treat these entities.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0820-0
PMID: 22622365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2842. Neurodegener Dis. 2013;11(1):49-58. doi: 10.1159/000336558. Epub 2012 May 24.

Mitochondrial inhibitor models of Huntington's disease and Parkinson's disease 
induce zinc accumulation and are attenuated by inhibition of zinc neurotoxicity 
in vitro or in vivo.

Sheline CT(1), Zhu J, Zhang W, Shi C, Cai AL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology and the Neuroscience Center of Excellence, 
Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, New Orleans, LA 70112, USA. 
csheli @ lsuhsc.edu

BACKGROUND: Inhibition of mitochondrial function occurs in many 
neurodegenerative diseases, and inhibitors of mitochondrial complexes I and II 
are used to model them. The complex II inhibitor, 3-nitroproprionic acid 
(3-NPA), kills the striatal neurons susceptible in Huntington's disease. The 
complex I inhibitor N-methyl-4-phenylpyridium (MPP(+)) and 6-hydroxydopamine 
(6-OHDA) are used to model Parkinson's disease. Zinc (Zn(2+)) accumulates after 
3-NPA, 6-OHDA and MPP(+) in situ or in vivo.
OBJECTIVE: We will investigate the role of Zn(2+) neurotoxicity in 3-NPA, 6-OHDA 
and MPP(+).
METHODS: Murine striatal/midbrain tyrosine hydroxylase positive, or near-pure 
cortical neuronal cultures, or animals were exposed to 3-NPA or MPP(+) and 
6-OHDA with or without neuroprotective compounds. Intracellular zinc 
([Zn(2+)](i)), nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)), NADH, glycolytic 
intermediates and neurotoxicity were measured.
RESULTS: We showed that compounds or genetics which restore NAD(+) and attenuate 
Zn(2+) neurotoxicity (pyruvate, nicotinamide, NAD(+), increased NAD(+) 
synthesis, sirtuin inhibition or Zn(2+) chelation) attenuated the neuronal death 
induced by these toxins. The increase in [Zn(2+)](i) preceded a reduction in the 
NAD(+)/NADH ratio that caused a reversible glycolytic inhibition. Pyruvate, 
nicotinamide and NAD(+) reversed the reductions in the NAD(+)/NADH ratio, 
glycolysis and neuronal death after challenge with 3-NPA, 6-OHDA or MPP(+), as 
was previously shown for exogenous Zn(2+). To test efficacy in vivo, we injected 
3-NPA into the striatum of rats and systemically into mice, with or without 
pyruvate. We observed early striatal Zn(2+) fluorescence, and pyruvate 
significantly attenuated the 3-NPA-induced lesion and restored behavioral 
scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these studies suggest that Zn(2+) accumulation caused by 
MPP(+) and 3-NPA is a novel preventable mechanism of the resultant 
neurotoxicity.

Copyright Â© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000336558
PMID: 22627004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2843. Front Neurol. 2012 May 17;3:82. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2012.00082. eCollection 2012.

Cognition in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder.

Gagnon JF(1), Bertrand JA, GÃ©nier Marchand D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine, HÃ´pital du SacrÃ©-Coeur de 
MontrÃ©al MontrÃ©al, QC, Canada.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia 
characterized by excessive muscle activity and undesirable motor events during 
REM sleep. RBD occurs in approximately 0.5% of the general population, with a 
higher prevalence in older men. RBD is a frequent feature of dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB), but is only rarely reported in Alzheimer's disease. RBD is also a 
risk factor for Î±-synuclein-related diseases, such as DLB, Parkinson's disease 
(PD), and multiple system atrophy. Therefore, RBD has major implications for the 
diagnosis and treatment of neurodegenerative disorders and for understanding 
specific neurodegeneration patterns. Several markers of neurodegeneration have 
been identified in RBD, including cognitive impairments such as deficits in 
attention, executive functions, learning capacities, and visuospatial abilities. 
Approximately 50% of RBD patients present mild cognitive impairment. Moreover, 
RBD is also associated with cognitive decline in PD.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2012.00082
PMCID: PMC3354332
PMID: 22629254


2844. Arch Neurol. 2012 Sep;69(9):1164-9. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2012.772.

Characterization of a family with c9FTD/ALS associated with the GGGGCC repeat 
expansion in C9ORF72.

Savica R(1), Adeli A, Vemuri P, Knopman DS, Dejesus-Hernandez M, Rademakers R, 
Fields JA, Whitwell J, Jack CR, Lowe V, Petersen RC, Boeve BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: The hexanucleotide repeat in the chromosome 9 open reading frame 72 
(C9ORF72) gene was recently discovered as the underlying genetic cause of many 
families with frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and/or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) linked to chromosome 9 (c9FTD/ALS). We report the clinical, 
neuropsychologic, and neuroimaging findings of a family with the C9ORF72 
mutation and clinical diagnoses bridging the FTD, parkinsonism, and ALS 
spectrum.
OBJECTIVE: To characterize the antemortem characteristics of a family with 
c9FTD/ALS associated with the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72.
DESIGN: Clinical series.
SETTING: Tertiary care academic medical center. PATIENTS The members of a family 
affected by the mutation with features of FTD and/or ALS.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical, neuropsychologic, and neuroimaging assessments.
RESULTS: All 3 examined subjects had the hexanucleotide expansion detected in 
C9ORF72. All had personality/behavioral changes early in the course of the 
disease. One case had levodopa-unresponsive parkinsonism, and 1 had ALS. 
Magnetic resonance imaging showed symmetric bilateral frontal, temporal, 
insular, and cingulate atrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: This report highlights the clinical and neuroimaging 
characteristics of a family with c9FTD/ALS. Further studies are needed to better 
understand the phenotypical variability and the 
cliniconeuroimaging-neuropathologic correlations.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2012.772
PMCID: PMC3625860
PMID: 22637471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2845. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Sep 1;21(17):3785-94. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds206. Epub 2012 May 
29.

Identification of novel ATP13A2 interactors and their role in Î±-synuclein 
misfolding and toxicity.

Usenovic M(1), Knight AL, Ray A, Wong V, Brown KR, Caldwell GA, Caldwell KA, 
Stagljar I, Krainc D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Charlestown, MA 
02129, USA.

Lysosomes are responsible for degradation and recycling of bulky cell material, 
including accumulated misfolded proteins and dysfunctional organelles. 
Increasing evidence implicates lysosomal dysfunction in several 
neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease and related 
synucleinopathies, which are characterized by the accumulation of Î±-synuclein 
(Î±-syn) in Lewy bodies. Studies of lysosomal proteins linked to 
neurodegenerative disorders present an opportunity to uncover specific molecular 
mechanisms and pathways that contribute to neurodegeneration. Loss-of-function 
mutations in a lysosomal protein, ATP13A2 (PARK9), cause Kufor-Rakeb syndrome 
that is characterized by early-onset parkinsonism, pyramidal degeneration and 
dementia. While loss of ATP13A2 function plays a role in Î±-syn misfolding and 
toxicity, the normal function of ATP13A2 in the brain remains largely unknown. 
Here, we performed a screen to identify ATP13A2 interacting partners, as a first 
step toward elucidating its function. Utilizing a split-ubiquitin membrane yeast 
two-hybrid system that was developed to identify interacting partners of 
full-length integral membrane proteins, we identified 43 novel interactors that 
primarily implicate ATP13A2 in cellular processes such as endoplasmic reticulum 
(ER) translocation, ER-to-Golgi trafficking and vesicular transport and fusion. 
We showed that a subset of these interactors modified Î±-syn aggregation and 
Î±-syn-mediated degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in Caenorhabditis elegans, 
further suggesting that ATP13A2 and Î±-syn are functionally linked in 
neurodegeneration. These results implicate ATP13A2 in vesicular trafficking and 
provide a platform for further studies of ATP13A2 in neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/dds206
PMCID: PMC3412378
PMID: 22645275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2846. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;33 Suppl 1:S385-96. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-129006.

From molecule to clinic and community for neurodegeneration: research to bridge 
translational gaps.

Brayne C(1), Barker RA, Harold D, Ince PG, Savva GM, Williams J, Williams-Gray 
CH, Wharton SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK. carol.brayne@medschl.cam.ac.uk

Six papers based on studies with particular epidemiological designs are 
presented here which have been selected on the basis of their visibility in the 
literature. The designs are intended to provide robust evidence on risk, natural 
history, and underpinning neurobiology and outcomes relevant to aging 
populations. There is a large case control study (the Late Onset Alzheimer's 
Disease study), a case cohort study of Parkinson's Disease (the CamPaIGN study), 
and the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study. Each study 
has included genetic investigation and risk, and the latter two include 
investigation of the clinical syndromes and their natural histories in relation 
to underlying pathology. Each aimed to provide results which were as 
generalizable to usual older populations as possible and each has produced 
findings which have contributed to current understanding of genetic risk, the 
heterogeneity of the syndrome of Parkinson's disease, and the underlying 
neuropathology of dementia in older population. They have influenced thinking 
about future directions, and the cohorts on which the findings are based will 
continue to provide an important resource for novel areas of research and future 
health care planning.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-129006
PMID: 22647264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2847. Neurology. 2012 Jun 12;78(24):1939-45. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318259e1c5. Epub 
2012 May 30.

Hippocampal abnormalities and memory deficits in Parkinson disease: a multimodal 
imaging study.

Carlesimo GA(1), Piras F, Assogna F, Pontieri FE, Caltagirone C, Spalletta G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Tor Vergata University, Rome, Italy. 
memolab@hsantalucia.it

OBJECTIVES: Investigating in a case-control study whether the performance scores 
of a group of patients with Parkinson disease (PD) without dementia on tests of 
declarative memory could be predicted by hippocampal volume reduction (as 
assessed by automatic segmentation of cerebral magnetic resonance [MR] images) 
or by the rate of microstructural alterations (as evaluated by diffusion tensor 
analysis of MR images).
METHOD: Twenty-five individuals with PD and 25 matched healthy control subjects 
underwent a 3-T MRI protocol with whole-brain T1-weighted and diffusion tensor 
imaging and a neuropsychological assessment. Images were processed to obtain 
indices of macrostructural (volume) and microstructural (mean diffusivity [MD]) 
variation of bilateral hippocampi. Neuropsychological evaluation included tests 
of verbal memory (15-minute delayed recall of a 15-word list) and visuospatial 
memory (20-minute delayed reproduction of Rey complex figure).
RESULTS: MD in the hippocampi of patients with PD was significantly increased 
with respect to that of the group of control subjects. Moreover, patients with 
high hippocampal MD values obtained low memory scores. In contrast, no 
difference emerged between patients with PD and healthy control subjects for 
hippocampal size, and no relationship could be found between hippocampal volumes 
and memory scores.
CONCLUSIONS: These data confirm that the declarative memory impairment in 
patients with PD without dementia may be predicted by the rate of 
microstructural alterations in the hippocampal formation as detected by 
diffusion tensor imaging analysis.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318259e1c5
PMID: 22649213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2848. Clin Genet. 2013 Mar;83(3):279-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01903.x. Epub 
2012 Jul 4.

Corticobasal and ataxia syndromes widen the spectrum of C9ORF72 hexanucleotide 
expansion disease.

Lindquist SG(1), Duno M, Batbayli M, Puschmann A, Braendgaard H, Mardosiene S, 
Svenstrup K, Pinborg LH, Vestergaard K, Hjermind LE, Stokholm J, Andersen BB, 
Johannsen P, Nielsen JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, 4062, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University 
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark. suzanne.lindquist@rh.regionh.dk

Recently, a hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansion in the first intron of 
C9ORF72 was reported as the cause of chromosome 9p21-linked frontotemporal 
dementia-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS). We here report the prevalence 
of the expansion in a hospital-based cohort and associated clinical features 
indicating a wider clinical spectrum of C9ORF72 disease than previously 
described. We studied 280 patients previously screened for mutations in genes 
involved in early onset autosomal dominant inherited dementia disorders. A 
repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction amplification assay was used to identify 
pathogenic GGGGCC expansions. As a potential modifier, confirmed cases were 
further investigated for abnormal CAG expansions in ATXN2. A pathogenic GGGGCC 
expansion was identified in a total of 14 probands. Three of these presented 
with atypical clinical features and were previously diagnosed with clinical 
olivopontocerebellar degeneration (OPCD), atypical Parkinsonian syndrome (APS) 
and a corticobasal syndrome (CBS). Further, the pathogenic expansion was 
identified in six FTD patients, four patients with FTD-ALS and one ALS patient. 
All confirmed cases had normal ATXN2 repeat sizes. Our study widens the clinical 
spectrum of C9ORF72 related disease and confirms the hexanucleotide expansion as 
a prevalent cause of FTD-ALS disorders. There was no indication of a modifying 
effect of the ATXN2 gene.

Â© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2012.01903.x
PMID: 22650353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2849. Mol Neurodegener. 2012 May 31;7:26. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-7-26.

A molecular signature in blood identifies early Parkinson's disease.

Molochnikov L(1), Rabey JM, Dobronevsky E, Bonucelli U, Ceravolo R, Frosini D, 
GrÃ¼nblatt E, Riederer P, Jacob C, Aharon-Peretz J, Bashenko Y, Youdim MB, Mandel 
SA.

Author information:
(1)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: The search for biomarkers in Parkinson's disease (PD) is crucial to 
identify the disease early and monitor the effectiveness of neuroprotective 
therapies. We aim to assess whether a gene signature could be detected in blood 
from early/mild PD patients that could support the diagnosis of early PD, 
focusing on genes found particularly altered in the substantia nigra of sporadic 
PD.
RESULTS: The transcriptional expression of seven selected genes was examined in 
blood samples from 62 early stage PD patients and 64 healthy age-matched 
controls. Stepwise multivariate logistic regression analysis identified five 
genes as optimal predictors of PD: p19 S-phase kinase-associated protein 1A 
(odds ratio [OR] 0.73; 95% confidence interval [CI] 0.60-0.90), huntingtin 
interacting protein-2 (OR 1.32; CI 1.08-1.61), aldehyde dehydrogenase family 1 
subfamily A1 (OR 0.86; 95% CI 0.75-0.99), 19âS proteasomal protein PSMC4 (OR 
0.73; 95% CI 0.60-0.89) and heat shock 70-kDa protein 8 (OR 1.39; 95% CI 
1.14-1.70). At a 0.5 cut-off the gene panel yielded a sensitivity and 
specificity in detecting PD of 90.3 and 89.1 respectively and the area under the 
receiving operating curve (ROC AUC) was 0.96. The performance of the five-gene 
classifier on the de novo PD individuals alone composing the early PD cohort 
(nâ=â38), resulted in a similar ROC with an AUC of 0.95, indicating the 
stability of the model and also, that patient medication had no significant 
effect on the predictive probability (PP) of the classifier for PD risk. The 
predictive ability of the model was validated in an independent cohort of 30 
patients at advanced stage of PD, classifying correctly all cases as PD (100% 
sensitivity). Notably, the nominal average value of the PP for PD (0.95 
(SDâ=â0.09)) in this cohort was higher than that of the early PD group (0.83 
(SDâ=â0.22)), suggesting a potential for the model to assess disease severity. 
Lastly, the gene panel fully discriminated between PD and Alzheimer's disease 
(nâ=â29).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings provide evidence on the ability of a five-gene panel 
to diagnose early/mild PD, with a possible diagnostic value for detection of 
asymptomatic PD before overt expression of the disorder.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-7-26
PMCID: PMC3424147
PMID: 22651796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2850. Alzheimers Dement. 2012 Nov;8(6):463-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.09.230. Epub 
2012 May 30.

Risk of dementia in an elderly population of Parkinson's disease patients: a 
15-year population-based study.

Perez F(1), Helmer C, Foubert-Samier A, Auriacombe S, Dartigues JF, Tison F.

Author information:
(1)University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France; CHU de Bordeaux, PÃ´le Neurosciences 
Cliniques, Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND: The incidence of dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) is not fully 
known, and previous studies have provided a wide range of rates owing to 
variations in diagnostic criteria and methodologies used. We estimated the risk 
of dementia in newly diagnosed cases of PD in a population-based cohort of 
subjects aged >65 years.
METHODS: We performed repetitive systematic screening of PD diagnosis, cognitive 
performances, and clinical dementia during 15 years (at year 0, 3, 5, 8, 10, and 
15) in 3726 elderly subjects living at home in southwestern France (PAQUID). Two 
sets of diagnostic criteria for dementia in PD were considered: Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised criteria and 
Movement Disorders Society criteria.
RESULTS: Forty-four incident cases of PD occurred in the cohort; of these, 18 
(41%) developed dementia during a mean follow-up of 6.8 Â± 3.6 years. Incidence 
rate of dementia associated with PD was 74 per 1000 patient-years. The 
cumulative risk of dementia was approximately 25% and 50% after 5 and 10 years 
of follow-up, respectively. The relative risk for developing dementia in 
incident PD subjects compared with non-PD subjects was 2.47 (1.55-3.95). 
Equivalent estimations were obtained with Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised criteria or Movement Disorders Society 
criteria.
CONCLUSION: PD represents a high-risk stage for dementia in the general 
population.

Copyright Â© 2012 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.09.230
PMID: 22651942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2851. Lancet Neurol. 2012 Jul;11(7):589-96. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70106-0. Epub 
2012 Jun 1.

Methylphenidate for gait hypokinesia and freezing in patients with Parkinson's 
disease undergoing subthalamic stimulation: a multicentre, parallel, randomised, 
placebo-controlled trial.

Moreau C(1), Delval A, Defebvre L, Dujardin K, Duhamel A, Petyt G, Vuillaume I, 
Corvol JC, Brefel-Courbon C, Ory-Magne F, Guehl D, Eusebio A, Fraix V, Saulnier 
PJ, Lagha-Boukbiza O, Durif F, Faighel M, Giordana C, Drapier S, MaltÃªte D, 
Tranchant C, Houeto JL, DebÃ» B, Sablonniere B, Azulay JP, Tison F, Rascol O, 
Vidailhet M, DestÃ©e A, Bloem BR, Bordet R, Devos D; Parkgait-II study group.

Collaborators: ArguillÃ¨re S, Bichon A, Bleuse S, Borg M, Burbaud P, Bubrovszky 
M, Choucha W, Cohelo-Braga MC, Damier P, Debilly B, Defer G, Delliaux M, 
Derkinderen P, Dupouy S, Fluchere F, Fleury O, Girault N, Grabli D, Hesekamp H, 
Hossein-Foucher C, Krack P, Kreisler A, Lefaucheur R, LhommÃ©e E, Mahieu F, Ouk 
T, Pollak P, Renou P, Rouaix N, Schmitt E, Simonin C, Talmant V, Verin M, 
Warembourg F, Welter ML, Witjas T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Movement Disorders and Neurology, Lille Nord de France 
University, CHU Lille, Lille, France.

Erratum in
    Lancet Neurol. 2012 Aug;11(8):658.
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Mar;15(3):241.
    Lancet Neurol. 2016 Mar;15(3):241.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2012 Jul;11(7):569-70.

BACKGROUND: Despite optimum medical management, many patients with Parkinson's 
disease are incapacitated by gait disorders including freezing of gait. We aimed 
to assess whether methylphenidate--through its combined action on dopamine and 
noradrenaline reuptake--would improve gait disorders and freezing of gate in 
patients with advanced Parkinson's disease without dementia who also received 
subthalamic nucleus stimulation.
METHODS: This multicentre, parallel, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 
randomised trial was done in 13 movement disorders departments in France between 
October, 2009, and December, 2011. Eligible patients were younger than 80 years 
and had Parkinson's disease, severe gait disorders, and freezing of gate despite 
optimised treatment of motor fluctuations with dopaminergic drugs and 
subthalamic stimulation. We randomly assigned patients (1:1 with a computer 
random-number generator in blocks of four) to receive methylphenidate (1 mg/kg 
per day) or placebo capsules for 90 days. Patients, their carers, study staff, 
investigators, and data analysts were masked to treatment allocation. To control 
for confounding effects of levodopa we assessed patients under standardised 
conditions with an acute levodopa challenge. Our primary outcome was a change in 
the number of steps during the stand-walk-sit (SWS) test without levodopa. We 
compared the respective mean numbers of steps at day 90 in the methylphenidate 
and placebo groups in a covariance analysis and adjusted for baseline 
differences. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number 
NCT00914095.
FINDINGS: We screened 81 patients and randomly assigned 35 to receive 
methylphenidate and 34 to receive placebo. 33 patients in the methylphenidate 
group and 32 patients in the placebo group completed the study. Efficacy 
outcomes were assessed in the patients who completed the study. Compared with 
patients in the placebo group (median 33 steps [IQR 26-45]), the patients in the 
methylphenidate group made fewer steps at 90 days (31 [26-42], F((1, 62))=6Â·1, 
p=0Â·017, adjusted size effect 0Â·61). Adverse events were analysed in all 
randomly assigned patients. There were significantly more adverse events in the 
methylphenidate group compared with placebo. Patients on methylphenidate had a 
significant increase in heart rate (mean 3Â·6 [SD 7Â·2] beats per min) and 
decrease in weight (mean 2Â·2 [SD 1Â·8] kg) compared with the placebo group.
INTERPRETATION: Methylphenidate improved gait hypokinesia and freezing in 
patients with advanced Parkinson's disease receiving subthalamic nucleus 
stimulation. Methylphenidate represents a therapeutic option in the treatment of 
gait disorders at the advanced stage of Parkinson's disease. The long term 
risk-benefit balance should be further studied.
FUNDING: French Ministry of Health and Novartis Pharma.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(12)70106-0
PMID: 22658702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2852. Neuropsychologia. 2012 Jul;50(9):2176-86. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.05.021. Epub 2012 May 31.

Probabilistic classification learning with corrective feedback is selectively 
impaired in early Huntington's disease--evidence for the role of the striatum in 
learning with feedback.

Holl AK(1), Wilkinson L, Tabrizi SJ, Painold A, Jahanshahi M.

Author information:
(1)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL, 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, WC1N3BG, United Kingdom. 
anna.holl@klinikum-graz.at

In general, declarative learning is associated with the activation of the medial 
temporal lobes (MTL), while the basal ganglia (BG) are considered the substrate 
for procedural learning. More recently it has been demonstrated the distinction 
of these systems may not be as absolute as previously thought and that not only 
the explicit or implicit nature of the memory task alone is important for the 
distinction of MTL or BG systems. Nevertheless, patients with BG dysfunction - 
such as patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) or Huntington's disease (HD) - 
are considered to be impaired at implicit learning. However, a more recent study 
demonstrated that one implicit learning task, probabilistic classification 
learning (examples include the weather prediction (WPT) and Mr. Potato Head 
tasks) is only impaired in PD when it involves learning with corrective feedback 
(FB) but not when it involves learning in a paired associate (PA) manner, 
without feedback. Therefore, it has been argued that the presence of feedback 
rather than the implicit nature of these tasks determines whether or not the BG 
are recruited. As patients with HD as well as those with PD, have also been 
shown to be impaired on the standard FB based version of probabilistic 
classification learning, the question remains as to whether or not there is a 
similar selective deficit in FB but not PA based probabilistic classification 
learning in HD. 18 patients with early HD and 18 healthy controls completed FB 
and PA versions of the WPT task. Relative to controls, HD patients were 
selectively impaired at WPT learning with feedback. These findings are 
consistent with previous evidence from studies of probabilistic classification 
learning in PD. Unlike PD, selective deficits in WPT learning in HD cannot be 
attributed to the effects of dopaminergic medication and must be directly 
related to BG dysfunction; for instance even in early HD, only 50% of the 
neurons in the medial head of caudate remain. We conclude that the striatum is 
important for WPT learning with feedback. Our findings are consistent with 
imaging evidence showing recruitment of the caudate during FB based WPT 
learning, while the MTL is associated with PA based learning.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.05.021
PMID: 22659110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2853. Neurotox Res. 2012 Oct;22(3):231-48. doi: 10.1007/s12640-012-9331-x. Epub 2012 
Jun 6.

Oxidative damage to RNA in aging and neurodegenerative disorders.

Nunomura A(1), Moreira PI, Castellani RJ, Lee HG, Zhu X, Smith MA, Perry G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Interdisciplinary Graduate School of Medicine 
and Engineering, University of Yamanashi, 1110 Shimokato, Chuo, Yamanashi 
409-3898, Japan. anunomura@yamanashi.ac.jp

An age-associated increase in oxidative damage to nucleic acids, predominantly 
to RNA, has been recently demonstrated in neurons of human and rodent brains, 
which may play a fundamental role in the development of age-associated 
neurodegeneration. Indeed, more prominent levels of neuronal RNA oxidation 
compared to normal aging have been described in neurodegenerative disorders 
including Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Moreover, oxidative damage to RNA has been found 
also in cellular and animal model of neurodegeneration. Oxidative RNA 
modification can occur not only in protein-coding RNAs but also in non-coding 
RNAs that are recently revealed to contribute towards the complexity of the 
mammalian brain. It has been hypothesized that RNA oxidation causes aberrant 
expression of microRNAs and proteins and subsequently initiates inappropriate 
cell fate pathways. While less lethal than mutations in the genome and not 
inheritable, such sublethal damage to cells might be associated with underlying 
mechanisms of degeneration, especially age-associated neurodegeneration. Of 
particular interest, the accumulating evidence obtained from studies on either 
human samples or experimental models coincidentally suggests that RNA oxidation 
is a feature in neurons of aging brain and more prominently observed in 
vulnerable neurons at early-stage of age-associated neurodegenerative disorders, 
indicating that RNA oxidation actively contributes to the background, the onset, 
and the development of the disorders. Further investigations aimed at 
understanding of the processing mechanisms related to oxidative RNA damage and 
its consequences may provide significant insights into the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative disorders and lead to better therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1007/s12640-012-9331-x
PMID: 22669748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2854. Mov Disord. 2012 Jun;27(7):858-63. doi: 10.1002/mds.25003. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Psychosis in Parkinson's disease without dementia: common and comorbid with 
other non-motor symptoms.

Lee AH(1), Weintraub D.

Author information:
(1)Perelman School of Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Psychosis in Parkinson's disease (PD) is common and associated with a range of 
negative outcomes. Dementia and psychosis are highly correlated in PD, but the 
frequency and correlates of psychosis in patients without cognitive impairment 
are not well understood. One hundred and ninety-one non-demented PD patients at 
two movement disorders centers participated in a study of neuropsychiatric 
complications in PD and completed a detailed neurological and neuropsychiatric 
assessment, including the rater-administered Parkinson Psychosis Rating Scale 
for hallucinations, delusions, and minor symptoms of psychosis (illusions and 
misidentification of persons). Psychotic symptoms were present in 21.5% of the 
sample. Visual hallucinations were most common (13.6%), followed by auditory 
hallucinations (6.8%), illusions or misidentification of people (7.3%), and 
paranoid ideation (4.7%). Visual hallucinations and illusions or 
misidentification of people were the most common comorbid symptoms (3.1%). 
Depression (P = 0.01) and rapid eye movement behavior disorder symptoms (P = 
0.03) were associated with psychosis in a multivariable model. The odds of 
experiencing psychotic symptoms were approximately five times higher in patients 
with comorbid disorders of depression and sleep-wakefulness. Even in patients 
without global cognitive impairment, psychosis in PD is common and most highly 
correlated with other non-motor symptoms. Screening for psychosis should occur 
at all stages of PD as part of a broad non-motor assessment. In addition, these 
findings suggest a common neural substrate for disturbances of perception, mood, 
sleep-wakefulness, and incipient cognitive decline in PD.

Copyright Â© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25003
PMCID: PMC3511789
PMID: 22674352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Relevant conflicts of interest/financial 
disclosures: Nothing to report. Full financial disclosures and author roles may 
be found in the online version of this article.


2855. Ann Med. 2013 Feb;45(1):74-8. doi: 10.3109/07853890.2012.663929. Epub 2012 Jun 
11.

The prognostic capacity of B-type natriuretic peptide on cognitive disorder 
varies by age.

Hiltunen M(1), Kerola T, Kettunen R, Hartikainen S, Sulkava R, Vuolteenaho O, 
Nieminen T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, 
FI-00290 Helsinki, Finland.

INTRODUCTION: It is known that blood levels of natriuretic peptides associate 
with cognitive disorder among the middle-aged. We aimed to test whether this 
association is valid in an older population aged 75 years or older.
METHODS: A total of 601 older subjects aged 75 or older participated in the 
study. A subgroup of 137 with a diagnosed cognitive disorder were tested for 
natriuretic peptides (ANP, NT-proANP, and BNP), and compared with age-matched 
controls (n = 464). The control group was followed-up for 5 years, and the 
association of the baseline BNP with the occurrence of cognitive impairment was 
studied.
RESULTS: In the youngest age tertile (75-78 y), BNP was significantly associated 
with a diagnosed cognitive disorder when other factors with a known effect on 
natriuretic peptides were taken into account. In the oldest tertile (83-96 y), 
higher BNP values suggested the absence of cognitive dysfunction. ANP and 
NT-proANP did not associate with the presence of cognitive impairment. Among the 
control group, BNP predicted a cognitive disorder at follow-up, but only in the 
youngest tertile.
CONCLUSIONS: The previously found link between a high BNP concentration and 
cognitive disorder in older people is only valid among those aged less than 79 
years.

DOI: 10.3109/07853890.2012.663929
PMID: 22680229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2856. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(6):e1002707. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002707. Epub 2012 Jun 
7.

Brain expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) identifies human 
disease-associated variants.

Zou F(1), Chai HS, Younkin CS, Allen M, Crook J, Pankratz VS, Carrasquillo MM, 
Rowley CN, Nair AA, Middha S, Maharjan S, Nguyen T, Ma L, Malphrus KG, Palusak 
R, Lincoln S, Bisceglio G, Georgescu C, Kouri N, Kolbert CP, Jen J, Haines JL, 
Mayeux R, Pericak-Vance MA, Farrer LA, Schellenberg GD; Alzheimer's Disease 
Genetics Consortium; Petersen RC, Graff-Radford NR, Dickson DW, Younkin SG, 
Ertekin-Taner N.

Collaborators: Apostolova LG, Arnold SE, Baldwin CT, Barber R, Barmada MM, Beach 
T, Beecham GW, Beekly D, Bennett DA, Bigio EH, Bird TD, Blacker D, Boeve BF, 
Bowen JD, Boxer A, Burke JR, Buros J, Buxbaum JD, Cairns NJ, Cantwell LB, Cao C, 
Carlson CS, Carney RM, Carroll SL, Chui HC, Clark DG, Corneveaux J, Cotman CW, 
Crane PK, Cruchaga C, Cummings JL, De Jager PL, DeCarli C, DeKosky ST, Demirci 
FY, Diaz-Arrastia R, Dick M, Dombroski BA, Duara R, Ellis WG, Evans D, Faber KM, 
Fallon KB, Farlow MR, Ferris S, Foroud TM, Frosch MP, Galasko DR, Gallins PJ, 
Ganguli M, Gearing M, Geschwind DH, Ghetti B, Gilbert JR, Gilman S, Giordani B, 
Glass JD, Goate AM, Green RC, Growdon JH, Hakonarson H, Hamilton RL, Hardy J, 
Harrell LE, Head E, Honig LS, Huentelman MJ, Hulette CM, Hyman BT, Jarvik GP, 
Jicha GA, Jin LW, Johnson N, Jun G, Kamboh I, Karlawish J, Karydas A, Kauwe JS, 
Kaye JA, Kim R, Koo EH, Kowall NW, Kramer P, Kukull WA, Lah JJ, Larson EB, Levey 
AI, Lieberman AP, Lopez OL, Lunetta KL, Mack WJ, Marson DC, Martin ER, Martiniuk 
F, Mash DC, Masliah E, McCormick WC, McCurry SM, McDavid AN, McKee AC, Mesulam 
M, Miller BL, Miller CA, Miller JW, Montine TJ, Morris JC, Myers AJ, Naj AC, 
Nowotny P, Parisi JE, Perl DP, Peskind E, Poon WW, Potter H, Quinn JF, Raj A, 
Rajbhandary RA, Raskind M, Reiman EM, Reisberg B, Reitz C, Ringman JM, Roberson 
ED, Rogaeva E, Rosenberg RN, Sano M, Saykin AJ, Schneider JA, Schneider LS, 
Seeley W, Shelanski ML, Slifer MA, Smith CD, Sonnen JA, Spina S, George-Hyslop 
PS, Stern RA, Tanzi RE, Trojanowski JQ, Troncoso JC, Tsuang DW, Van Deerlin VM, 
Vardarajan BN, Vinters HV, Vonsattel JP, Wang LS, Weintraub S, Welsh-Bohmer KA, 
Williamson J, Woltjer RL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.

Genetic variants that modify brain gene expression may also influence risk for 
human diseases. We measured expression levels of 24,526 transcripts in brain 
samples from the cerebellum and temporal cortex of autopsied subjects with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD, cerebellar n=197, temporal cortex n=202) and with other 
brain pathologies (non-AD, cerebellar n=177, temporal cortex n=197). We 
conducted an expression genome-wide association study (eGWAS) using 213,528 
cisSNPs within Â± 100 kb of the tested transcripts. We identified 2,980 
cerebellar cisSNP/transcript level associations (2,596 unique cisSNPs) 
significant in both ADs and non-ADs (q<0.05, p=7.70 Ã 10(-5)-1.67 Ã 10(-82)). Of 
these, 2,089 were also significant in the temporal cortex (p=1.85 Ã 10(-5)-1.70 
Ã 10(-141)). The top cerebellar cisSNPs had 2.4-fold enrichment for human 
disease-associated variants (p<10(-6)). We identified novel cisSNP/transcript 
associations for human disease-associated variants, including progressive 
supranuclear palsy SLCO1A2/rs11568563, Parkinson's disease (PD) MMRN1/rs6532197, 
Paget's disease OPTN/rs1561570; and we confirmed others, including PD 
MAPT/rs242557, systemic lupus erythematosus and ulcerative colitis 
IRF5/rs4728142, and type 1 diabetes mellitus RPS26/rs1701704. In our eGWAS, 
there was 2.9-3.3 fold enrichment (p<10(-6)) of significant cisSNPs with 
suggestive AD-risk association (p<10(-3)) in the Alzheimer's Disease Genetics 
Consortium GWAS. These results demonstrate the significant contributions of 
genetic factors to human brain gene expression, which are reliably detected 
across different brain regions and pathologies. The significant enrichment of 
brain cisSNPs among disease-associated variants advocates gene expression 
changes as a mechanism for many central nervous system (CNS) and non-CNS 
diseases. Combined assessment of expression and disease GWAS may provide 
complementary information in discovery of human disease variants with functional 
implications. Our findings have implications for the design and interpretation 
of eGWAS in general and the use of brain expression quantitative trait loci in 
the study of human disease genetics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002707
PMCID: PMC3369937
PMID: 22685416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: NR Graff-Radford has served as a consultant to 
Codman and received grant support from Elan Pharmaceutical Research, Pfizer 
Pharmaceuticals, Medivation, and Forrest. RC Petersen has been a consultant to 
GE Healthcare and Elan Pharmaceuticals, has served on a data safety monitoring 
committee for Pfizer and Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy, and has provided a CME 
lecture for Novartis. ADGC Authors: T.D.B. received licensing fees from and is 
on the speaker's bureau of Athena Diagnostics. M.R.F. receives research funding 
from BristolMyersSquibb Company, Danone Research, Elan Pharmaceuticals, Eli 
Lilly, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, OctaPharma AG, Pfizer, and Sonexa Therapeutics; 
receives honoraria as scientific consultant from Accera, Astellas Pharma US 
Inc., Baxter, Bayer Pharmaceuticals Corporation, BristolMyersSquibb, Eisai 
Medical Research, GE Healthcare, Medavante, Medivation, Merck, Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals, Pfizer, Prana Biotechnology, QR Pharma, The sanofi-aventis 
Group, and Toyama Chemical; and is speaker for Eisai Medical Research, Forest 
Laboratories, Pfizer, and Novartis Pharmaceuticals. A.M.G. has research funding 
from AstraZeneca, Pfizer and Genentech, and has received remuneration for giving 
talks at Pfizer and Genentech. R.C.P. is on the Safety Monitory Committee of 
Pfizer (Wyeth) and a consultant to the Safety Monitoring Committee at Janssen 
Alzheimer's Immunotherapy Program (Elan), to Elan Pharmaceuticals, and to GE 
Healthcare. R.E.T. is a consultant to Eisai, Japan, in the area of Alzheimer's 
genetics and a shareholder in, and consultant to, Pathway Genomics, San Diego, 
CA.


2857. Horm Behav. 2013 Feb;63(2):308-14. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.05.013. Epub 2012 
Jun 8.

Risk factors for Parkinson's disease may differ in men and women: an exploratory 
study.

Savica R(1), Grossardt BR, Bower JH, Ahlskog JE, Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, College of 
Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Although several environmental and genetic risk or protective factors have been 
associated with Parkinson's disease (PD), their interactions overall and in men 
and women separately remain unknown. We used the medical records-linkage system 
of the Rochester Epidemiology Project to identify 196 subjects who developed PD 
in Olmsted County, MN, from 1976 through 1995. Each incident case was matched by 
age (Â±1 year) and sex to a general population control. We considered the 
following 12 risk or protective factors: personal history of head trauma, 
pesticide use, immunologic diseases, anemia, hysterectomy (in women only), 
cigarette smoking, coffee consumption, and education; and family history of 
parkinsonism, essential tremor, dementia, or psychiatric disorders. We used 
recursive partitioning analyses to explore interactions overall and in men and 
women separately and used logistic regression analyses to test for interactions. 
In the overall group, we observed the independent effects of anemia, lack of 
coffee consumption (never vs. ever), and head trauma; however, the findings were 
different in men and women. In men, we observed the independent effects of lack 
of coffee consumption (never vs. ever), head trauma, and pesticide use, and a 
suggestive synergistic interaction between immunologic diseases and family 
history of dementia. By contrast, in women, anemia was the most important factor 
and we observed a suggestive synergistic interaction between anemia and higher 
education. Risk factors for PD and their interactions may differ in men and 
women.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2012.05.013
PMCID: PMC3477259
PMID: 22687345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2858. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2012;33(4):250-4. doi: 10.1159/000339357. Epub 2012 
Jun 8.

Lack of genetic association of the UCHL1 gene with Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia.

Shibata N(1), Motoi Y, Tomiyama H, Ohnuma T, Kuerban B, Tomson K, Komatsu M, 
Hattori N, Arai H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. nshibata@juntendo.ac.jp

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Several candidate genes were suggested to modify the 
susceptibility to both Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Symptoms of dementia are found in approximately 30% of PD patients. Both 
apolipoprotein E (APO E) and ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 (UCHL1) are 
neuropathogenic proteins for both diseases. The aim of this study was to 
investigate whether polymorphisms of both genes are associated with AD and PD 
with dementia (PDD).
METHODS: The APO E polymorphism and 5 common single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) of the UCHL1 gene were analyzed using a case-control study design.
RESULTS: Although APO E4 affected the onset of AD, the 5 SNPs of the UCHL1 gene 
were not associated with risk for AD. Linkage disequilibrium (LD) analysis of 
our Japanese data set showed that the SNPs of the UCHL1 gene are part of one LD 
block. Although one SNP, rs4861387, of the UCHL1 gene showed marginal 
association with PDD, we did not detect any association between the other SNPs 
and PDD.
CONCLUSION: The common SNPs of UCHL1 are not major risk factors for AD. Since 
our analyses on PDD are preliminary, further genetic studies on APO E, UCHL1 and 
PD with and without dementia are needed.

Copyright Â© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000339357
PMID: 22688354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2859. Epilepsia. 2012 Aug;53(8):1282-93. doi: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03528.x. Epub 
2012 Jun 12.

The somatic comorbidity of epilepsy: a weighty but often unrecognized burden.

Gaitatzis A(1), Sisodiya SM, Sander JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, SEIN-Epilepsy Institute in 
Netherlands Foundation, Heemstede, The Netherlands. agaitatzis@sein.nl

A range of medical and neurologic disorders occurs more frequently in people 
with epilepsy than in the general population and constitutes its somatic 
comorbidity. Common examples include cardiac, gastrointestinal, and respiratory 
disorders; stroke; dementia; and migraine. Alzheimer's disease and migraine are 
not only more common in epilepsy but are also risk factors for the development 
of seizures, suggesting a bidirectional association and shared disease 
mechanisms. Less well-appreciated associations with epilepsy include Parkinson's 
disease and obstructive sleep apnea. The association between epilepsy and other 
conditions can be due to a variety of interacting genetic, biologic, and 
environmental factors. We propose an etiologic classification of comorbidity 
into uncertain (coincidence or unknown), causal (cause), shared risk factors 
(common disease mechanisms or shared predisposing risk factors), and resultant 
(consequence). Co-occurrence of other conditions in a person with epilepsy can 
complicate diagnosis or have adverse prognostic implications. Management of 
these conditions may facilitate the treatment of epilepsy, as in the case of 
obstructive sleep apnea. The presence of somatic disorders in epilepsy is 
associated with increased health care needs, poorer health-related quality of 
life, and premature mortality. Prevention, identification, and adequate 
treatment of comorbid disorders in epilepsy should be an important part of 
epilepsy management at all levels of care.

Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Â© 2012 International League Against Epilepsy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1528-1167.2012.03528.x
PMID: 22691064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2860. Mov Disord. 2012 Jul;27(8):965-73. doi: 10.1002/mds.25048. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

Brain amyloid and cognition in Lewy body diseases.

Gomperts SN(1), Locascio JJ, Marquie M, Santarlasci AL, Rentz DM, Maye J, 
Johnson KA, Growdon JH.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, 15 Parkman Street, Boston, MA 02114,USA.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2013 Mar;28(3):406.
    Mov Disord. 2013 Mar;28(3):407.

Many patients with PD develop PD with dementia (PDD), a syndrome that overlaps 
clinically and pathologically with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB); PDD and DLB 
differ chiefly in the relative timing of dementia and parkinsonism. Brain 
amyloid deposition is an early feature of DLB and may account, in part, for its 
early dementia. We sought to confirm this hypothesis and also to determine 
whether amyloid accumulation contributes to cognitive impairment and dementia in 
the broad range of parkinsonian diseases. Twenty-nine cognitively healthy PD, 14 
PD subjects with mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), 18 with DLB, 12 with PDD, 
and 85 healthy control subjects (HCS) underwent standardized neurologic and 
neuropsychological examinations and Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) imaging with 
PET. Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotypes were obtained in many patients. PiB 
retention was expressed as the distribution volume ratio using a cerebellar 
tissue reference. PiB retention was significantly higher in DLB than in any of 
the other diagnostic groups. PiB retention did not differ across PDD, PD-MCI, 
PD, and HCS. Amyloid burden increased with age and with the presence of the ApoE 
Îµ4 allele in all patient groups. Only in the DLB group was amyloid deposition 
associated with impaired cognition. DLB subjects have higher amyloid burden than 
subjects with PDD, PD-MCI, PD, or HCS; amyloid deposits are linked to cognitive 
impairment only in DLB. Early amyloid deposits in DLB relative to PDD may 
account for their difference in the timing of dementia and parkinsonism.

Copyright Â© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25048
PMCID: PMC3725259
PMID: 22693110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Financial Disclosure/Conflict of Interest: None


2861. Parkinsons Dis. 2012;2012:142372. doi: 10.1155/2012/142372. Epub 2012 May 29.

The anticholinesterase phenserine and its enantiomer posiphen as 
5'untranslated-region-directed translation blockers of the Parkinson's alpha 
synuclein expression.

Mikkilineni S(1), Cantuti-Castelvetri I, Cahill CM, Balliedier A, Greig NH, 
Rogers JT.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital (East), CNY2, 149, 
13th Street, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

There is compelling support for limiting expression of alpha-synuclein (Î±-syn) 
in the brains of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. An increase of SNCA gene 
copy number can genetically cause familial PD where increased dose of this 
pathogenic protein correlates with severity of symptoms (triplication of the 
SNCA gene causes dementia in PD patients). Gene promoter polymorphisms were 
shown to increase Î±-synuclein expression as a risk for PD. Cholinesterase 
inhibitors can clinically slow cognitive decline in the later stages of PD 
etiology similar to their widespread use in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Pertinent 
to this, we identified that the well-tolerated anticholinesterase, phenserine, 
blocked neural SNCA mRNA translation and tested for targeting via its 
5'untranslated region (5'UTR) in a manner similar to its action to limit the 
expression of the AD-specific amyloid precursor protein (APP). Posiphen, its 
better-tolerated (+) enantiomer (devoid of anticholinesterase action), repressed 
neural Î±-synuclein translation. Primary metabolic analogs of posiphen were, 
likewise, characterized using primary fetal neurons grown ex vivo from the 
brains of Parkinson's transgenic mice expressing the human SNCA gene.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/142372
PMCID: PMC3368596
PMID: 22693681


2862. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Nov;18(9):1027-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.05.020. Epub 2012 Jun 12.

Age at onset in Huntington's disease: replication study on the association of 
HAP1.

Karadima G(1), Dimovasili C, Koutsis G, Vassilopoulos D, Panas M.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenetics Unit, Department of Neurology, Eginition Hospital, University 
of Athens, 74 Vas. Sofias Av., 11528 Athens, Greece. gkaradim@med.uoa.gr

In recent years two association studies investigating the HAP1 T441M (rs4523977) 
polymorphism as a potential modifying factor of the age at onset (AAO) of 
Huntington's disease (HD), have been reported. Initially evidence for 
association was found between the M441 risk allele and the AAO. Subsequently, a 
second study, although failing to replicate these findings, found evidence for 
association between the same risk allele and AAO of motor symptoms (mAAO). In 
the present study, the role of the HAP1 T441M polymorphism as a modifier of the 
AAO in HD was investigated in a cohort of 298 Greek HD patients. In this cohort 
the CAG repeat number accounted for 55% of the variance in AAO. No association 
was found between the HAP1 T441M polymorphism and the AAO of HD.

Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.05.020
PMID: 22698993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2863. Neurologia. 2014 Nov-Dec;29(9):541-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nrl.2012.04.001. Epub 2012 
Jun 14.

Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease: environmental risk factors.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Campdelacreu J(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de NeurologÃ­a, Hospital Universitari de Bellvitge, L'Hospitalet de 
Llobregat, EspaÃ±a. Electronic address: 33357jcf@Comb.Cat.

INTRODUCTION: The purpose of this review is to update and summarise available 
evidence on environmental risk factors that have been associated with risk of 
Parkinson disease (PD) or Alzheimer disease (AD) and discuss their potential 
mechanisms.
DEVELOPMENT: Evidence consistently suggests that a higher risk of PD is 
associated with pesticides and that a higher risk of AD is associated with 
pesticides, hypertension and high cholesterol levels in middle age, 
hyperhomocysteinaemia, smoking, traumatic brain injury and depression. There is 
weak evidence suggesting that higher risk of PD is associated with high milk 
consumption in men, high iron intake, chronic anaemia and traumatic brain 
injury. Weak evidence also suggests that a higher risk of AD is associated with 
high aluminium intake through drinking water, excessive exposure to 
electromagnetic fields from electrical grids, DM and hyperinsulinaemia, obesity 
in middle age, excessive alcohol consumption and chronic anaemia. Evidence 
consistently suggests that a lower risk of PD is associated with hyperuricaemia, 
tobacco and coffee use, while a lower risk of AD is associated with moderate 
alcohol consumption, physical exercise, perimenopausal hormone replacement 
therapy and good cognitive reserve. Weak evidence suggests that lower risk of PD 
is associated with increased vitamin E intake, alcohol, tea, NSAIDs, and 
vigorous physical exercise, and that lower risk of AD is associated with the 
Mediterranean diet, coffee and habitual NSAID consumption.
CONCLUSIONS: Several environmental factors contribute significantly to risk of 
PD and AD. Some may already be active in the early stages of life, and some may 
interact with other genetic factors. Population-based strategies to modify such 
factors could potentially result in fewer cases of PD or AD.

Copyright Â© 2012 Sociedad EspaÃ±ola de NeurologÃ­a. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nrl.2012.04.001
PMID: 22703631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2864. Psychogeriatrics. 2012 Jun;12(2):106-14. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2012.00409.x.

Molecular imaging of dementia.

Mori T(1), Maeda J, Shimada H, Higuchi M, Shinotoh H, Ueno S, Suhara T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Imaging Center, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, 
Japan.

Diagnosis and treatment strategies for dementia are based on the sensitive and 
specific detection of the incipient neuropathological characteristics, combined 
with emerging treatments that counteract molecular processes in its 
pathogenesis. Positron emission tomography (PET) is used for diverse clinical 
and basic studies on dementia with a wide range of radiotracers. Approaches to 
visualize amyloid deposition in human brains non-invasively with PET depend on 
imaging agents reacting with amyloid fibrils. The most widely used tracer is 
[(11) C]-6-OH-BTA-1, also known as Pittsburgh Compound-B, which has a high 
affinity to amyloid Î² peptide (AÎ²) aggregates. Some (18) F-labeled amyloid 
ligands with a longer radioactive half-life have also been developed for broader 
clinical applications. In addition, there have been demonstrated advantages of 
tracers with high specific radioactivity in the sensitive detection of amyloid, 
which have indicated the significance of AÎ²-N3-pyroglutamate as a new diagnostic 
and therapeutic target. Furthermore, beneficial outcomes of AÎ² and tau 
immunization in humans and mouse models have highlighted crucial roles of 
immunocompetent glia in the protection of neurons against amyloid toxicities. 
The utility of PET with a radioligand for translocator protein as a biomarker 
for tau-triggered toxicity, and as a complement to amyloid and tau imaging for 
diagnostic assessment of tauopathies with and without AÎ² pathologies, has also 
been demonstrated. Meanwhile, brain cholinergic function can be estimated by 
measuring acetylcholinesterase activity in the brain with PET and radiolabeled 
acetylcholine analogues. It has been reported that patients with early 
Parkinson's disease exhibit a reduction in acetylcholinesterase activity in the 
cerebral cortex, and this decline is more profound in patients with Parkinson's 
disease with dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies than in patients with 
Parkinson's disease without dementia. The Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative was a multicentre research project conducted over 6âyears that 
studied changes in cognition, brain structure, and biomarkers in healthy elderly 
controls and subjects with mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease. An 
international workgroup of the National Institute on Aging-Alzheimer's 
Association has suggested that Alzheimer's disease would be optimally treated 
before significant cognitive impairment, defined as a 'presymptomatic' or 
'preclinical' stage. Therefore, PET will be of technical importance for both 
clinical and basic research aimed at prodromal pathologies of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Â© 2012 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics Â© 2012 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2012.00409.x
PMID: 22712644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2865. Ann Neurol. 2012 Jun;71(6):850-4. doi: 10.1002/ana.23568.

Somatic mitochondrial DNA mutations in early Parkinson and incidental Lewy body 
disease.

Lin MT(1), Cantuti-Castelvetri I, Zheng K, Jackson KE, Tan YB, Arzberger T, Lees 
AJ, Betensky RA, Beal MF, Simon DK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Cornell Medical College, New 
York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurol. 2012 Aug;259(8):1761-3.
    Ann Neurol. 2012 Nov;72(5):823; author reply 823-4.

Somatic mutations in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are hypothesized to play a role 
in Parkinson disease (PD), but large increases in mtDNA mutations have not 
previously been found in PD, potentially because neurons with high mutation 
levels degenerate and thus are absent in late stage tissue. To address this 
issue, we studied early stage PD cases and cases of incidental Lewy body disease 
(ILBD), which is thought to represent presymptomatic PD. We show for the first 
time that mtDNA mutation levels in substantia nigra neurons are significantly 
elevated in this group of early PD and ILBD cases.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.23568
PMCID: PMC3383820
PMID: 22718549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2866. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2012;33(4):273-81. doi: 10.1159/000339363. Epub 2012 
Jun 21.

Retrospective survey of prodromal symptoms in dementia with Lewy bodies: 
comparison with Alzheimer's disease.

Chiba Y(1), Fujishiro H, Iseki E, Ota K, Kasanuki K, Hirayasu Y, Satoa K.

Author information:
(1)PET/CT Dementia Research Center, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical 
Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Non-motor symptoms are recognized to enable the early detection of 
Parkinson's disease (PD). It remains unknown when those symptoms appear in 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHOD: We investigated the prevalence of 15 non-motor symptoms of PD at the 
onset of memory loss based on a standardized worksheet in 34 patients with DLB, 
32 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 30 normal controls.
RESULTS: DLB patients exhibited a significantly higher prevalence of olfactory 
dysfunction, constipation, increased saliva and signs of rapid eye movement 
sleep behavior disorder at the onset of memory loss than AD patients and normal 
controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Paying attention to non-motor symptoms of PD may help DLB diagnosis 
in the early stage, especially in terms of its differentiation from AD.

Copyright Â© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000339363
PMID: 22722638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2867. Mov Disord. 2012 Jun;27(7):913-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.25037. Epub 2012 May 30.

A single-question screen for rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder: a 
multicenter validation study.

Postuma RB(1), Arnulf I, Hogl B, Iranzo A, Miyamoto T, Dauvilliers Y, Oertel W, 
Ju YE, Puligheddu M, Jennum P, Pelletier A, Wolfson C, Leu-Semenescu S, 
Frauscher B, Miyamoto M, Cochen De Cock V, Unger MM, Stiasny-Kolster K, Fantini 
ML, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, QuÃ©bec, Canada. ron.postuma@mcgill.ca

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is 
a parasomnia that is an important risk factor for Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
Lewy body dementia. Its prevalence is unknown. One barrier to determining 
prevalence is that current screening tools are too long for large-scale 
epidemiologic surveys. Therefore, we designed the REM Sleep Behavior Disorder 
Single-Question Screen (RBD1Q), a screening question for dream enactment with a 
simple yes/no response.
METHODS: Four hundred and eighty-four sleep-clinic-based participants (242 
idiopathic RBD patients and 242 controls) completed the screen during a 
multicenter case-control study. All participants underwent a polysomnogram to 
define gold-standard diagnosis according to standard criteria.
RESULTS: We found a sensitivity of 93.8% and a specificity of 87.2%. Sensitivity 
and specificity were similar in healthy volunteers, compared to controls or 
patients with other sleep diagnoses.
CONCLUSIONS: A single-question screen for RBD may reliably detect disease, with 
psychometric properties favorably comparable to those reported for longer 
questionnaires.

Copyright Â© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25037
PMCID: PMC4043389
PMID: 22729987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2868. Nutr Hosp. 2012 Mar-Apr;27(2):341-8. doi: 10.1590/S0212-16112012000200003.

[Enteral nutrition in neurological patients: is there enough vitamin D content 
in commonly used formulas?].

[Article in Spanish]

Botella Romero F(1), Alfaro MartÃ­nez JJ, Luna LÃ³pez V, Galicia MartÃ­n I; Grupo 
de Trabajo sobre Calcio y Vitamina D en NutriciÃ³n Enteral.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de EndocrinologÃ­a y NutriciÃ³n, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario 
de Albacete, Albacete, EspaÃ±a. fbotellar@sescam.jccm.es

INTRODUCTION: Vitamin D deficiency produces inadequate bone mineralization, 
proximal muscle weakness, abnormal gait and increased risk of falls and 
fractures. Moreover, in epidemiological studies, has been associated with 
increased risk of cancer, autoimmune diseases, type 1 and 2 diabetes, rheumatoid 
arthritis, multiple sclerosis, infectious diseases, cardiovascular diseases and 
depression. When synthesis through the skin by sun exposure is not possible and 
the patient can not eat by mouth, as in the advanced stages of various 
neurological diseases, the supply of vitamin D has to be done by enteral 
nutrition.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study is to review the role of vitamin D in a common 
group of neurological conditions that often require artificial nutrition and 
analyze whether the vitamin D of different enteral nutrition formulas is 
adequate to meet the needs of this group of patients.
RESULTS: Numerous studies have shown the association between vitamin D 
deficiency and increased incidence of dementia, stroke and other 
neurodegenerative diseases. Interventions aimed to increase levels of vit. D and 
its effects on functional (falls, pain, quality of life) and cardiovascular 
goals (cardiovascular death, stroke, myocardial infarction, cardiovascular risk 
factors) have obtained as highlight data a clear reduction of falls and 
fractures, while the evidence for the other parameters studied is still limited 
and inconsistent. The content of calcium and vitamin D of enteral formulas is 
legislated in our country. The total amount of vitamin D for a daily intake of 
1,500-2,000 kcal ranges between 300 and 1,600 IU/d (mean Â± SD: 32.9 Â± 8.5 mg/100 
kcal) in the complete formulas for enteral nutrition most commonly used. 50% of 
the diets studied, for an intake of 2,000 kcal/d, and 90% for an intake of 1,500 
kcal/d, provide less than 600 IU/d of vitamin D.
DISCUSSION: Some revised recently guidelines published recommendations of daily 
intake of vitamin D. The document published by the U.S. Institute of Medicine 
recommended for adults between 19 and 70 years, 600 IU/d and up from 70, 
proposes 800 IU/d of vitamin D. These amounts are deemed insufficient by other 
scientific societies to state that to achieve blood levels of 25 (OH) D equal or 
greater than 30 ng/ml may be required a daily intake of 1,500-2,000 IU and a 
number two or three times higher if previous deficiency exists.
CONCLUSIONS: Further controlled studies are needed to ascertain which is the 
appropriate dose of vitamin D in advanced stages of neurological disease, where 
sun exposure is difficult and unlikely. We suggest that the vitamin D content 
should probably be reconsidered in enteral nutrition formulas, which, in light 
of recent publications appear as clearly insufficient for standard energy 
intakes (1,500-2,000 kcal).

DOI: 10.1590/S0212-16112012000200003
PMID: 22732955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2869. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Jun;46(3):508-26. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.019.

Neurochemistry and the non-motor aspects of PD.

Ferrer I(1), LÃ³pez-Gonzalez I, Carmona M, DalfÃ³ E, Pujol A, MartÃ­nez A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, Service of Pathology, University Hospital of 
Bellvitge, Spain. 8082ifa@comb.es

Parkinson disease (PD) is a systemic disease with variegated non-motor deficits 
and neurological symptoms, including impaired olfaction, autonomic failure, 
cognitive impairment and psychiatric symptoms, in addition to the classical 
motor symptoms. Many non-motor symptoms appear before or in parallel with motor 
deficits and then worsen with disease progression. Although there is a 
relationship, albeit not causal, between motor symptoms and the presence of Lewy 
bodies (LBs) and neurites filled with abnormal Î±-synuclein, other neurological 
alterations are independent of the amount of Î±-synuclein inclusions in neurons 
and neurites, thereby indicating that different mechanisms probably converge in 
the degenerative process. This may apply to complex alterations interfering with 
olfactory and autonomic nervous systemfunctions, emotions, sleep regulation, and 
behavioral, cognitive and mental performance. Involvement of the cerebral cortex 
leading to impaired behavior and cognition is related to several convergent 
altered factors including: a. dopaminergic, noradrenergic, serotoninergic and 
cholinergic cortical innervation; b. synapses; c. cortical metabolism; d. 
mitochondrial function and energy production; e. oxidative damage; f. 
transcription; g. protein expression; h. lipid composition; and i. 
ubiquitinâproteasome system and autophagy, among others. This complex situation 
indicates that multiple subcellular failure in selected cell populations is 
difficult to reconcilewith a reductionistic scenario of a single causative 
cascade of events leading to non-motor symptoms in PD. Furthermore, these 
alterationsmay appear at early stages of the disease and may precede the 
appearance of substantial irreversible cell loss by years. These observations 
have important implications in the design of therapeutic approaches geared to 
prevention and treatment of PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.019
PMID: 22737710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2870. Age Ageing. 2012 Nov;41(6):765-70. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afs084. Epub 2012 Jun 27.

Sleepiness, parkinsonian features and sustained attention in mild Alzheimer's 
disease.

Park M(1), Hood MM, Shah RC, Fogg LF, Wyatt JK.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, Rush University Medical Center, 1653 W. Congress 
Parkway 6th Floor, JRB, Chicago, IL 60611, USA. margaret_park@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: we previously demonstrated that patients with mild Alzheimer's 
disease and parkinsonian features (ADÂ +Â PF) are at a higher risk of having 
daytime sleepiness than mild AD patients without PF (ADÂ -Â PF).
OBJECTIVE: to determine whether ADÂ +Â PF patients demonstrate a known a 
consequence of daytime sleepiness, reduced performance-based sustained 
attention, compared with ADÂ -Â PF patients.
METHODS: a nocturnal polysomnogram and a next-day multiple sleep latency test 
(MSLT) were performed. Between MSLT nap opportunities, a 10-min psychomotor 
vigilance test (PVT) was administered and analysed for reciprocal mean response 
times (IMEAN), number of lapses (LAPSE) and reciprocal mean slowest 10% (ISLOW).
RESULTS: a total of 35 patients met criteria (ADÂ +Â PF, nÂ =Â 16; ADÂ -Â PF, nÂ =Â 19). 
Comparatively, the ADÂ +Â PF group had slower IMEAN results [F((1,28))Â =Â 6.64, 
PÂ <Â 0.05] and higher LAPSE rates [F((1,27))Â =Â 7.57, PÂ <Â 0.05]. ISLOW measures 
were not different between groups. When accounting for MSLT results, IMEAN and 
LAPSE results were no longer significantly different between groups during 
morning tests, but remained significantly different on afternoon tests.
CONCLUSION: PFs in mild AD are associated with decreased sustained attention as 
measured by the PVT. Sleepiness did not fully account for the impairment in 
sustained attention, suggesting that the presence of PFs has an independent 
negative association with sustained attention in mild AD.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/afs084
PMID: 22743151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2871. Neurology. 2012 Jul 31;79(5):428-34. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31825dd383. Epub 
2012 Jun 27.

Environmental risk factors for REM sleep behavior disorder: a multicenter 
case-control study.

Postuma RB(1), Montplaisir JY, Pelletier A, Dauvilliers Y, Oertel W, Iranzo A, 
Ferini-Strambi L, Arnulf I, Hogl B, Manni R, Miyamoto T, Mayer G, 
Stiasny-Kolster K, Puligheddu M, Ju Y, Jennum P, Sonka K, Santamaria J, Fantini 
ML, Zucconi M, Leu-Semenescu S, Frauscher B, Terzaghi M, Miyamoto M, Unger MM, 
Cochen De Cock V, Wolfson C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Canada. ron.postuma@mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Neurology. 2012 Jul 31;79(5):402-3.
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Sep;8(9):476.

OBJECTIVE: Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder is a parasomnia characterized 
by dream enactment and is commonly a prediagnostic sign of parkinsonism and 
dementia. Since risk factors have not been defined, we initiated a multicenter 
case-control study to assess environmental and lifestyle risk factors for REM 
sleep behavior disorder.
METHODS: Cases were patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder who 
were free of dementia and parkinsonism, recruited from 13 International REM 
Sleep Behavior Disorder Study Group centers. Controls were matched according to 
age and sex. Potential environmental and lifestyle risk factors were assessed 
via standardized questionnaire. Unconditional logistic regression adjusting for 
age, sex, and center was conducted to investigate the environmental factors.
RESULTS: A total of 694 participants (347 patients, 347 controls) were 
recruited. Among cases, mean age was 67.7 Â± 9.6 years and 81.0% were male. Cases 
were more likely to smoke (ever smokers = 64.0% vs 55.5%, adjusted odds ratio 
[OR] = 1.43, p = 0.028). Caffeine and alcohol use were not different between 
cases and controls. Cases were more likely to report previous head injury (19.3% 
vs 12.7%, OR = 1.59, p = 0.037). Cases had fewer years of formal schooling (11.1 
Â± 4.4 years vs 12.7 Â± 4.3, p < 0.001), and were more likely to report having 
worked as farmers (19.7% vs 12.5% OR = 1.67, p = 0.022) with borderline increase 
in welding (17.8% vs 12.1%, OR = 1.53, p = 0.063). Previous occupational 
pesticide exposure was more prevalent in cases than controls (11.8% vs 6.1%, OR 
= 2.16, p = 0.008).
CONCLUSIONS: Smoking, head injury, pesticide exposure, and farming are potential 
risk factors for idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31825dd383
PMCID: PMC3405255
PMID: 22744670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2872. Dement Neuropsychol. 2012 Jul-Sep;6(3):137-144. doi: 
10.1590/S1980-57642012DN06030005.

Vascular Parkinsonism and cognitive impairment: literature review, Brazilian 
studies and case vignettes.

Vale TC(1), Barbosa MT(2), Caramelli P(1), Cardoso F(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Division, University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine, Federal 
University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte MG, Brazil.
(2)Internal and Geriatric Medicine, Internal Medicine Department, Faculty of 
Medicine, Federal University of Minas Gerais (UFMG), Belo Horizonte MG, Brazil.

Vascular Parkinsonism (VP) is a form of secondary Parkinsonism resulting from 
cerebrovascular disease. Estimates of the frequency of VP vary greatly 
worldwide; 3% to 6% of all cases of Parkinsonism are found to have a vascular 
etiology. In a Brazilian community-based study on Parkinsonism, 15.1% of all 
cases were classified as VP, the third most common form, with a prevalence of 
1.1% in an elderly cohort. Another Brazilian survey found a prevalence of 2.3% 
of VP in the elderly. VP is usually the result of conventional vascular risk 
factors, particularly hypertension, leading to strategic infarcts of subcortical 
gray matter nuclei, diffuse white matter ischaemic lesions and less commonly, 
large vessel infarcts. Patients with VP tend to be older and present with gait 
difficulties, symmetrical predominant lower-body involvement, poor levodopa 
responsiveness, postural instability, falls, cognitive impairment and dementia, 
corticospinal findings, urinary incontinence and pseudobulbar palsy. This 
article intends to provide physicians with an insight on the practical issues of 
VP, a disease potentially confounded with vascular dementia, idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and other secondary causes of 
Parkinsonism.

Publisher: Parkinsonismo vascular (VP) Ã© a forma secundÃ¡ria da sÃ­ndrome 
parkinsoniana resultante de doenÃ§a cerebrovascular. HÃ¡ grande variaÃ§Ã£o das 
estimativas de frequÃªncia em estudos mundiais, sendo que em mÃ©dia 3% a 6% de 
todos os casos de parkinsonismo tÃªm a etiologia vascular. Em um estudo 
brasileiro de base comunitÃ¡ria sobre parkinsonismo, 15,1% de todos os casos 
foram classificados como VP, que foi a terceira causa mais comum, com uma 
prevalÃªncia de 1,1% em uma coorte de idosos. Outro estudo brasileiro encontrou 
uma prevalÃªncia de 2,3% de VP tambÃ©m em idosos. VP usualmente resulta de fatores 
de risco vasculares como a hipertensÃ£o, levando a infartos estratÃ©gicos nos 
nÃºcleos da base, lesÃµes isquÃªmicas difusas da substÃ¢ncia branca subcortical e 
menos comumente, infartos de grandes vasos. Os pacientes com VP geralmente sÃ£o 
mais idosos e apresentam dificuldades para a marcha, envolvimento simÃ©trico 
predominante em membros inferiores, resposta pobre Ã  terapÃªutica com levodopa, 
instabilidade postural e quedas, comprometimento cognitivo e demÃªncia, sinais de 
acometimento corticoespinhal, incontinÃªncia urinÃ¡ria e paralisia pseudobulbar. 
Este artigo apresenta algumas informaÃ§Ãµes prÃ¡ticas sobre o VP, uma condiÃ§Ã£o 
neurolÃ³gica potencialmente confundida com demÃªncia vascular, doenÃ§a de Parkinson 
idiopÃ¡tica, demÃªncia com corpos de Lewy e com outras causas de parkinsonismo.

DOI: 10.1590/S1980-57642012DN06030005
PMCID: PMC5618960
PMID: 29213787

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest.


2873. Nutr Rev. 2012 Jul;70(7):373-86. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2012.00484.x. Epub 
2012 May 22.

Nutraceuticals and their preventive or potential therapeutic value in 
Parkinson's disease.

Chao J(1), Leung Y, Wang M, Chang RC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Anatomy, LKS Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common aging-related disorder in the 
world, after Alzheimer's disease. It is characterized by the progressive loss of 
dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta and other parts of 
the brain, leading to motor impairment, cognitive impairment, and dementia. 
Current treatment methods, such as L-dopa therapy, are focused only on relieving 
symptoms and delaying progression of the disease. To date, there is no known 
cure for PD, making prevention of PD as important as ever. More than a decade of 
research has revealed a number of major risk factors, including oxidative stress 
and mitochondrial dysfunction. Moreover, numerous nutraceuticals have been found 
to target and attenuate these risk factors, thereby preventing or delaying the 
progression of PD. These nutraceuticals include vitamins C, D, E, coenzyme Q10, 
creatine, unsaturated fatty acids, sulfur-containing compounds, polyphenols, 
stilbenes, and phytoestrogens. This review examines the role of nutraceuticals 
in the prevention or delay of PD as well as the mechanisms of action of 
nutraceuticals and their potential applications as therapeutic agents, either 
alone or in combination with current treatment methods.

Â© 2012 International Life Sciences Institute.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2012.00484.x
PMID: 22747840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2874. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Dec;18(10):1067-72. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.06.002. Epub 2012 Jun 30.

Neuropsychological profile in patients with early stage of Parkinson's disease 
in Taiwan.

Yu RL(1), Wu RM, Tai CH, Lin CH, Cheng TW, Hua MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan.

Given the importance of early detection and intervention for disease management, 
determining the vulnerable neuropsychological function in patients with 
early-stage Parkinson's disease (PD) is a priority. Here, we describe the 
neuropsychological pattern in early-stage PD patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (PD-MCI) and dementia (PDD) in Taiwanese population. The 
neuropsychological performance of 94 patients with PD was compared with that of 
84 healthy controls (HCs) and available normative data, using a comprehensive 
neuropsychological assessment including tests of executive, memory, psychomotor 
speed, attention, visuospatial, and language functions. Our results showed that 
PD patients performed significantly worse on executive function (i.e., category 
of card sorting) and psychomotor speed (i.e., processing speed index). Up to 
46.8% were classified as PD-MCI and the majority of those having single-domain 
impairment (68.2%); 9.6% met the consensus diagnostic criteria for PDD. 
Accordingly, we suggest that early-stage PD patients have cognitive dysfunction 
predominately in the anterior brain. Further follow-up study to determine how 
many percent of PD-MCI develop PDD is important. The effect of neurocognitive 
rehabilitation on executive function is also valuable in the subsequence study.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.06.002
PMID: 22749792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2875. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038639. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Comparison of brief cognitive tests and CSF biomarkers in predicting Alzheimer's 
disease in mild cognitive impairment: six-year follow-up study.

Palmqvist S(1), Hertze J, Minthon L, Wattmo C, Zetterberg H, Blennow K, Londos 
E, Hansson O.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, MalmÃ¶, Sweden. sebastian.palmqvist@med.lu.se

INTRODUCTION: Early identification of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is needed both 
for clinical trials and in clinical practice. In this study, we compared brief 
cognitive tests and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers in predicting 
conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD.
METHODS: At a memory clinic, 133 patients with MCI were followed until 
development of dementia or until they had been stable over a mean period of 5.9 
years (range 3.2-8.8 years). The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), the clock 
drawing test, total tau, tau phosphorylated at Thr(181) (P-tau) and 
amyloid-Î²(1-42) (AÎ²(42)) were assessed at baseline.
RESULTS: During clinical follow-up, 47% remained cognitively stable and 53% 
developed dementia, with an incidence of 13.8%/year. In the group that developed 
dementia the prevalence of AD was 73.2%, vascular dementia 14.1%, dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) 5.6%, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) 4.2%, semantic 
dementia 1.4% and dementia due to brain tumour 1.4%. When predicting subsequent 
development of AD among patients with MCI, the cognitive tests classified 81% of 
the cases correctly (AUC, 0.85; 95% CI, 0.77-0.90) and CSF biomarkers 83% (AUC, 
0.89; 95% CI, 0.82-0.94). The combination of cognitive tests and CSF (AUC, 0.93; 
95% CI 0.87 to 0.96) was significantly better than the cognitive tests (p = 
0.01) and the CSF biomarkers (p = 0.04) alone when predicting AD.
CONCLUSIONS: The MMSE and the clock drawing test were as accurate as CSF 
biomarkers in predicting future development of AD in patients with MCI. 
Combining both instruments provided significantly greater accuracy than 
cognitive tests or CSF biomarkers alone in predicting AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038639
PMCID: PMC3382225
PMID: 22761691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journalâs policy and have the following conflicts: KB has served at Advisory 
Boards for Innogenetics, Belgium. This does not alter the authors' adherence to 
all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials. The authors have 
declared that no other competing interests exist.


2876. Brain Nerve. 2012 Jul;64(7):799-813.

[Neurological disease and facial recognition].

[Article in Japanese]

Kawamura M(1), Sugimoto A, Kobayakawa M, Tsuruya N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Showa University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

To discuss the neurological basis of facial recognition, we present our case 
reports of impaired recognition and a review of previous literature. First, we 
present a case of infarction and discuss prosopagnosia, which has had a large 
impact on face recognition research. From a study of patient symptoms, we assume 
that prosopagnosia may be caused by unilateral right occipitotemporal lesion and 
right cerebral dominance of facial recognition. Further, circumscribed lesion 
and degenerative disease may also cause progressive prosopagnosia. Apperceptive 
prosopagnosia is observed in patients with posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), 
pathologically considered as Alzheimer's disease, and associative prosopagnosia 
in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD). Second, we discuss face recognition 
as part of communication. Patients with Parkinson disease show social cognitive 
impairments, such as difficulty in facial expression recognition and deficits in 
theory of mind as detected by the reading the mind in the eyes test. 
Pathological and functional imaging studies indicate that social cognitive 
impairment in Parkinson disease is possibly related to damages in the amygdalae 
and surrounding limbic system. The social cognitive deficits can be observed in 
the early stages of Parkinson disease, and even in the prodromal stage, for 
example, patients with rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) 
show impairment in facial expression recognition. Further, patients with 
myotonic dystrophy type 1 (DM 1), which is a multisystem disease that mainly 
affects the muscles, show social cognitive impairment similar to that of 
Parkinson disease. Our previous study showed that facial expression recognition 
impairment of DM 1 patients is associated with lesion in the amygdalae and 
insulae. Our study results indicate that behaviors and personality traits in DM 
1 patients, which are revealed by social cognitive impairment, are attributable 
to dysfunction of the limbic system.

PMID: 22764352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2877. Imaging Med. 2012 Apr;4(2):201-213. doi: 10.2217/iim.12.10.

An update on brain imaging in parkinsonian dementia.

Petrou M(1), Kotagal V, Bohnen NI.

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Disturbances of cognition are frequent in Parkinson's disease (PD). Unlike 
severe loss of dopamine early in PD, extensive cholinergic losses have been 
consistently reported in PD with dementia. Cholinergic imaging suggests that 
basal forebrain cholinergic system degeneration appears early in PD and worsens 
with dementia development. Cortical cholinergic denervation is similar in PD 
with dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies, supporting a common disease 
spectrum, at least with respect to cholinergic pathology. Presence of cerebral 
amyloidopathy in the setting of parkinsonism may accelerate cognitive decline. 
Novel MRI techniques illustrate the widespread presence of neurodegeneration in 
PD with dementia, affecting white matter tracts and connectivity functions. This 
review will outline current concepts regarding dementia development in PD and 
discuss their correlation with functional and structural neuroimaging including 
PET and MRI.

DOI: 10.2217/iim.12.10
PMCID: PMC3387991
PMID: 22768021


2878. Cleve Clin J Med. 2012 Jul;79 Suppl 2:S14-8. doi: 10.3949/ccjm.79.s2a.03.

Nonmotor complications of Parkinson disease.

Fernandez HH(1).

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Program, Center for Neurological Restoration, Cleveland 
Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. fernanh@ccf.org

Nonmotor manifestations are integral components of Parkinson disease (PD), and 
they often have a greater impact on disability and quality of life than the 
motor features that currently define the illness. Nonmotor features of PD, such 
as dementia, may be an intrinsic feature of the disorder and persist regardless 
of the medication state (ie, they continue to manifest in the "on" or "off" 
state); some nonmotor features, such as psychotic symptoms, may be iatrogenic 
complications of pharmacologic intervention for the treatment of the motor 
manifestations of PD. Iatrogenic complications, such as psychosis and impulse 
control disorders, may respond to modification of the PD treatment regimen at 
the risk of worsening motor symptoms. Thus, a balance must be struck between 
controlling nonmotor manifestations and motor features of the disease.

DOI: 10.3949/ccjm.79.s2a.03
PMID: 22761264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2879. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;32(1):57-76. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120406.

Parkin null cortical neuronal/glial cultures are resistant to amyloid-Î²1-42 
toxicity: a role for autophagy?

Solano RM(1), Casarejos MJ, GÃ³mez A, Perucho J, de YÃ©benes JG, Mena MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Hospital RamÃ³n y Cajal and Centro de 
InvestigaciÃ³n BiomÃ©dica en red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Madrid, Spain.

Dementia occurs often in late stages of Parkinson's disease (PD) but its cause 
is unknown. Likewise there is little information about the interaction between 
proteins that produce PD and those implicated in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Here 
we have investigated the interactions between parkin protein and the amyloid-Î² 
(AÎ²)1-42 peptide. We examined the effects of oligomeric AÎ²1-42 peptide on the 
survival, differentiation, and signaling pathways in cortical cultures from wild 
type (WT) and parkin null (PK-KO) mice. We discovered that PK-KO cells were more 
resistant than WT to AÎ²1-42. This peptide induced neuronal cell death, 
astrogliosis, microglial proliferation, and increased total and 
hyperphosphorylated tau and levels of chaperones HSP-70 and CHIP in WT, but not 
in AÎ²-treated PK-KO cultures. AÎ²1-42 decreased proteasome activities in WT and 
PK-KO cultures, but the ubiquitination of proteins only increased in WT 
cultures. AÎ²1-42 induced a short activation of ERK1/2 and AKT signaling 
pathways, implicated in cell survival, in PK-KO-treated cells, and a shift in 
the autophagy marker LC3-II/LC3-I ratio. In addition, the percentage of cells 
immunoreactive to both HSC70 and LAMP-2A increased in PK-KO cultures versus WT 
and furthermore in PK-KO cultures treated with AÎ²1-42. Pre-treatment with 
inhibitors of glutathione synthesis or autophagy reverted the resistance to 
AÎ²1-42 of the PK-KO cultures. In conclusion, the loss of parkin protein triggers 
the compensatory mechanisms of cell protection against AÎ²1-42. Parkin 
suppression, therefore, is not a risk factor for dementia of AD type.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-120406
PMID: 22785397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2880. Br J Psychiatry. 2012 Sep;201(3):221-6. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.107631. Epub 
2012 Jul 12.

Antipsychotics in dementia: prevalence and quality of antipsychotic drug 
prescribing in UK mental health services.

Barnes TR(1), Banerjee S, Collins N, Treloar A, McIntyre SM, Paton C.

Author information:
(1)Imperial College London, and the Prescribing Observatory for Mental Health 
(POMH), Royal College of Psychiatrists' Centre for Quality Improvement, London, 
UK. t.r.barnes@imperial.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Up to a quarter of people in the UK with a diagnosis of dementia are 
prescribed an antipsychotic in any year. The potential risks of such treatment 
are becoming clearer, but the benefits remain uncertain. Concern about the 
frequency and quality of such prescribing was expressed in the National Dementia 
Strategy for England in 2009.
AIMS: To provide an estimate of the prevalence of antipsychotic use for dementia 
in secondary mental health services in the UK and to collect data relevant to 
quality improvement initiatives for such prescribing practice.
METHOD: In the context of a UK quality improvement programme, relevant clinical 
audit data were collected for patients with dementia under the care of 
specialist older people's mental health services.
RESULTS: Fifty-four mental health National Health Service (NHS) trusts submitted 
data on 10 199 patients. Of those patients without comorbid psychotic illness, 
1620 (16%) were prescribed an antipsychotic; the common clinical indications for 
such medication were agitation, psychotic symptoms, aggression and distress. 
Multivariable regression found younger age, care home or in-patient setting, 
vascular or Parkinson's disease dementia and greater severity of dementia to be 
all significantly associated with being prescribed antipsychotic medication. Of 
the 1001 (62%) patients prescribed treatment for more than 6 months, only 
three-quarters had a documented review of therapeutic response in the previous 6 
months.
CONCLUSIONS: The data reveal areas of relatively good current practice, 
including consideration of alternatives to antipsychotic medication and clear 
documentation of target symptoms. They also suggest areas for improvement, such 
as the frequency and quality of review of long-term medication. Strategies to 
reduce antipsychotic use should take account of the demographic and clinical 
variables predicting increased likelihood of antipsychotic prescription.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.111.107631
PMID: 22790679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2881. Mov Disord. 2012 Sep 1;27(10):1255-61. doi: 10.1002/mds.25034. Epub 2012 Jul 12.

Brain perfusion anomalies in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder with 
mild cognitive impairment.

Vendette M(1), Montplaisir J, Gosselin N, Soucy JP, Postuma RB, Dang-Vu TT, 
Gagnon JF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine, HÃ´pital du SacrÃ©-Coeur de 
MontrÃ©al, Quebec, Canada.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder is an important risk factor for 
Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Approximately 50% of patients 
with REM sleep behavior disorder have mild cognitive impairment. Our objective 
was to investigate brain perfusion changes associated with mild cognitive 
impairment in REM sleep behavior disorder. Twenty patients with REM sleep 
behavior disorder, including 10 patients with mild cognitive impairment and 10 
patients without mild cognitive impairment, and 20 healthy controls underwent a 
complete neuropsychological assessment and single-photon emission computerized 
tomography using (99mc) Tc-Ethylene Cysteinate Dimer. Compared with controls, 
both REM sleep behavior disorder groups had hypoperfusion in the frontal 
regions. In addition, patients with REM sleep behavior disorder and mild 
cognitive impairment showed cortical hypoperfusion in the occipital, temporal, 
and parietal regions compared with controls and patients with REM sleep behavior 
disorder without mild cognitive impairment. Both REM sleep behavior disorder 
groups had hyperperfusion in the right hippocampus and parahippocampal gyri. 
However, patients with REM sleep behavior disorder and mild cognitive impairment 
showed more pronounced anomalies in the right hippocampus and had increased 
perfusion in the putamen and the left paracentral gyrus. This study showed 
specific patterns of posterior cortical hypoperfusion and hyperperfusion in some 
brain areas in patients with REM sleep behavior disorder and mild cognitive 
impairment, similar to those found in Parkinson's disease dementia and dementia 
with Lewy bodies. This suggests the presence of an identifiable neuroimaging 
marker of synucleinopathy in REM sleep behavior disorder with mild cognitive 
impairment. Â© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

Copyright Â© 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25034
PMID: 22791632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2882. Trends Neurosci. 2012 Nov;35(11):700-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2012.06.004. Epub 
2012 Jul 14.

Caspase-3 in the central nervous system: beyond apoptosis.

D'Amelio M(1), Sheng M, Cecconi F.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico, S. Lucia Foundation, via 
del Fosso di Fiorano 65, 00143 Rome, Italy. m.damelio@hsantalucia.it

Caspase-3 has been identified as a key mediator of neuronal programmed cell 
death. This protease plays a central role in the developing nervous system and 
its activation is observed early in neural tube formation and persists during 
postnatal differentiation of the neural network. Caspase-3 activation, a crucial 
event of neuronal cell death program, is also a feature of many chronic 
neurodegenerative diseases. This traditional apoptotic function of caspase-3 is 
challenged by recent studies that reveal new cell death-independent roles for 
mitochondrial-activated caspase-3 in neurite pruning and synaptic plasticity. 
These findings underscore the need for further research into the mechanism of 
action and functions of caspase-3 that may prove useful in the development of 
novel pharmacological treatments for a diverse range of neurological disorders.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2012.06.004
PMID: 22796265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2883. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Nov;124(5):693-704. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-1017-1. Epub 
2012 Jul 17.

The MAPT H1 haplotype is associated with tangle-predominant dementia.

Santa-Maria I(1), Haggiagi A, Liu X, Wasserscheid J, Nelson PT, Dewar K, Clark 
LN, Crary JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New York 10032, 
USA.

Tangle-predominant dementia (TPD) patients exhibit cognitive decline that is 
clinically similar to early to moderate-stage Alzheimer disease (AD), yet 
autopsy reveals neurofibrillary tangles in the medial temporal lobe composed of 
the microtubule-associated protein tau without significant amyloid-beta 
(AÎ²)-positive plaques. We performed a series of neuropathological, biochemical 
and genetic studies using autopsy brain tissue drawn from a cohort of 34 TPD, 50 
AD and 56 control subjects to identify molecular and genetic signatures of this 
entity. Biochemical analysis demonstrates a similar tau protein isoform 
composition in TPD and AD, which is compatible with previous histological and 
ultrastructural studies. Further, biochemical analysis fails to uncover 
elevation of soluble AÎ² in TPD frontal cortex and hippocampus compared to 
control subjects, demonstrating that non-plaque-associated AÎ² is not a 
contributing factor. Unexpectedly, we also observed high levels of secretory 
amyloid precursor protein Î± (sAPPÎ±) in the frontal cortex of some TPD patients 
compared to AD and control subjects, suggesting differences in APP processing. 
Finally, we tested whether TPD is associated with changes in the tau gene 
(MAPT). Haplotype analysis demonstrates a strong association between TPD and the 
MAPT H1 haplotype, a genomic inversion associated with some tauopathies and 
Parkinson disease (PD), when compared to age-matched control subjects with mild 
degenerative changes, i.e., successful cerebral aging. Next-generation 
resequencing of MAPT followed by association analysis shows an association 
between TPD and two polymorphisms in the MAPT 3' untranslated region (UTR). 
These results support the hypothesis that haplotype-specific variation in the 
MAPT 3' UTR underlies an AÎ²-independent mechanism for neurodegeneration in TPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-012-1017-1
PMCID: PMC3608475
PMID: 22802095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2884. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2012 Oct;12(5):492-501. doi: 
10.1007/s11910-012-0290-7.

Clinical trials of dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease dementia.

Aarsland D(1), Ballard C, Rongve A, Broadstock M, Svenningsson P.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Centre, Novum, Karolinska Institutet, 141 86 
Stockholm, Sweden. daarsland@gmail.com

Despite the frequency and importance of dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), there is relatively little 
evidence on which to base treatment. Evidence from meta-analysis suggests that 
rivastigmine can improve cognition and functioning in PDD and also reduce risk 
of falling. There is also evidence supporting its use in DLB. Recent evidence 
suggests that memantine may also be effective, particularly for PDD, although 
evidence is more conflicting. Memantine may also improve parkinsonism and 
dyskinesias. Few clinical trials of cognition in PD without dementia exist, but 
there is preliminary evidence for atomoxetine, memantine, and piribedil. There 
is a lack of systematic evidence for the treatment of visual hallucinations and 
depression in PDD and DLB. In addition, there is a need for studies of whether 
potentially disease-modifying agents can prevent or delay the progression to 
dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-012-0290-7
PMID: 22806065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2885. Int Psychogeriatr. 2013 Jan;25(1):111-9. doi: 10.1017/S1041610212001214. Epub 
2012 Jul 19.

Does posterior cortical atrophy on MRI discriminate between Alzheimer's disease, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and normal aging?

O'Donovan J(1), Watson R, Colloby SJ, Firbank MJ, Burton EJ, Barber R, Blamire 
AM, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 5PL, UK.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies suggest that posterior cortical atrophy may be a 
useful marker for early onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). Dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) is associated with less temporal lobe atrophy than AD, though 
posterior cortical atrophy may be greater. Therefore, we assessed whether visual 
rating scales for assessing posterior atrophy (PA), medial temporal lobe atrophy 
(MTA), and ventricular enlargement (VEn) aid in the discrimination between AD, 
DLB, and normal aging.
METHODS: T1-weighted MRI scans acquired at 3 Tesla were visually rated for PA 
(range 0-3), MTA (range 0-4), and VEn (range 0-3) in older subjects with AD (n = 
36), DLB (n = 35), and healthy controls (n = 35). The diagnostic utility of MTA, 
PA, and VEn visual ratings in distinguishing AD and DLB from controls as well as 
AD from DLB was investigated.
RESULTS: Significantly higher MTA ratings were associated with AD and DLB 
compared to controls (p < 0.001). MTA ratings were greater in AD relative to DLB 
(U = 384.5, p = 0.004). For PA ratings, scores did not differ between groups (p 
= 0.20). VEn ratings were significantly higher in AD and DLB compared to 
controls (p = 0.003), but similar between AD and DLB (U = 384.5, p = 0.4).
CONCLUSIONS: Unlike findings reported in younger subjects, visual ratings for PA 
are not a reliable marker at older ages for distinguishing AD from controls, or 
for distinguishing DLB from AD. However, visual ratings of MTA and VEn may be 
useful markers in distinguishing both AD and DLB from older subjects without 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610212001214
PMID: 22809815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2886. Brain. 2012 Aug;135(Pt 8):2470-7. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws173. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Imaging and acetylcholinesterase inhibitor response in dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Graff-Radford J(1), Boeve BF, Pedraza O, Ferman TJ, Przybelski S, Lesnick TG, 
Vemuri P, Senjem ML, Smith GE, Knopman DS, Lowe V, Jack CR Jr, Petersen RC, 
Kantarci K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors are commonly used to treat patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies. Hippocampal atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging and 
amyloid-Î² load on positron emission tomography are associated with the 
Alzheimer's disease-related pathology in patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies. To date, few studies have investigated imaging markers that predict 
treatment response in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies. Our objective was 
to determine whether imaging markers of Alzheimer's disease-related pathology 
such as hippocampal volume, brain amyloid-Î² load on (11)C Pittsburgh compound B 
positron emission tomography predict treatment response to acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies. We performed a 
retrospective analysis on consecutive treatment-naive patients with dementia 
with Lewy bodies (nâ=â54) from the Mayo Clinic Alzheimer's Disease Research 
Centre who subsequently received acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and underwent 
magnetic resonance imaging with hippocampal volumetry. Baseline and follow-up 
assessments were obtained with the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale. Subjects were 
divided into three groups (reliable improvement, stable or reliable decline) 
using Dementia Rating Scale reliable change indices determined previously. 
Associations between hippocampal volumes and treatment response were tested with 
analysis of covariance adjusting for baseline Dementia Rating Scale, age, 
gender, magnetic resonance field strength and Dementia Rating Scale interval. 
Seven subjects underwent (11)C Pittsburgh compound B imaging within 12 weeks of 
magnetic resonance imaging. Global cortical (11)C Pittsburgh compound B 
retention (scaled to cerebellar retention) was calculated in these patients. 
Using a conservative psychometric method of assessing treatment response, there 
were 12 patients with reliable decline, 29 stable cases and 13 patients with 
reliable improvement. The improvers had significantly larger hippocampi than 
those that declined (Pâ=â0.02) and the stable (Pâ=â0.04) group. An exploratory 
analysis demonstrated larger grey matter volumes in the temporal and parietal 
lobes in improvers compared with those who declined (Pâ<â0.05). The two patients 
who had a positive (11)C Pittsburgh compound B positron emission tomography scan 
declined and those who had a negative (11)C Pittsburgh compound B positron 
emission tomography scan improved or were stable after treatment. Patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies who do not have the imaging features of coexistent 
Alzheimer's disease-related pathology are more likely to cognitively improve 
with acetylcholinesterase inhibitor treatment.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws173
PMCID: PMC3407425
PMID: 22810436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2887. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Jan;19(1):15-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.06.019. Epub 2012 Jul 18.

Analyses of the MAPT, PGRN, and C9orf72 mutations in Japanese patients with 
FTLD, PSP, and CBS.

Ogaki K(1), Li Y, Takanashi M, Ishikawa K, Kobayashi T, Nonaka T, Hasegawa M, 
Kishi M, Yoshino H, Funayama M, Tsukamoto T, Shioya K, Yokochi M, Imai H, Sasaki 
R, Kokubo Y, Kuzuhara S, Motoi Y, Tomiyama H, Hattori N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo, 
Tokyo, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the microtubule associated protein tau (MAPT) and 
progranulin (PGRN) have been identified in several neurodegenerative disorders, 
such as frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP), and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). Recently, C9orf72 repeat expansion was 
reported to cause FTLD and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). To date, no 
comprehensive analyses of mutations in these three genes have been performed in 
Asian populations. The aim of this study was to investigate the genetic and 
clinical features of Japanese patients with MAPT, PGRN, or C9orf72 mutations.
METHODS: MAPT and PGRN were analyzed by direct sequencing and gene dosage 
assays, and C9orf72 repeat expansion was analyzed by repeat-primed PCR in 75 (48 
familial, 27 sporadic) Japanese patients with FTLD, PSP, or CBS.
RESULTS: We found four MAPT mutations in six families, one novel PGRN 
deletion/insertion, and no repeat expansion in C9orf72. Intriguingly, we 
identified a de novo MAPT p.S285R mutation. All six patients with early-onset 
PSP and the abnormal eye movements that are not typical of sporadic PSP had MAPT 
mutations. The gene dosages of MAPT and PGRN were normal.
DISCUSSION: MAPT p.S285R is the first reported de novo mutation in a sporadic 
adult-onset patient. MAPT mutation analysis is recommended in both familial and 
sporadic patients, especially in early-onset PSP patients with these abnormal 
eye movements. Although PGRN and C9orf72 mutations were rare in this study, the 
PGRN mutation was found in this Asian FTLD. These genes should be studied 
further to improve the clinicogenetic diagnoses of FTLD, PSP, and CBS.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.06.019
PMID: 22818528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2888. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Mar;34(3):936-42. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.06.015. Epub 2012 Jul 21.

MAPT H1 haplotype is associated with enhanced Î±-synuclein deposition in dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Colom-Cadena M(1), Gelpi E, MartÃ­ MJ, Charif S, Dols-Icardo O, Blesa R, ClarimÃ³n 
J, LleÃ³ A.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Institut d'Investigacions Biomediques Sant Pau, 
Hospital de Sant Pau, Universitat AutÃ²noma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

The microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) H1 haplotype has been identified 
as a genetic risk factor for synucleinopathies. However, whether it modulates 
tau or Î±-synuclein pathology remains unknown. Our aim was to investigate the 
relationship between MAPT haplotypes and pathologic aggregates of tau and 
Î±-synuclein in pathologically confirmed cases of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB). Twenty-two cases fulfilling clinical and neuropathological criteria for 
DLB were included. Clinical and neuropathological data were collected, and APOE 
and MAPT genotypes were determined. Tau and Î±-synuclein pathology was assessed 
semiquantitatively in 17 brain areas and total scores were calculated. DLB H1/H1 
(n = 12) and H2 carriers (n = 10) did not differ in demographics, clinical 
variables, concomitant Alzheimer's pathology, or APOE genotype. Total 
Î±-synuclein scores were significantly increased in the H1/H1 group (p = 0.011), 
largely due to an increase in brainstem regions. This difference was driven by 
an increase in Lewy bodies and diffuse and punctuate cytoplasmatic Î±-synuclein 
aggregates (p = 0.007 and p = 0.025 respectively). These findings provide a 
mechanistic link for the genetic association between MAPT haplotypes and 
synucleinopathies.

Copyright Â© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.06.015
PMID: 22819391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2889. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;28(6):567-72. doi: 10.1002/gps.3860. Epub 
2012 Jul 22.

Longitudinal testing of visual perception in dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer's disease.

Wood JS(1), Watson R, Firbank MJ, Mosimann UP, Barber R, Blamire AM, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Newcastle Magnetic Resonance Centre, Institute of Cellular Medicine, Campus 
for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK. 
josh.wood@ncl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVES: Visuo-perceptual abnormalities are a prominent feature in dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) and also occur in Alzheimer's disease (AD) to a lesser 
extent. We studied the progression of visuo-perceptual abnormalities over a 
12-month period in DLB and AD by using a novel computerised test battery.
METHODS: Following our previous work using the Newcastle Visual Perception 
(NEVIP) battery, we re-assessed 16 AD, 12 DLB and 28 similar-aged comparison 
participants 12âmonths after initial baseline assessment.
RESULTS: DLB visual perception at follow-up showed worse performance than AD 
(Uâ=â43, pâ=â0.027); however, there were no significant changes in 
visuo-perceptual scores between baseline assessment and 12-month assessment 
within groups. A poor baseline score on the NEVIP predicted subsequent 
deterioration on the Bristol Activities of Daily Living Scale (rs â=â-0.725, 
pâ=â0.014) in DLB participants but not in the AD group.
CONCLUSIONS: The NEVIP is a reliable test of visuo-perception, relatively 
independent of cognitive decline, with predictive value in identifying DLB 
participants at risk of functional decline. Visuo-perceptual dysfunction is a 
core feature of the disorder for some DLB patients and was stable over the 
12-month period examined here.

Copyright Â© 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.3860
PMID: 22821711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2890. Neurodegener Dis. 2013;12(1):1-12. doi: 10.1159/000338610. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

The impact of MRI white matter hyperintensities on dementia in Parkinson's 
disease in relation to the homocysteine level and other vascular risk factors.

SÅawek J(1), Roszmann A, Robowski P, Dubaniewicz M, Sitek EJ, Honczarenko K, 
Gorzkowska A, Budrewicz S, Mak M, GoÅÄb-Janowska M, Koziorowska-Gawron E, 
DroÅºdzik M, Kurzawski M, Bandurski T, BiaÅecka M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological-Psychiatric Nursing, St. Adalbert Hospital, 
GdaÅsk, Poland. jaroslawek@gumed.edu.pl

Comment in
    Neurodegener Dis. 2013;12(3):164.

BACKGROUND: The role of white matter hyperintensities (WMH) and homocysteine 
(Hcy) and other vascular risk factors in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease 
(PD) dementia (PDD) remains unclear.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to assess the impact of WMH, Hcy and other 
biochemical and vascular risk factors on PDD.
METHODS: A total of 192 patients with PD and 184 age- and sex-matched healthy 
controls were included. A semistructured interview was used to assess 
demographic and clinical variables with respect to vascular risk factors 
(arterial hypertension, diabetes mellitus, atrial fibrillation, ischemic heart 
disease, obliterative atherosclerosis, hypercholesterolemia, smoking, alcohol 
intake). Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale score, Hoehn-Yahr staging and 
the Schwab-England activities of daily living scale were used to assess motor 
abilities and activities of daily living. A complex neuropsychological 
examination with a battery of tests was used to classify patients into a group 
with dementia (PDD) and a group without dementia (PD). Neuroradiological 
examination of MRI scans included visual rating scales for WMH (according to the 
Wahlund and Erkinjunntti rating scales) and the Scheltens scale for hippocampal 
atrophy. Blood samples for Hcy, folate, vitamin B12, fibrinogen, lipids, 
glucose, creatinine, transaminases and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) were 
examined.
RESULTS: Among all patients, 57 (29.7%) fulfilled the diagnostic criteria for 
dementia. Significantly higher Hcy plasma levels were noted in PD and PDD groups 
compared to controls (p < 0.05) and in PDD when compared to PD (p < 0.05). 
According to multivariate regression analysis, WMH (Erkinjuntti scale), high 
Hcy, low vitamin B12 and folate plasma levels were independent risk factors for 
PDD. Vascular risk factors did not play any role in the pathogenesis of PDD and 
WMH.
CONCLUSIONS: WMH along with Hcy, folate and vitamin B12 may impact cognition in 
PD. Therapy with vitamin B12, folate and catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitors 
may play a potential protective role against PDD.

Copyright Â© 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000338610
PMID: 22831964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2891. Curr Med Chem. 2012;19(28):4816-27. doi: 10.2174/092986712803341430.

L-type voltage-dependent calcium channels as therapeutic targets for 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Yagami T(1), Kohma H, Yamamoto Y.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Himeji Dokkyo University, Himeji, Hyogo, 
Japan. yagami@himeji-du.ac.jp

Ca(2+) is a highly versatile intracellular second messenger in the central 
nervous system, and regulates many complicated cellular processes, including 
excitation, plasticity and apoptosis. Influx of Ca(2+) from the extracellular 
fluid is required for sustained elevation of the cytosolic Ca(2+) concentration 
and full activation of Ca(2+)-dependent processes. Voltage-dependent Ca(2+) 
channels (VDCCs) serve as the principal routes of Ca(2+) entry into electrically 
excitable cells such as neurons. The nervous system expresses VDCCs with unique 
cellular and subcellular distribution and specific functions. L-type 
voltage-dependent Ca(2+) channels (L-VDCCs) are distributed at neuronal cell 
bodies, dendrites and spines, and the postsynaptic L-VDCCs regulate neuronal 
excitability and gene expression. Presynaptic P/Qand N-type VDCCs trigger 
neurotransmitter release, and T-type channels support neuronal rhythmic burst 
firing. Evidence from natural mutants, knockout mice, and human genetic 
disorders indicates a fundamental role of some VDCCs in a wide variety of 
neurological disorders, including vascular dementia (VaD), Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Prion disease. Amyloid Î² peptides, causative 
factors for AD, potentiate the influx of Ca(2+) into neurons via L-VDCCs. 
L-VDCCs blockers prevent neurons from undergoing amyloid Î²-induced apoptosis. 
The present review highlights some recent findings on biochemical 
characterizations, physiological functions, pathological roles and 
pharmacological applications of the L-VDCCs and their implication in neurologic 
diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/092986712803341430
PMID: 22834820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2892. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Jan;19(1):47-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.07.002. Epub 2012 Jul 26.

InÂ vivo microglia activation in very early dementia with Lewy bodies, comparison 
with Parkinson's disease.

Iannaccone S(1), Cerami C, Alessio M, Garibotto V, Panzacchi A, Olivieri S, 
Gelsomino G, Moresco RM, Perani D.

Author information:
(1)Neurorehabilitation Unit, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, San Raffaele 
Scientific Institute and Vita-Salute University, Milan, Italy.

Erratum in
    Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Oct;19(10)921.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Sep;8(9):475.

BACKGROUND: Reactive microgliosis, hallmark of neuroinflammation, may contribute 
to neuronal degeneration, as shown in several neurodegenerative diseases. We in 
vivo evaluated microglia activation in early dementia with Lewy bodies, still 
not reported, and compared with early Parkinson's disease, to assess possible 
differential pathological patterns.
METHODS: We measured the [(11)C]-PK11195 binding potentials with Positron 
Emission Tomography, using a simplified reference tissue model, as marker of 
microglia activation, and cerebral spinal fluid protein carbonylation levels, as 
marker of oxidative stress. Six dementia with Lewy bodies and 6 Parkinson's 
disease patients within a year from the onset, and eleven healthy controls were 
included. Clinical diagnosis was confirmed at a 4-year follow-up.
RESULTS: In dementia with Lewy bodies as well as in Parkinson's disease, we 
found significant (p < 0.001) [(11)C]-PK11195 binding potential increases in the 
substantia nigra and putamen. Patients with Lewy bodies dementia had extensive 
additional microglia activation in several associative cortices. This was 
evident also at a single subject level. Significant increase of Cerebral Spinal 
Fluid protein carbonylation was shown in both patients' groups.
CONCLUSIONS: [(11)C]-PK11195 Positron Emission Tomography imaging revealed 
neuroinflammation in dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease, 
mirroring, even at a single subject level, the common and the different 
topographical distribution of neuropathological changes, yet in the earliest 
stages of the disease process. Focusing on those events that characterize 
parkinsonisms and Parkinson's disease may be the key to further advancing the 
understanding of pathogenesis and to taking these mechanisms forward as a means 
of defining targets for neuroprotection.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.07.002
PMID: 22841687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2893. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41572. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041572. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Establishment of induced pluripotent stem cells from centenarians for 
neurodegenerative disease research.

Yagi T(1), Kosakai A, Ito D, Okada Y, Akamatsu W, Nihei Y, Nabetani A, Ishikawa 
F, Arai Y, Hirose N, Okano H, Suzuki N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan.

Induced pluripotent stem cell (iPSC) technology can be used to model human 
disorders, create cell-based models of human diseases, including 
neurodegenerative diseases, and in establishing therapeutic strategies. To 
detect subtle cellular abnormalities associated with common late-onset disease 
in iPSCs, valid control iPSCs derived from healthy donors free of serious 
late-onset diseases are necessary. Here, we report the generation of iPSCs from 
fibroblasts obtained immediately postmortem from centenarian donors (106- and 
109-years-old) who were extremely healthy until an advanced age. The iPSCs were 
generated using a conventional method involving OCT4, SOX2, KLF4, and c-MYC, and 
then differentiated into neuronal cells using a neurosphere method. The 
expression of molecules that play critical roles in late-onset neurodegenerative 
diseases by neurons differentiated from the centenarian-iPSCs was compared to 
that of neurons differentiated from iPSCs derived from familial Alzheimer's 
disease and familial Parkinson's disease (PARK4: triplication of the Î± synuclein 
gene) patients. The results indicated that our series of iPSCs would be useful 
in neurodegeneration research. The iPSCs we describe, which were derived from 
donors with exceptional longevity who were presumed to have no serious disease 
risk factors, would be useful in longevity research and as valid super-controls 
for use in studies of various late-onset diseases.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041572
PMCID: PMC3405135
PMID: 22848530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors declare that 
they received grants from Eisai Co. Ltd for this study. There are no other 
relevant declarations relating to employment, consultancy, patents, products in 
development or marketed products. This does not alter the authors' adherence to 
all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


2894. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Jan;19(1):77-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.07.008. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Long-duration Parkinson's disease: role of lateralization of motor features.

Munhoz RP(1), Espay AJ, Morgante F, Li JY, Teive HA, Dunn E, Gallin E, Litvan I.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Hospital de ClÃ­nicas, Federal 
University of ParanÃ¡, Curitiba, Brazil. renatopuppi@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: A mean of 10 years elapse before patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) reach Hoehn & Yahr (H&Y) stage 4, and 14 years for stage 5. A small 
proportion of PD patients survive and are ambulatory for â¥ 20 years. We sought 
to identify features associated with long-duration PD (dPD).
METHODS: This five-center, case-control study compared 136 PD patients with â¥ 20 
years of duration and H&Y stage â¤ 4 (dPD) to 134 H&Y-, age- and gender-matched 
PD patients between 10 and 15 years of disease (cPD).
RESULTS: By study design, there were no between-group differences in age, gender 
and H&Y. dPD subjects were younger at onset (p < 0.0001), had more psychosis (p: 
0.038), were receiving higher levodopa equivalent daily doses (p: 0.02), were 
predominantly left-handed (p: 0.048), and had greater frequency of left-sided 
onset (p: 0.015) compared to cPD subjects. Both groups had similar rates of 
resting tremor, dementia and REM sleep behavior disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Early disease onset, left-handedness and left-sided onset are 
associated with long disease and ambulatory PD survival. The neurobiological 
basis of the prognostic value of lateralization deserves further investigation.

Copyright Â© 2012. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.07.008
PMCID: PMC3635808
PMID: 22858180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2895. Stroke. 2012 Oct;43(10):2574-9. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.657130. Epub 2012 Aug 
2.

Cerebral white matter lesions and lacunar infarcts contribute to the presence of 
mild parkinsonian signs.

de Laat KF(1), van Norden AG, Gons RA, van Uden IW, Zwiers MP, Bloem BR, van 
Dijk EJ, de Leeuw FE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and 
Behaviour, Centre for Neuroscience, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) are common in elderly 
people and may be an early stage of parkinson(ism). They might be related to 
cerebral small-vessel disease, although this association remains incompletely 
understood. To identify subjects at early stages of the disease, we investigated 
whether the presence of MPS was dependent on the severity and location of 
small-vessel disease, including white matter lesions and lacunar infarcts.
METHODS: Four hundred thirty individuals, with small-vessel disease, aged 
between 50 and 85 years, without dementia or parkinsonism, were included in this 
analysis and underwent MRI scanning. The number and location of lacunar infarcts 
were rated. White matter lesion volume was assessed by manual segmentation with 
automated delineating of different regions. Presence of MPS was based on the 
motor section of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Associations were 
determined using logistic regression analysis adjusted for age, sex, and total 
brain volume.
RESULTS: Severe white matter lesions and the presence of lacunar infarcts were 
independently associated with the presence of MPS (OR, 2.6; 95% CI, 1.3-4.9 and 
OR, 1.8; 95% CI, 1.0-3.0). Frontal and parietal white matter lesions and, to a 
lesser extent, lacunar infarcts in the thalamus were associated with a higher 
risk of MPS. The presence of lacunar infarcts was independently related to the 
bradykinesia category of parkinsonian signs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that severe small-vessel disease, especially at 
certain locations, is associated with MPS signs in older adults. Our findings 
suggest that small-vessel disease interrupts basal ganglia-thalamocortical 
circuits involving both the frontal and parietal lobes and hence may result in 
MPS.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.112.657130
PMID: 22858727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2896. Prion. 2012 Sep-Oct;6(4):359-63. doi: 10.4161/pri.20675. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

The P's and Q's of cellular PrP-AÎ² interactions.

Westaway D(1), Jhamandas JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB 
Canada. david.westaway@ualberta.ca

Prion disease research has opened up the "black-box" of neurodegeneration, 
defining a key role for protein misfolding wherein a predominantly alpha-helical 
precursor protein, PrP (C), is converted to a disease-associated, Î²-sheet 
enriched isoform called PrP (Sc). In Alzheimer disease (AD) the AÎ² peptide 
derived from the Î²-amyloid precuror protein APP folds in Î²-sheet amyloid. Early 
thoughts along the lines of overlap may have been on target, (1) but were 
eclipsed by a simultaneous (but now anachronistic) controversy over the role of 
PrP (Sc) in prion diseases. (2) (,) (3) Nonetheless, as prion diseases such as 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) are themselves rare and can include an overt 
infectious mode of transmission, and as familial prion diseases and familial AD 
involve different genes, an observer might reasonably have concluded that prion 
research could occasionally catalyze ideas in AD, but could never provide 
concrete overlaps at the mechanistic level. Surprisingly, albeit a decade or 
three down the road, several prion/AD commonalities can be found within the 
contemporary literature. One important prion/AD overlap concerns seeded spread 
of AÎ² aggregates by intracerebral inoculation much like prions, (4) and, with a 
neuron-to-neuron 'spreading' also reported for pathologic forms of other 
misfolded proteins, Tau (5) (,) (6) and Î±-synuclein in the case of Parkinson 
Disease. (7) (,) (8) The concept of seeded spread has been discussed extensively 
elsewhere, sometimes under the rubric of "prionoids" (9), and lies outside the 
scope of this particular review where we will focus upon PrP (C). From this 
point the story can now be subdivided into four strands of investigation: (1) 
pathologic effects of AÎ² can be mediated by binding to PrP (C), (10) (2) the 
positioning of endoproteolytic processing events of APP by pathologic 
(Î²-cleavage + Î³-cleavage) and non-pathologic (Î±-cleavage + Î³-cleavage) secretase 
pathways is paralleled by seemingly analogous Î±- and Î²-like cleavage of PrP (C) 
(Fig. 1) (3) similar lipid raft environments for PrP (C) and APP processing 
machinery, (11) (-) (13) and perhaps in consequence, overlaps in repertoire of 
the PrP (C) and APP protein interactors ("interactomes"), (14) (,) (15) and (4) 
rare kindreds with mixed AD and prion pathologies. (16) Here we discuss 
confounds, consensus and conflict associated with parameters that apply to these 
experimental settings.

DOI: 10.4161/pri.20675
PMCID: PMC3609064
PMID: 22874673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2897. Brain. 2012 Sep;135(Pt 9):2809-16. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws190. Epub 2012 Aug 9.

Delirium is a strong risk factor for dementia in the oldest-old: a 
population-based cohort study.

Davis DH(1), Muniz Terrera G, Keage H, Rahkonen T, Oinas M, Matthews FE, 
Cunningham C, Polvikoski T, Sulkava R, MacLullich AM, Brayne C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, UK. 
dhjd2@cam.ac.uk

Comment in
    Brain. 2012 Sep;135(Pt 9):2582-4.

Recent studies suggest that delirium is associated with risk of dementia and 
also acceleration of decline in existing dementia. However, previous studies may 
have been confounded by incomplete ascertainment of cognitive status at 
baseline. Herein, we used a true population sample to determine if delirium is a 
risk factor for incident dementia and cognitive decline. We also examined the 
effect of delirium at the pathological level by determining associations between 
dementia and neuropathological markers of dementia in patients with and without 
a history of delirium. The Vantaa 85+ study examined 553 individuals (92% of 
those eligible) aged â¥85 years at baseline, 3, 5, 8 and 10 years. Brain autopsy 
was performed in 52%. Fixed and random-effects regression models were used to 
assess associations between (i) delirium and incident dementia and (ii) decline 
in Mini-Mental State Examination scores in the whole group. The relationship 
between dementia and common neuropathological markers (Alzheimer-type, infarcts 
and Lewy-body) was modelled, stratified by history of delirium. Delirium 
increased the risk of incident dementia (odds ratio 8.7, 95% confidence interval 
2.1-35). Delirium was also associated with worsening dementia severity (odds 
ratio 3.1, 95% confidence interval 1.5-6.3) as well as deterioration in global 
function score (odds ratio 2.8, 95% confidence interval 1.4-5.5). In the whole 
study population, delirium was associated with loss of 1.0 more Mini-Mental 
State Examination points per year (95% confidence interval 0.11-1.89) than those 
with no history of delirium. In individuals with dementia and no history of 
delirium (nâ=â232), all pathologies were significantly associated with dementia. 
However, in individuals with delirium and dementia (nâ=â58), no relationship 
between dementia and these markers was found. For example, higher Braak stage 
was associated with dementia when no history of delirium (odds ratio 2.0, 95% 
confidence interval 1.1-3.5, Pâ=â0.02), but in those with a history of delirium, 
there was no significant relationship (odds ratio 1.2, 95% confidence interval 
0.2-6.7, Pâ=â0.85). This trend for odds ratios to be closer to unity in the 
delirium and dementia group was observed for neuritic amyloid, apolipoprotein Îµ 
status, presence of infarcts, Î±-synucleinopathy and neuronal loss in substantia 
nigra. These findings are the first to demonstrate in a true population study 
that delirium is a strong risk factor for incident dementia and cognitive 
decline in the oldest-old. However, in this study, the relationship did not 
appear to be mediated by classical neuropathologies associated with dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws190
PMCID: PMC3437024
PMID: 22879644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2898. Autophagy. 2012 Sep;8(9):1389-91. doi: 10.4161/auto.21011. Epub 2012 Aug 13.

Lysosomal dysfunction in Parkinson disease: ATP13A2 gets into the groove.

Dehay B(1), Martinez-Vicente M, Ramirez A, Perier C, Klein C, Vila M, Bezard E.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Maladies NeurodÃ©gÃ©nÃ©ratives, UniversitÃ© de Bordeaux, CNRS UMR 
5293, Bordeaux, France. benjamin.dehay@u-bordeaux2.fr

Comment on
    Dehay B, Ramirez A, Martinez-Vicente M, Perier C, Canron MH, Doudnikoff E, 
et al. Loss of P-type ATPase ATP13A2/PARK9 function induces general lysosomal 
deficiency and leads to Parkinson disease neurodegeneration. Proc Natl Acad Sci 
U S A. 2012;125:3170â81. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1112368109.

Mutations in ATP13A2 (PARK9) cause an autosomal recessive form of early-onset 
parkinsonism with pyramidal degeneration and dementia called Kufor-Rakeb 
Syndrome (KRS). The ATP13A2 gene encodes a transmembrane lysosomal P5-type 
ATPase (ATP13A2) whose physiological function in mammalian cells, and hence its 
potential role in Parkinson disease (PD), remains elusive. In this context, we 
have recently shown that KRS-linked mutations in ATP13A2 leads to several 
lysosomal alterations in ATP13A2 KRS patient-derived fibroblasts, including 
impaired lysosomal acidification, decreased proteolytic processing of lysosomal 
enzymes, reduced degradation of lysosomal substrates and diminished 
lysosomal-mediated clearance of autophagosomes (AP). Similar alterations are 
observed in stable ATP13A2-knockdown dopaminergic cell lines, which are 
associated with cell death. Restoration of ATP13A2 levels in 
ATP13A2-mutant/depleted cells is able to restore lysosomal function and 
attenuate cell death. Relevant to PD, we have determined that ATP13A2 levels are 
decreased in dopaminergic nigral neurons from sporadic PD patients. 
Interestingly in these patients, the main signal of ATP13A2 is detected in the 
Lewy bodies. Our results unravel an instrumental role of ATP13A2 in lysosomal 
function and in cell viability. Altogether, our results validate ATP13A2 as a 
likely therapeutic target against PD degeneration.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.21011
PMCID: PMC3442887
PMID: 22885599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2899. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2012 Oct;22(10):716-24. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0b013e32835693f7.

Association of COMT, MTHFR, and SLC19A1(RFC-1) polymorphisms with homocysteine 
blood levels and cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

BiaÅecka M(1), Kurzawski M, Roszmann A, Robowski P, Sitek EJ, Honczarenko K, 
Gorzkowska A, Budrewicz S, Mak M, Jarosz M, GoÅÄb-Janowska M, Koziorowska-Gawron 
E, DroÅºdzik M, SÅawek J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Clinical Pharmacology, Pomeranian Medical 
University, Szczecin, Poland. monika-bialecka@post.pl

INTRODUCTION: Elevated plasma homocysteine (Hcy) concentration is an independent 
risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and its involvement in endothelial cell 
dysfunction is well established. However, the role of Hcy and folate in the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease (PD) remains controversial.
OBJECTIVES: The study was aimed at evaluating the relationships between Hcy, 
vitamin B12, and folic acid levels in the blood and cognitive status in PD 
patients with the genetic polymorphisms of MTHFR (rs1801133: C>T-677C>T, 
rs1801131: A>C-1298A>C), COMT (rs4680: A>G-Val158Met, rs6269: A>G, rs4633: C>T, 
rs4818: C>G), or SLC19A1 (rs1051266: G>A-80G>A).
METHODS: A total of 502 participants (248 with PD and 254 age-matched and 
sex-matched controls) were included in the study. The Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale score, Hoehn-Yahr staging, and the Schwab-England scale 
were used to assess motor abilities and activity during daily life. Complex 
psychological examination with a battery of tests was used to classify patients 
into groups with (PDD) and without (nPDD) dementia. Blood samples were examined 
for Hcy, vitamin B12, and folic acid levels, as well as polymorphisms in genes 
related to Hcy metabolism, such as COMT, MTHFR, and SLC19A1(RFC-1).
RESULTS: The frequency of homozygous COMT rs4680G and rs4633C allele carriers 
was significantly decreased in PD patients in comparison with the controls 
(P=0.015; odds ratio=0.60; 95% confidence interval 0.41-0.90 and P=0.020; odds 
ratio=0.619; 95% confidence interval 0.42-0.92, respectively). No significant 
differences in the distribution of MTHFR 677C>T, 1298A>C, and SLC19A1 80G>A 
alleles and genotypes between PD patients and the controls were found. Hcy 
levels were significantly increased in PD patients (18Â±7.8 Î¼mol/l) as compared 
with the controls (14.0Â±9.6 Î¼mol/l, P=10(-8)) and were significantly associated 
with the MTHFR 677C>T polymorphism both in PD patients and controls, in which T 
allele carriers were characterized by markedly elevated Hcy plasma 
concentrations. No association was observed between Hcy plasma level and COMT 
and SLC19A polymorphisms. The results of multivariate logistic regression 
analysis revealed age (P=0.0003) and Hcy plasma levels (P=0.07) as independent 
risk factors predisposing individuals to PD dementia. The studied polymorphisms 
were not associated with cognitive status in PD patients.
CONCLUSION: The genetic factors studied were not associated with cognitive 
status in PD patients. Only age and Hcy plasma levels were found to be 
independent risk factors predisposing individuals to PD dementia. However, COMT: 
rs4680: A>G and rs4633: C>T polymorphisms were found to significantly affect PD 
risk, and the MTHFR 677C>T polymorphism helped determine plasma Hcy 
concentrations.

DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32835693f7
PMID: 22890010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2900. Neurology. 2012 Aug 28;79(9):906-14. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318266fc51. Epub 
2012 Aug 15.

Characterizing dementia with Lewy bodies by means of diffusion tensor imaging.

Watson R(1), Blamire AM, Colloby SJ, Wood JS, Barber R, He J, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. rosie.watson@ncl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To investigate patterns of in vivo white matter tract change using 
diffusion tensor imaging (DTI), we conducted a cross-sectional study of dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) in comparison with Alzheimer disease (AD) and normal 
aging.
METHODS: The study included 106 subjects (35 with DLB, 36 with AD, and 35 
elderly controls) who underwent clinical and neuropsychological assessment and 
diffusion tensor MRI. We used tract-based spatial statistics to investigate 
patterns of reduced fractional anisotropy (FA) and increased mean diffusivity 
(MD) across the entire white matter tract skeleton and also investigated 
correlations with clinical features.
RESULTS: Areas of reduced FA in subjects with DLB vs controls were found 
primarily in parieto-occipital white matter tracts; in AD, the changes were much 
more diffuse. DLB was also associated with reduced FA in the pons and left 
thalamus, in comparison with AD. The pattern of MD increase was diffuse in AD 
and DLB. We found an association between DTI parameters and impaired episodic 
memory, letter fluency, and severity of motor parkinsonism in DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite a similar level of dementia severity, patterns of DTI 
changes in AD and DLB differed significantly. The selective involvement of the 
visual association areas and subcortical structures and the significant clinical 
correlations highlight the potential importance of white matter tract change in 
the pathogenesis of DLB. DTI may be a useful technique to investigate early and 
possible preclinical changes in DLB and warrants further investigation.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318266fc51
PMCID: PMC3425843
PMID: 22895591 [Indexed for MEDLINE]