3501. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2014;114(6 Pt 2):73-9.

[REM sleep behavior disorders in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Russian]

Liashenko EA(1), Poluéktov MG, Levin OS.

Author information:
(1)Kafedra nevrologii Rossiĭskoĭ meditsinskoĭ akademii postdiplomnogo 
obrazovaniia, Tsentr ékstrapiramidnykh zabolevaniĭ, Moskva.

The article presents a literature review on REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD). 
The loss of REM atonia of sleep, such that patients act out the contents of 
their dreams, is described. The most important implication of research into this 
area is that patients with idiopathic RBD are at very high risk of developing 
synuclein-mediated neurodegenerative disease (Parkinson's disease, dementia with 
Lewy bodies and multiple system atrophy), with risk estimates that approximate 
40-65% at 10 years. Thus, RBD is a reliable marker of prodromal synucleinopathy 
that open possibilities for neuroprotective therapy.

PMID: 25042507


3502. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Sep;71(9):1150-4. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1428.

Influence of lifestyle modifications on age-related free radical injury to 
brain.

Peskind ER(1), Li G(2), Shofer JB(3), Millard SP(3), Leverenz JB(4), Yu CE(5), 
Raskind MA(1), Quinn JF(6), Galasko DR(7), Montine TJ(8).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle2Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans 
Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle.
(3)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs 
Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle2Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans 
Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington3Department of 
Neurology, University of Washin.
(5)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington5Department of Medicine, University 
of Washington, Seattle.
(6)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health and Science University, 
Portland7Veterans Affairs Parkinson's Disease Research, Education, and Clinical 
Center, Portland, Oregon.
(7)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla.
(8)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle.

IMPORTANCE: The Healthy Brain Initiative 2013-2018 seeks to optimize brain 
health as we age. Free radical injury is an important effector of molecular and 
cellular stress in the aging brain that derives from multiple sources.
OBJECTIVE: To identify potentially modifiable risk factors associated with 
increased markers of brain oxidative stress.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: This cross-sectional, academic multicenter 
study consisted of 320 research volunteers (172 women) aged 21 to 100 years who 
were medically healthy and cognitively normal.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Free radical injury to the brain was assessed using 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) F2-isoprostane (F2-IsoP) concentrations correlated 
with age, sex, race, cigarette smoking, body mass index, inheritance of the ε4 
allele of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE), and CSF biomarkers of Alzheimer 
disease.
RESULTS: The concentration of CSF F2-IsoP increased with age by approximately 3 
pg/mL (approximately 10%) from age 45 to 71 years in medically healthy, 
cognitively normal adults (P < .001). The CSF F2-IsoP concentration increased by 
approximately more than 10% for every 5-U increase in body mass index (P 
< .001). Current smoking had an approximately 3-fold greater effect on CSF 
F2-IsoPs compared with age (P < .001). Women had greater mean CSF F2-IsoP 
concentrations than men at all ages after adjusting for other factors (P = .02). 
Neither the concentration of CSF Alzheimer disease biomarkers nor inheritance of 
the APOE ε4 allele was associated with the CSF F2-IsoP concentration in this 
group of medically healthy, cognitively normal adults (P > .05). The association 
between CSF F2-IsoP concentrations and race was not significant after 
controlling for the effect of current smoking status (P = .45).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our results are consistent with an age-related 
increase in free radical injury in the human brain and uniquely suggest that 
this form of injury may be greater in women than in men. Our results also 
highlighted 2 lifestyle modifications (ie, body mass index and smoking) that 
would have an even greater effect on suppressing free radical injury to the 
brain than would suppressing the processes of aging. These results inform 
efforts to achieve success in the Healthy Brain Initiative 2013-2018.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1428
PMCID: PMC4160350
PMID: 25048271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.


3503. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Oct;20(10):1059-64. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.06.023. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Natural history of falls in a population-based cohort of patients with 
Parkinson's disease: an 8-year prospective study.

Hiorth YH(1), Larsen JP(2), Lode K(2), Pedersen KF(3).

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
PO Box 8100, N-4068 Stavanger, Norway. Electronic address: 
ylva.hivand.hiorth@sus.no.
(2)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
PO Box 8100, N-4068 Stavanger, Norway.
(3)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
PO Box 8100, N-4068 Stavanger, Norway; Department of Neurology, Stavanger 
University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway.

BACKGROUND: Prospective long-term studies of falls in Parkinson's disease (PD) 
are scarce.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the development of falls over 8 years in a 
population-based cohort of ambulatory patients with PD, and to investigate 
predictors of future falls in non-fallers at baseline.
METHODS: All patients were examined at baseline and after 4 and 8 years, 
including the UPDRS, MMSE, Montgomery and Aaberg Depression Rating Scale, 
Functional Comorbidity Index, and a clinical dementia interview. Logistic 
regression models were applied to investigate baseline risk factors for future 
falls. A total of 211 patients were included at baseline, whereas 121 and 64 
were re-examined at 4 and 8 years, respectively.
RESULTS: The prevalence of falls increased from 41% (87 of 211) at baseline to 
72% (46 of 64) after 8 years of prospective follow-up (disease duration 16.2 ± 
4.8 years). Forty-seven non-falling patients at baseline completed all study 
visits, of these 68% (n = 32) changed fall status during follow-up. Predictive 
variables for current falling after 4 years were rare or occasional freezing of 
gait (OR 6.6, 95% CI 1.2-36.9), higher levodopa equivalent doses and more severe 
speech and axial impairment (both OR 1.3, 95% CI 1.0-1.7) in non-fallers at 
baseline. Higher baseline age was the only risk factor for current falling after 
8 years.
CONCLUSIONS: Nearly ¾ of the PD cohort reported falling after 8 years of 
follow-up. Disease-specific gait and axial impairments were the major risk 
factors for future falls in non-fallers at baseline. This has implications for 
patient education and management.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.06.023
PMID: 25048614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3504. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Oct;128(4):463-76. doi: 10.1007/s00401-014-1324-9. Epub 
2014 Jul 30.

Is there a risk of prion-like disease transmission by Alzheimer- or 
Parkinson-associated protein particles?

Beekes M(1), Thomzig A, Schulz-Schaeffer WJ, Burger R.

Author information:
(1)Robert Koch-Institut, Nordufer 20, 13353, Berlin, Germany, beekesm@rki.de.

The misfolding and aggregation of endogenous proteins in the central nervous 
system is a neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), as well as prion diseases. A molecular mechanism referred to as 
"nucleation-dependent aggregation" is thought to underlie this neuropathological 
phenomenon. According to this concept, disease-associated protein particles act 
as nuclei, or seeds, that recruit cellular proteins and incorporate them, in a 
misfolded form, into their growing aggregate structure. Experimental studies 
have shown that the aggregation of the AD-associated proteins amyloid-β (Aβ) and 
tau, and of the PD-associated protein α-synuclein, can be stimulated in 
laboratory animal models by intracerebral (i.c.) injection of inocula containing 
aggregated species of the respective proteins. This has raised the question of 
whether AD or PD can be transmitted, like certain human prion diseases, between 
individuals by self-propagating protein particles potentially present on medical 
instruments or in blood or blood products. While the i.c. injection of inocula 
containing AD- or PD-associated protein aggregates was found to cause neuronal 
damage and clinical abnormalities (e.g., motor impairments) in some animal 
models, none of the studies published so far provided evidence for a 
transmission of severe or even fatal disease. In addition, available 
epidemiological data do not indicate a transmissibility of AD or PD between 
humans. The findings published so far on the effects of experimentally 
transmitted AD- or PD-associated protein seeds do not suggest specific 
precautionary measures in the context of hemotherapy, but call for vigilance in 
transfusion medicine and other medical areas.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-014-1324-9
PMCID: PMC4159603
PMID: 25073522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3505. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Oct;20(10):1071-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.07.004. Epub 2014 Jul 18.

Severity of mild cognitive impairment in early Parkinson's disease contributes 
to poorer quality of life.

Lawson RA(1), Yarnall AJ(2), Duncan GW(2), Khoo TK(3), Breen DP(4), Barker 
RA(4), Collerton D(2), Taylor JP(2), Burn DJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, 
UK. Electronic address: rachael.lawson@ncl.ac.uk.
(2)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, 
UK.
(3)Griffith Health Institute & School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold 
Coast, Australia.
(4)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.

BACKGROUND: Poor quality of life (QoL) is a feature of people with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) who develop dementia. The relationship between mild cognitive 
impairment in PD (PD-MCI) and QoL is less clear. To address this, we studied the 
impact of varying severities of cognitive impairment on QoL in a cohort of 
non-demented patients with early PD.
METHOD: Patients with newly diagnosed PD (n = 219) and age and sex matched 
healthy controls (n = 99) completed a schedule of neuropsychological tests, in 
addition to scales assessing QoL (PDQ-39), depression, sleep, neuropsychiatric 
symptoms and a clinical examination. The Movement Disorder Society criteria were 
used to define and classify PD-MCI.
RESULTS: Participants with PD-MCI were significantly older than those with 
normal cognition, had more severe motor symptoms, scored higher for depression 
and had poorer quality of life. Logistic regression showed that mild cognitive 
impairment, independent of other factors, was an indicator of poorer QoL. Using 
cognitive performance 2.0 standard deviations (SD) below normative data as a 
cut-off to define PD-MCI, there was a significant difference in QoL scores 
between patients with PD-MCI and those classified as having normal cognition. 
Subjects with less severe mild cognitive impairment did not exhibit significant 
differences in QoL.
CONCLUSIONS: PD-MCI is a significant, independent factor contributing to poorer 
QoL in patients with newly diagnosed PD. Those classified with greatest 
impairment (2.0 SD below normal values) have lower QoL. This has implications 
for clinical practice and future interventions targeting cognitive impairments.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.07.004
PMCID: PMC4194347
PMID: 25074728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3506. Nutr Hosp. 2014;29 Suppl 2:3-12.

[Nutritional and metabolic aspects of neurological diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

Planas Vilà M.

The central nervous system regulates food intake, homoeostasis of glucose and 
electrolytes, and starts the sensations of hunger and satiety. Different 
nutritional factors are involved in the pathogenesis of several neurological 
diseases. Patients with acute neurological diseases (traumatic brain injury, 
cerebral vascular accident hemorrhagic or ischemic, spinal cord injuries, and 
cancer) and chronic neurological diseases (Alzheimer's Disease and other 
dementias, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's Disease) increase the risk 
of malnutrition by multiple factors related to nutrient ingestion, abnormalities 
in the energy expenditure, changes in eating behavior, gastrointestinal changes, 
and by side effects of drugs administered. Patients with acute neurological 
diseases have in common the presence of hyper metabolism and hyper catabolism 
both associated to a period of prolonged fasting mainly for the frequent 
gastrointestinal complications, many times as a side effect of drugs 
administered. During the acute phase, spinal cord injuries presented a reduction 
in the energy expenditure but an increase in the nitrogen elimination. In order 
to correct the negative nitrogen balance increase intakes is performed with the 
result of a hyper alimentation that should be avoided due to the complications 
resulting. In patients with chronic neurological diseases and in the acute phase 
of cerebrovascular accident, dysphagia could be present which also affects 
intakes. Several chronic neurological diseases have also dementia, which lead to 
alterations in the eating behavior. The presence of malnutrition complicates the 
clinical evolution, increases muscular atrophy with higher incidence of 
respiratory failure and less capacity to disphagia recuperation, alters the 
immune response with higher rate of infections, increases the likelihood of 
fractures and of pressure ulcers, increases the incapacity degree and is an 
independent factor to increase mortality. The periodic nutritional evaluation 
due to the evolutionary changes should be part of the treatment. At the same 
time to know the metabolic and nutritional characteristics is important to be 
able to prevent and treat early the possible side effects. If nutritional 
support is indicated, the enteral route is the route of choice although some 
times, mainly in critical patients, parentral nutrition is necessary to ensure 
the administration of the required nutrients.

PMID: 25077336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3507. Nutr Hosp. 2014;29 Suppl 2:38-46.

[Nutritional support in chronic neurological diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

Bretón Lesmes I, Burgos Peláez R, Cuerda C, Camblor M, Velasco C, Higuera I, 
García-Peris P.

Malnutrition is common in neurodegenerative disorders and is associated with a 
worse prognosis and an increased risk of complications. Factors leading to 
malnutrition in these patients are: diseased nutrient intake, due to anorexia, 
dysphagia and other factors, gastrointestinal symptoms, and energy expenditure 
alterations. Nutritional evaluation and monitoring is mandatory and should be 
part of regular clinical evaluation. It will help to identify those patients 
that need specialized nutritional support. In this paper, relevant aspects 
regarding nutritional evaluation and support in patients suffering from a 
neurodegenerative disorder are reviewed, including amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease and dementia.

PMID: 25077344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3508. Brain. 2014 Oct;137(Pt 10):2743-58. doi: 10.1093/brain/awu201. Epub 2014 Jul 30.

Genetic impact on cognition and brain function in newly diagnosed Parkinson's 
disease: ICICLE-PD study.

Nombela C(1), Rowe JB(2), Winder-Rhodes SE(3), Hampshire A(4), Owen AM(5), Breen 
DP(3), Duncan GW(6), Khoo TK(7), Yarnall AJ(6), Firbank MJ(6), Chinnery PF(8), 
Robbins TW(9), O'Brien JT(10), Brooks DJ(11), Burn DJ(6); ICICLE-PD study group; 
Barker RA(3).

Author information:
(1)1 John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK dra.cristinanombela@gmail.com.
(2)2 Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK 3 Medical Research Council, Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK 
4 Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, UK.
(3)1 John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.
(4)5 Computational, Cognitive and Clinical Neuroscience Laboratory, Imperial 
College London, London, UK.
(5)6 Brain and Mind Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada 7 
Department of Psychology, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
(6)8 Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
(7)9 Griffith Health Institute and School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold 
Coast, Australia.
(8)10 Institute of Genetic Medicine, Newcastle University, Newcastle, UK.
(9)4 Behavioural and Clinical Neuroscience Institute, University of Cambridge, 
UK.
(10)11 Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(11)12 Imperial College London, London, UK 13 Department of Clinical Medicine, 
Positron Emission Tomography Centre, Aarhus University, Denmark.

Comment in
    Brain. 2014 Oct;137(Pt 10):2630-1.

Parkinson's disease is associated with multiple cognitive impairments and 
increased risk of dementia, but the extent of these deficits varies widely among 
patients. The ICICLE-PD study was established to define the characteristics and 
prevalence of cognitive change soon after diagnosis, in a representative cohort 
of patients, using a multimodal approach. Specifically, we tested the 'Dual 
Syndrome' hypothesis for cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease, which 
distinguishes an executive syndrome (affecting the frontostriatal regions due to 
dopaminergic deficits) from a posterior cortical syndrome (affecting 
visuospatial, mnemonic and semantic functions related to Lewy body pathology and 
secondary cholinergic loss). An incident Parkinson's disease cohort (n = 168, 
median 8 months from diagnosis to participation) and matched control group (n = 
85) were recruited to a neuroimaging study at two sites in the UK. All 
participants underwent clinical, neuropsychological and functional magnetic 
resonance imaging assessments. The three neuroimaging tasks (Tower of London, 
Spatial Rotations and Memory Encoding Tasks) were designed to probe executive, 
visuospatial and memory encoding domains, respectively. Patients were also 
genotyped for three polymorphisms associated with cognitive change in 
Parkinson's disease and related disorders: (i) rs4680 for COMT Val158Met 
polymorphism; (ii) rs9468 for MAPT H1 versus H2 haplotype; and (iii) rs429358 
for APOE-ε2, 3, 4. We identified performance deficits in all three cognitive 
domains, which were associated with regionally specific changes in cortical 
activation. Task-specific regional activations in Parkinson's disease were 
linked with genetic variation: the rs4680 polymorphism modulated the effect of 
levodopa therapy on planning-related activations in the frontoparietal network; 
the MAPT haplotype modulated parietal activations associated with spatial 
rotations; and APOE allelic variation influenced the magnitude of activation 
associated with memory encoding. This study demonstrates that neurocognitive 
deficits are common even in recently diagnosed patients with Parkinson's 
disease, and that the associated regional brain activations are influenced by 
genotype. These data further support the dual syndrome hypothesis of cognitive 
change in Parkinson's disease. Longitudinal data will confirm the extent to 
which these early neurocognitive changes, and their genetic factors, influence 
the long-term risk of dementia in Parkinson's disease. The combination of 
genetics and functional neuroimaging provides a potentially useful method for 
stratification and identification of candidate markers, in future clinical 
trials against cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease.

© The Author (2014). Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Guarantors of Brain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awu201
PMCID: PMC4163033
PMID: 25080285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3509. Magn Reson Imaging. 2014 Dec;32(10):1301-6. doi: 10.1016/j.mri.2014.07.003. Epub 
2014 Jul 31.

Simultaneous imaging of locus coeruleus and substantia nigra with a quantitative 
neuromelanin MRI approach.

Chen X(1), Huddleston DE(2), Langley J(1), Ahn S(1), Barnum CJ(3), Factor SA(4), 
Levey AI(4), Hu X(5).

Author information:
(1)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA; Center for Health 
Research Southeast, Kaiser Permanente, Atlanta, GA.
(3)Department of Physiology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
(4)Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA.
(5)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology and Emory University, Atlanta, GA. Electronic address: 
xhu3@emory.edu.

Quantitative MRI of neuromelanin (NM) containing structures (referred to as 
NM-MRI) in the brainstem, namely the locus coeruleus (LC) and substantia nigra 
(SN), may assist with the early detection of Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) as well as differential diagnosis in the early disease 
stages. In this study, two gradient echo (GRE) sequences with magnetization 
transfer contrast (MTC) preparation pulses were developed to simultaneously 
image the LC and SN. This has been a challenge with NM-MRI techniques used in 
previous studies due to the relatively high specific absorption rate (SAR) 
induced by these techniques. In addition, a semi-automated quantitative analysis 
scheme was applied to estimate volumes and contrast-to-noise ratios (CNR) of the 
LC and SN based on segmentation of both structures. Compared to a T1-weighted 
turbo spin echo (TSE) sequence typically used for simultaneous imaging of the LC 
and SN, the two GRE-MTC sequences exhibited improved performance in terms of 
higher sensitivity (in CNR) in imaging the SN and lower SAR during the scans. A 
multiple-measurement protocol was adopted as well so that motion degraded 
measurements could be removed and artifacts associated with motion could be 
corrected. The present approach has demonstrated advantages in image acquisition 
(lower SAR and higher sensitivity), image pre-processing (with motion 
correction) and quantitative image analysis (segmentation-based estimation of 
volume and CNR) when compared with existing NM-MRI approaches. This approach has 
potential for detection and monitoring of neurodegeneration in LC and SN in 
disease states including AD and PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mri.2014.07.003
PMID: 25086330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3510. J Agric Food Chem. 2014 Aug 27;62(34):8696-704. doi: 10.1021/jf501174j. Epub 
2014 Aug 18.

Identification of the environmental neurotoxins annonaceous acetogenins in an 
Annona cherimolia Mill. Alcoholic Beverage Using HPLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap.

Le Ven J(1), Schmitz-Afonso I, Lewin G, Brunelle A, Touboul D, Champy P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacognosie, CNRS UMR 8076 BioCIS, Faculté de Pharmacie, 
Université Paris-Sud , 5 rue J.-B. Clément, 92296 Châtenay-Malabry, France.

Epidemiological and toxicological studies have suggested Annonaceaeous 
acetogenins to be environmental neurotoxins responsible for sporadic atypical 
parkinsonism/dementia in tropical areas. These compounds are present in the 
tropical genus Annona (Annonaceae), known for its fruit-yielding cultivated 
species such as Annona cherimolia. This species is widely cultivated in South 
America, Spain, and Portugal and yields acetogenins in its seeds, stems, and 
roots. The presence of these compounds in the pulp of its fruit and in derived 
food products is unclear. An innovative and sensitive methodology by 
HPLC-ESI-LTQ-Orbitrap with postcolumn infusion of lithium iodide was used to 
identify the presence of low levels of acetogenins in an A. cherimolia Mill. 
fruit-based commercial alcoholic beverage. More than 80 representatives were 
detected, and the 31 most intense acetogenins were identified. All together 
these findings indicate that this species should be considered as a risk factor 
within the framework of a worldwide problem of food toxicity.

DOI: 10.1021/jf501174j
PMID: 25088119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3511. J Proteome Res. 2014 Nov 7;13(11):4518-25. doi: 10.1021/pr5006058. Epub 2014 Aug 
13.

Intact protein analysis of ubiquitin in cerebrospinal fluid by multiple reaction 
monitoring reveals differences in Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration.

Oeckl P(1), Steinacker P, von Arnim CA, Straub S, Nagl M, Feneberg E, Weishaupt 
JH, Ludolph AC, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ulm University Hospital , Oberer Eselsberg 45, 89081 
Ulm, Germany.

The impairment of the ubiquitin-proteasome system (UPS) is thought to be an 
early event in neurodegeneration, and monitoring UPS alterations might serve as 
a disease biomarker. Our aim was to establish an alternate method to 
antibody-based assays for the selective measurement of free monoubiquitin in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Free monoubiquitin was measured with liquid 
chromatography-multiple reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) in CSF 
of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
behavioral variant of frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
(CJD), Parkinson's disease (PD), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), and 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). The LC-MS/MS method showed excellent 
intra- and interassay precision (4.4-7.4% and 4.9-10.3%) and accuracy (100-107% 
and 100-106%). CSF ubiquitin concentration was increased compared with that of 
controls (33.0 ± 9.7 ng/mL) in AD (47.5 ± 13.1 ng/mL, p < 0.05) and CJD patients 
(171.5 ± 103.5 ng/mL, p < 0.001) but not in other neurodegenerative diseases. 
Receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC) analysis of AD vs control patients 
revealed an area under the curve (AUC) of 0.832, and the specificity and 
sensitivity were 75 and 75%, respectively. ROC analysis of AD and FTLD patients 
yielded an AUC of 0.776, and the specificity and sensitivity were 53 and 100%, 
respectively. In conclusion, our LC-MS/MS method may facilitate ubiquitin 
determination to a broader community and might help to discriminate AD, CJD, and 
FTLD patients.

DOI: 10.1021/pr5006058
PMID: 25091646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3512. Immunobiology. 2014 Nov;219(11):836-44. doi: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.07.014. Epub 
2014 Jul 22.

Late stages of hematopoiesis and B cell lymphopoiesis are regulated by 
α-synuclein, a key player in Parkinson's disease.

Xiao W(1), Shameli A(1), Harding CV(1), Meyerson HJ(1), Maitta RW(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, 
OH, United States; Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH, United States.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospitals Case Medical Center, Cleveland, 
OH, United States; Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine, 
Cleveland, OH, United States. Electronic address: robert.maitta@uhhospitals.org.

α-Synuclein plays a crucial role in Parkinson's disease and dementias defined as 
synucleinopathies. α-Synuclein is expressed in hematopoietic and immune cells, 
but its functions in hematopoiesis and immune responses are unknown. We utilized 
α-synuclein(-/-) (KO) mice to investigate its role in hematopoiesis and B cell 
lymphopoiesis. We demonstrated hematologic abnormalities including mild anemia, 
smaller platelets, lymphopenia but relatively normal early hematopoiesis in KO 
mice compared to wild-type (WT) as measured in hematopoietic stem cells and 
progenitors of the different cell lineages. However, the absolute number of 
B220(+)IgM(+) B cells in bone marrow was reduced by 4-fold in KO mice (WT: 
104±23×10(5) vs. KO: 27±5×10(5)). B cells were also reduced in KO spleens 
associated with effacement of splenic and lymph node architecture. KO mice 
showed reduced total serum IgG but no abnormality in serum IgM was noted. When 
KO mice were challenged with a T cell-dependent antigen, production of antigen 
specific IgG1 and IgG2b was abolished, but antigen specific IgM was not 
different from WT mice. Our study shows hematologic abnormalities including 
anemia and smaller platelets, reduced B cell lymphopoiesis and defects in IgG 
production in the absence of α-synuclein. This is the first report to show an 
important role of α-synuclein late in hematopoiesis, B cell lymphopoiesis and 
adaptive immune response.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.imbio.2014.07.014
PMCID: PMC4437197
PMID: 25092570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of Conflicts of Interest: The authors 
declare no competing financial interests in the submission of this article.


3513. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2014 Aug 7;2:90. doi: 10.1186/s40478-014-0090-1.

Microglial phenotypes and toll-like receptor 2 in the substantia nigra and 
hippocampus of incidental Lewy body disease cases and Parkinson's disease 
patients.

Doorn KJ, Moors T, Drukarch B, van de Berg WDj, Lucassen PJ, van Dam AM.

Next to α-synuclein deposition, microglial activation is a prominent 
pathological feature in the substantia nigra (SN) of Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients. Little is known, however, about the different phenotypes of microglia 
and how they change during disease progression, in the SN or in another brain 
region, like the hippocampus (HC), which is implicated in dementia and 
depression, important non-motor symptoms in PD. We studied phenotypes and 
activation of microglia in the SN and HC of established PD patients (Braak PD 
stage 4–6), matched controls (Braak PD stage 0) and of incidental Lewy Body 
disease (iLBD) cases (Braak PD stage 1–3) that are considered a prodromal state 
of PD. As recent experimental studies suggested that toll-like receptor 2 (TLR2) 
mediates α-synuclein triggered microglial activation, we also studied whether 
TLR2 expression is indeed related to pathology in iLBD and PD patients. A clear 
α-synuclein pathology-related increase in amoeboid microglia was present in the 
HC and SN in PD. Also, morphologically primed/reactive microglial cells, and a 
profound increase in microglial TLR2 expression were apparent in iLBD, but not 
PD, cases, indicative of an early activational response to PD pathology. 
Moreover, TLR2 was differentially expressed between the SN and HC, consistent 
with a region-specific pattern of microglial activation. In conclusion, the 
regional changes in microglial phenotype and TLR2 expression in primed/reactive 
microglia in the SN and HC of iLBD cases indicate that TLR2 may play a prominent 
role in the microglial-mediated responses that could be important for PD 
progression.

DOI: 10.1186/s40478-014-0090-1
PMCID: PMC4224021
PMID: 25099483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3514. PLoS Genet. 2014 Aug 7;10(8):e1004550. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004550. 
eCollection 2014 Aug.

Dysfunction of the CNS-heart axis in mouse models of Huntington's disease.

Mielcarek M(1), Inuabasi L(1), Bondulich MK(1), Muller T(1), Osborne GF(1), 
Franklin SA(1), Smith DL(1), Neueder A(1), Rosinski J(2), Rattray I(1), Protti 
A(3), Bates GP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, King's College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(2)CHDI Management Inc./CHDI Foundation Inc., Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.
(3)King's College London British Heart Foundation Centre of Excellence, 
Cardiovascular Division and Division of Imaging Sciences and Biomedical 
Engineering, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

Cardiac remodelling and contractile dysfunction occur during both acute and 
chronic disease processes including the accumulation of insoluble aggregates of 
misfolded amyloid proteins that are typical features of Alzheimer's, Parkinson's 
and Huntington's disease (HD). While HD has been described mainly as a 
neurological disease, multiple epidemiological studies have shown that HD 
patients exhibit a high incidence of cardiovascular events leading to heart 
failure, and that this is the second highest cause of death. Given that 
huntingtin is ubiquitously expressed, cardiomyocytes may be at risk of an 
HD-related dysfunction. In mice, the forced expression of an expanded polyQ 
repeat under the control of a cardiac specific promoter led to severe heart 
failure followed by reduced lifespan. However the mechanism leading to cardiac 
dysfunction in the clinical and pre-clinical HD settings remains unknown. To 
unravel this mechanism, we employed the R6/2 transgenic and HdhQ150 knock-in 
mouse models of HD. We found that pre-symptomatic animals developed connexin-43 
relocation and a significant deregulation of hypertrophic markers and Bdnf 
transcripts. In the symptomatic animals, pronounced functional changes were 
visualised by cardiac MRI revealing a contractile dysfunction, which might be a 
part of dilatated cardiomyopathy (DCM). This was accompanied by the 
re-expression of foetal genes, apoptotic cardiomyocyte loss and a moderate 
degree of interstitial fibrosis. To our surprise, we could identify neither 
mutant HTT aggregates in cardiac tissue nor a HD-specific transcriptional 
dysregulation, even at the end stage of disease. We postulate that the 
HD-related cardiomyopathy is caused by altered central autonomic pathways 
although the pathogenic effects of mutant HTT acting intrinsically in the heart 
may also be a contributing factor.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004550
PMCID: PMC4125112
PMID: 25101683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Jim Rosinski is employed by CHDI Management Inc. 
to provide consulting services to CHDI Foundation. There are no patents, 
products in development or marketed products to declare. We fully adhere to all 
the PLoS Genetics policies on sharing data and materials, as detailed online in 
the guide for authors.


3515. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014;13(9):1604-14. doi: 
10.2174/1871527313666140806150440.

Drugs targeting SNPrs35753505 of the NRG1 gene may prevent the association of 
neurological disorder schizophrenia in a Pakistani population.

Nawaz R, Asif H, Khan A, Ishtiaq H, Shad F, Siddiqui S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Dr. Panjwani Center for Molecular Medicine and 
Drug Research, International Center for Chemical and Biological Sciences, 
University of Karachi, Karachi 75270, Pakistan. siddisbs@yahoo.com.

The Neuregulin 1 (NRG1) gene has been associated with schizophrenia in several 
populations, and all four types of NRG1 genes are linked with neurotransmitters 
activities. In this study for the first time we have demonstrated an association 
between NRG1 mutation and schizophrenia in Pakistani population. We examined the 
relationship of three genetic variants SNPs: rs3924999, rs2954041 and rs35753505 
of NRG1 gene with the onset of disease. Genomic DNA samples were obtained from 
the blood of 100 patients and 80 matched controls. All three NRG1 SNPs were 
genotyped by polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism 
method and further confirmed by DNA sequencing. The SNPs frequencies were 
estimated by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and Chi-square tests. Our study 
established a significant association of rs35753505 with schizophrenia but no 
association with rs3924999 and rs2954041. The frequency of risk allele C was 
significantly higher (62.5%) in rs35753505 patients when compared to controls 
(28.13%). Genotype frequency by Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium for SNPrs3924999 in 
patients was GG 77.4%, GA 21.12% and AA 1.44% and showed no association with the 
disease. Similarly, no genotype association was observed in rs2954041: GG 
92.98%, GT 6.89%, TT 0.13% of NRG1. However, one unexpected G allele, 100% 
guanine (G) with no adenine (A) was found to be present in SNP rs35753505 in 
both patients and controls. This is an interesting finding that both cohorts 
display only allele G peak but no peak for allele A in the electropherogram for 
this SNP. Our results suggest that SNP rs35753505 of NRG1 plays an important 
role in conferring susceptibility to the schizophrenia in a Pakistani 
population.

DOI: 10.2174/1871527313666140806150440
PMID: 25106628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3516. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Oct 15;345(1-2):193-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.046. Epub 
2014 Jul 28.

Clinical features and neuropsychological profile in vascular parkinsonism.

Benítez-Rivero S(1), Lama MJ(1), Huertas-Fernández I(1), Alvarez de Toledo P(1), 
Cáceres-Redondo MT(1), Martín-Rodríguez JF(1), Carrillo F(1), Carballo M(1), 
Palomar FJ(2), Mir P(3).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento, Servicio de Neurología y Neurofisiología 
Clínica, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain.
(2)Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento, Servicio de Neurología y Neurofisiología 
Clínica, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain; Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain.
(3)Unidad de Trastornos del Movimiento, Servicio de Neurología y Neurofisiología 
Clínica, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla, Hospital Universitario Virgen del 
Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla, Seville, Spain; Centro de Investigación 
Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Spain. 
Electronic address: pmir@us.es.

BACKGROUND: The clinical profile in vascular parkinsonism (VP) patients is well 
described in the literature, but little is known about the neuropsychological 
features of this disease. The aim of our study was to evaluate the clinical 
characteristics and the profile of cognitive impairment in patients with VP.
METHODS: We prospectively evaluated 12 patients with VP, 15 with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and 13 healthy controls (HC) with similar age and sex distribution. 
Different clinical and demographic details were collected. All subjects 
underwent detailed neurological and neuropsychological examinations. The 
neuropsychological tests included analysis of global efficiency, executive 
function, verbal memory, language and visuospatial function.
RESULTS: VP patients exhibited lower disease duration, older age at onset and 
higher frequency of cardiovascular risk factors. Non-motor symptoms were found 
to be more frequent in PD. We found that VP patients developed cognitive 
impairment with a significantly higher frequency than HC of a similar age. 
Additionally, we found that these patients had a global pattern of cognitive 
impairment, including executive function, verbal memory and language. Only 
visuospatial function was more impaired in PD than in HC.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data contribute to clarify the pattern of neuropsychological 
impairment in VP. Therefore, in the clinical evaluation, besides assessing the 
motor status of the patient, given that these symptoms are frequently found not 
to be self-reported complaints, the neurologist should evaluate them routinely 
as a comprehensive assessment of this disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.046
PMID: 25108818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3517. Biogerontology. 2014 Dec;15(6):547-57. doi: 10.1007/s10522-014-9523-2. Epub 2014 
Aug 12.

Inverse association between cancer and neurodegenerative disease: review of the 
epidemiologic and biological evidence.

Driver JA(1).

Author information:
(1)New England Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, VA Boston 
Healthcare System, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA, 
jdriver@partners.org.

Growing evidence suggests an unusual epidemiologic association between cancer 
and certain neurological conditions, particularly age-related neurodegenerative 
diseases. Cancer survivors have a 20-50% lower risk of developing Parkinson's 
and Alzheimer's disease, and patients with these neurodegenerative conditions 
have a substantially lower incidence of cancer. We review the epidemiologic 
evidence for this inverse co-morbidity and show that it is not simply an 
artifact of survival bias or under-diagnosis. We then review the potential 
biological explanations for this association, which is intimately linked to the 
very different nature of dividing cells and neurons. The known genetic and 
metabolic connections between cancer and neurodegeneration generally fall within 
two categories. The first includes shared genes and pathways such as Pin1 and 
the ubiquitin proteasome system that are dysregulated in different directions to 
cause one disease or the other. The second includes common pathophysiological 
mechanisms such as mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative stress and DNA damage 
that drive both conditions, but with different cellular fates. We discuss 
examples of these biological links and their implications for developing new 
approaches to prevention and treatment of both diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10522-014-9523-2
PMID: 25113739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3518. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;42 Suppl 3:S217-28. doi: 10.3233/JAD-132684.

Default mode network connectivity patterns associated with visual processing at 
different stages of Parkinson's disease.

Rektorova I(1), Krajcovicova L(1), Marecek R(2), Novakova M(3), Mikl M(2).

Author information:
(1)Applied Neuroscience Research Group, CEITEC - Central European Institute of 
Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic First Department of 
Neurology, School of Medicine, Masaryk University and St. Anne's University 
Hospital, Brno, Czech Republic.
(2)Multimodal and Functional Imaging Research Group, CEITEC - Central European 
Institute of Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.
(3)Applied Neuroscience Research Group, CEITEC - Central European Institute of 
Technology, Masaryk University, Brno, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: The default mode network (DMN) decreases its activity when switching 
from a resting state to a cognitive task condition, while activity of the 
network engaged in the given task increases. Visual processing is typically 
disturbed in Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD).
OBJECTIVE: Using functional MRI, we studied the DMN effective connectivity 
patterns in PDD as compared with cognitively normal patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and healthy controls (HC) when switching from baseline to a visual 
cognitive task condition.
METHODS: In all, 14 PDD, 18 PD, and 18 age-matched healthy controls participated 
in this functional MRI study. We used a psychophysiological interaction analysis 
with the precuneus (PCu) as a seed. The threshold was set at p(FWE) <0.05.
RESULTS: The healthy controls showed greater PCu connectivity with the bilateral 
middle temporal/middle occipital gyri at baseline than during the task 
condition. The correlation direction changed from positive to negative. Both PD 
and PDD showed disturbed DMN connectivity with the brain regions that are 
involved in bottom-up visual processing. In PD, we also found impaired 
integration of the areas engaged in the ventral attentional network, which might 
reflect specific attentional deficits observed during the early course of PD. In 
mild PDD, we detected increased engagement of areas involved in the dorsal 
attentional network, which corresponds to increased top-down control in this 
patient group as compared to the healthy controls.
CONCLUSION: Our results show impaired dynamic interplay between large scale 
brain networks in PD that spread far beyond the motor system.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-132684
PMID: 25114077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3519. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Nov 15;346(1-2):299-302. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.063. Epub 
2014 Aug 6.

Does early verbal fluency decline after STN implantation predict long-term 
cognitive outcome after STN-DBS in Parkinson's disease?

Borden A(1), Wallon D(2), Lefaucheur R(1), Derrey S(3), Fetter D(1), Verin M(4), 
Maltête D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rouen University Hospital, University of Rouen, 
France.
(2)Department of Neurology, Rouen University Hospital, University of Rouen, 
France; Department of Neurosurgery, Rouen University Hospital, University of 
Rouen, France.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Rouen University Hospital, University of Rouen, 
France.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Rennes, France; EA 4712 
"Behavior and Basal Ganglia", Rennes 1 University, France.
(5)Department of Neurology, Rouen University Hospital, University of Rouen, 
France; INSERM U1079, Rouen Faculty of Medicine, France. Electronic address: 
david.maltete@chu-rouen.fr.

BACKGROUNDS: An early and transient verbal fluency (VF) decline and impairment 
in frontal executive function, suggesting a cognitive microlesion effect may 
influence the cognitive repercussions related to subthalamic nucleus deep brain 
stimulation (STN-DBS).
METHODS: Neuropsychological tests including semantic and phonemic verbal fluency 
were administered both before surgery (baseline), the third day after surgery 
(T3), at six months (T180), and at an endpoint multiple years after surgery 
(Tyears).
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients (mean age, 63.5 ± 9.5 years; mean disease 
duration, 12 ± 5.8 years) were included. Both semantic and phonemic VF decreased 
significantly in the acute post-operative period (44.4 ± 28.2% and 34.3 ± 33.4%, 
respectively) and remained low at 6 months compared to pre-operative levels 
(decrease of 3.4 ± 47.8% and 10.8 ± 32.1%) (P < 0.05). Regression analysis 
showed phonemic VF to be an independent factor of decreased phonemic VF at six 
months. Age was the only independent predictive factor for incident Parkinson's 
disease dementia (PDD) (F (4,19)=3.4, P<0.03).
CONCLUSION: An acute post-operative decline in phonemic VF can be predictive of 
a long-term phonemic VF deficit. The severity of this cognitive lesion effect 
does not predict the development of dementia which appears to be 
disease-related.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.07.063
PMID: 25125047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3520. Ann Clin Transl Neurol. 2014 Jul 3;1(7):479-489. doi: 10.1002/acn3.77.

Disease-Modifying Effect of Adiponectin in Model of α-Synucleinopathies.

Sekiyama K(1), Waragai M(1), Akatsu H(2), Sugama S(3), Takenouchi T(4), 
Takamatsu Y(1), Fujita M(1), Sekigawa A(1), Rockenstein E(5), Inoue S(6), La 
Spada AR(7), Masliah E(5), Hashimoto M(1).

Author information:
(1)Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Sciences, 2-1-6 Kamikitazawa, 
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo 156-0057, Japan.
(2)Choju Medical Institute, Fukushimura Hospital, Aichi 441-8124, Japan.
(3)Nippon Medical School, 1-1-5 Sendagi, Bunkyou-ku, Tokyo 113-8602, Japan.
(4)Division of Animal Sciences, National Institute of Agrobiological Sciences, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8634, Japan.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093-0624, USA.
(6)Department of Anti-Aging Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo 156-0057, Japan.
(7)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics, Department of Cellular and 
Molecular Medicine, the Institute for Genomic Medicine, and the Sanford 
Consortium for Regenerative Medicine, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA 92037, USA ; Rady Children's Hospital, San Diego, CA 92123, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Growing evidence suggests that neurodegenerative diseases are 
associated with metabolic disorders, but the mechanisms are still unclear. 
Better comprehension of this issue might provide a new strategy for treatment of 
neurodegenerative diseases. We investigated possible roles of adiponectin (APN), 
the anti-diabetes protein, in the pathogenesis of α-synucleinopathies.
METHODS: Using biochemical and histological methods, we investigated autopsy 
brain of α-synucleinopathies including Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB), and analyzed the effects of APN in cellular and in mouse 
models of α-synucleinopathies.
RESULTS: We observed that APN is localized in Lewy bodies derived from 
α-synucleinopathies such as Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. 
In neuronal cells expressing α-synuclein (αS), aggregation of αS was suppressed 
by treatment with recombinant APN in an AdipoRI-AMP kinase pathway-dependent 
manner. Concomitantly, phosphorylation and release of αS were significantly 
decreased by APN, suggesting that APN may be antineurodegenerative. In 
transgenic mice expressing αS, both histopathology and movement disorder were 
significantly improved by intranasal treatment with globular APN when the 
treatment was initiated in the early stage of the disease. In a mouse model, 
reduced levels of guanosine- and inosine- monophosphates, both of which are 
potential stimulators of aggregation of αS, might partly contribute to 
suppression of aggregation of αS by APN.
INTERPRETATION: Taken together, APN may suppress neurodegeneration through 
modification of the metabolic pathway, and could possess a therapeutic potential 
against α-synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1002/acn3.77
PMCID: PMC4128281
PMID: 25126588


3521. Syst Rev. 2014 Aug 15;3:91. doi: 10.1186/2046-4053-3-91.

Understanding the impact of visual arts interventions for people living with 
dementia: a realist review protocol.

Windle G(1), Gregory S, Newman A, Goulding A, O'Brien D, Parkinson C.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Services Development Centre, Bangor University, Ardudwy, Holyhead 
Road, Bangor, Gwynedd LL57 2DG, Wales. g.windle@bangor.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Arts-based activities are being increasingly suggested as a valuable 
activity for people living with dementia in terms of countering the negative 
aspects of their condition. The potential for such programmes to improve a broad 
range of psychosocial outcomes is suggested in some studies. However, there is 
largely an absence of rigorous methodology to demonstrate the benefits, and 
research results are mixed. Practice variability in terms of the content, 
contexts and implementation of such interventions raises challenges in terms of 
identifying an optimal arts programme model that could be adopted by other 
service providers. Understanding how interventions may have the best chance at 
broad implementation success and uptake is limited.
METHODS/DESIGN: A realist review will be undertaken. This aims to understand how 
visual arts interventions influence outcomes in people living with dementia. The 
review will explore how the context, that is the circumstances which enable or 
constrain, affect outcomes through the activation of mechanisms. An early 
scoping search and a stakeholder survey formulated the preliminary programme 
theory. A systematic literature search across a broad range of disciplines 
(arts, humanities, social sciences, health) will be undertaken to identify 
journal articles and grey literature. Data will be extracted in relation to the 
programme theory, contextual factors, mechanisms and outcomes and their 
configurations, background information about the study design and participant 
characteristics, detail about the quantity ('dose') of an intervention, 
theoretical perspectives proposed by the authors of the paper and further 
theorising by the reviewer. Thematic connections/patterns will be sought across 
the extracted data, identifying patterns amongst contextual factors, the 
mechanisms they trigger and the associated outcomes.
DISCUSSION: Along with stakeholder engagement and validation, this review will 
help inform the development of an optimal, replicable arts intervention for 
people with dementia as part of our broader research programme, titled 'Dementia 
and Imagination' (funded by the Arts and Humanities Research Council). 
Forthcoming work under this programme of research will test this theoretically 
informed intervention in three different geographical areas of the UK. The 
production of freely available practice guidance is a key aspect of 
dissemination.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: PROSPERO registration number CRD42014008702.

DOI: 10.1186/2046-4053-3-91
PMCID: PMC4141269
PMID: 25128286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3522. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Jan;36(1):434-45. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.07.009. Epub 2014 Jul 15.

Quantitative electroencephalogram utility in predicting conversion of mild 
cognitive impairment to dementia with Lewy bodies.

Bonanni L(1), Perfetti B(2), Bifolchetti S(2), Taylor JP(3), Franciotti R(4), 
Parnetti L(5), Thomas A(2), Onofrj M(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, G. d'Annunzio University, Chieti, 
Italy; Aging Research Centre, Ce.S.I., G. d'Annunzio University Foundation, 
Chieti, Italy. Electronic address: l.bonanni@unich.it.
(2)Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, G. d'Annunzio University, Chieti, 
Italy; Aging Research Centre, Ce.S.I., G. d'Annunzio University Foundation, 
Chieti, Italy.
(3)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(4)Department of Neuroscience and Imaging, G. d'Annunzio University, Chieti, 
Italy; Institute for Advanced Biomedical Technologies (ITAB), G. d'Annunzio 
University Foundation, Chieti, Italy.
(5)Center for Memory Disturbances and Alzheimer's Center, Section of Neurology, 
University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) as a precursor of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) is the focus of recent research, trying to explore the early mechanisms 
and possible biomarkers of DLB. Quantitative electroencephalogram (QEEG) methods 
are able to differentiate early DLB from Alzheimer's disease (AD). The aim of 
the present study was to assess whether QEEG abnormalities, characterized by 
dominant frequency <8 Hz and dominant frequency variability >1.5 Hz, typical of 
early DLB, are already present at the stage of MCI and to evaluate whether EEG 
abnormalities can predict the development of DLB. Forty-seven MCI subjects were 
followed for 3 years. EEG recordings were obtained at admission and at the end 
of the study. At the end of follow-up, 20 subjects had developed probable DLB 
(MCI-DLB), 14 had probable AD (MCI-AD), 8 did not convert to dementia, 5 
developed a non-AD/DLB dementia. One hundred percent of MCI-DLB showed EEG 
abnormalities at admission. Ninety three percent of MCI-AD maintained a normal 
EEG throughout the study. QEEG may represent a powerful tool to predict the 
progression from MCI to DLB with a sensitivity and specificity close to 100%.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.07.009
PMCID: PMC4270449
PMID: 25129239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3523. Curr Med Chem. 2014;21(36):4100-31. doi: 10.2174/0929867321666140815124246.

Diagnostic and therapeutic uses of nanomaterials in the brain.

Garbayo E, Estella-Hermoso de Mendoza A, Blanco-Prieto MJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology, School of Pharmacy, 
University of Navarra, C/Irunlarrea 1, 31080 Pamplona, Spain. mjblanco@unav.es.

Nanomedicine has recently emerged as an exciting tool able to improve the early 
diagnosis and treatment of a variety of intractable or age-related brain 
disorders. The most relevant properties of nanomaterials are that they can be 
engineered to cross the blood brain barrier, to target specific cells and 
molecules and to act as vehicles for drugs. Potentially beneficial properties of 
nanotherapeutics derived from its unique characteristics include improved 
efficacy, safety, sensitivity and personalization compared to conventional 
medicines. In this review, recent advances in available nanostructures and 
nanomaterials for brain applications will be described. Then, the latest 
applications of nanotechnology for the diagnosis and treatment of neurological 
disorders, in particular brain tumors and neurodegenerative diseases, will be 
reviewed. Recent investigations of the neurotoxicity of the nanomaterial both in 
vitro and in vivo will be summarized. Finally, the ongoing challenges that have 
to be meet if new nanomedical products are to be put on the market will be 
discussed and some future directions will be outlined.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867321666140815124246
PMID: 25139519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3524. J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4(4):651-6. doi: 10.3233/JPD-140427.

Mild cognitive impairment and Parkinson's disease--something to remember.

Barker RA(1), Williams-Gray CH(1).

Author information:
(1)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Cognitive impairment is common in Parkinson's disease (PD), and many patients 
will eventually develop a dementia, which has a devastating impact on the 
patient and their family. As such, there has been much interest in identifying a 
prodromal state to inform prognosis and facilitate earlier management, similar 
to the concept of 'MCI' in the Alzheimer's field. However, grouping the early 
cognitive deficits of PD together as 'PD-MCI' may not be the best way forward as 
it implies a single aetiological basis with one clinical consequence. In this 
review, we argue that cognitive deficits in PD arise from a number of different 
pathological pathways, only some of which herald a dementing process. This has 
important implications both for treatment of individual patients, and for the 
design of future disease-modifying therapy trials.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-140427
PMID: 25147139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3525. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 28;9(8):e105784. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105784. 
eCollection 2014.

Biochemical assessment of precuneus and posterior cingulate gyrus in the context 
of brain aging and Alzheimer's disease.

Maarouf CL(1), Kokjohn TA(2), Walker DG(3), Whiteside CM(1), Kalback WM(1), 
Whetzel A(3), Sue LI(4), Serrano G(4), Jacobson SA(5), Sabbagh MN(5), Reiman 
EM(6), Beach TG(4), Roher AE(1).

Author information:
(1)The Longtine Center for Neurodegenerative Biochemistry, Banner Sun Health 
Research Institute, Sun City, Arizona, United States of America.
(2)Department of Microbiology, Midwestern University, Glendale, Arizona, United 
States of America.
(3)Laboratory of Neuroinflammation, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun 
City, Arizona, United States of America.
(4)Civin Laboratory for Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 
Sun City, Arizona, United States of America.
(5)Cleo Roberts Center for Clinical Research, Banner Sun Health Research 
Institute, Sun City, Arizona, United States of America.
(6)Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America.

Defining the biochemical alterations that occur in the brain during "normal" 
aging is an important part of understanding the pathophysiology of 
neurodegenerative diseases and of distinguishing pathological conditions from 
aging-associated changes. Three groups were selected based on age and on having 
no evidence of neurological or significant neurodegenerative disease: 1) young 
adult individuals, average age 26 years (n = 9); 2) middle-aged subjects, 
average age 59 years (n = 5); 3) oldest-old individuals, average age 93 years 
(n = 6). Using ELISA and Western blotting methods, we quantified and compared 
the levels of several key molecules associated with neurodegenerative disease in 
the precuneus and posterior cingulate gyrus, two brain regions known to exhibit 
early imaging alterations during the course of Alzheimer's disease. Our 
experiments revealed that the bioindicators of emerging brain pathology remained 
steady or decreased with advancing age. One exception was S100B, which 
significantly increased with age. Along the process of aging, neurofibrillary 
tangle deposition increased, even in the absence of amyloid deposition, 
suggesting the presence of amyloid plaques is not obligatory for their 
development and that limited tangle density is a part of normal aging. Our study 
complements a previous assessment of neuropathology in oldest-old subjects, and 
within the limitations of the small number of individuals involved in the 
present investigation, it adds valuable information to the molecular and 
structural heterogeneity observed along the course of aging and dementia. This 
work underscores the need to examine through direct observation how the 
processes of amyloid deposition unfold or change prior to the earliest phases of 
dementia emergence.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105784
PMCID: PMC4148328
PMID: 25166759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: CLM, TAK, CMW, WMK, AW, 
LIS, GS have no conflicts of interest to declare. AER and DGW receive grants 
from the National Institute on Aging. TGB received grants support from the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, National Brain and 
Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders, the National 
Institute on Aging, Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core Center and the Michael J. 
Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. SAJ receives salary support from the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (U24 NS072026 National 
Brain and Tissue Resource for Parkinson’s Disease and Related Disorders), the 
National Institute on Aging (P30 AG19610 Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core 
Center), the Arizona Biomedical Research Corporation, and the Michael J. Fox 
Foundation for Parkinson’s Research. SAJ also receives royalties from American 
Psychiatric Publishing, Inc. for published works. MNS receives grants/contracts 
from Pfizer, Eisai, Neuronix, Lilly, Avid, Piramal, GE, Avanir, Elan, Takeda, 
DART, Navidea and Functional Neuromodulation, is an advisor for Biogen, Lilly, 
Piramal, Eisai and Avid and receives royalties from Wiley and Tenspeed 
(RandomHouse). EMR receives grants from the Arizona Alzheimer’s Disease Core 
Center and the National Institute on Aging. This does not alter the authors’ 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


3526. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2015 Jan;59(1):8-20. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400290. Epub 2014 
Oct 9.

Natural polyphenols binding to amyloid: a broad class of compounds to treat 
different human amyloid diseases.

Ngoungoure VL(1), Schluesener J, Moundipa PF, Schluesener H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Yaoundé I, Yaoundé, 
Cameroon; Division of Immunopathology of the Nervous System, Department of 
Neuropathology, Institute of Pathology, University of Tuebingen, Tuebingen, 
Germany.

Polyphenols are a large group of phytonutrients found in herbal beverages and 
foods. They have manifold biological activities, including antioxidative, 
antimicrobial, and anti-inflammatory properties. Interestingly, some polyphenols 
bind to amyloid and substantially ameliorate amyloid diseases. Misfolding, 
aggregation, and accumulation of amyloid fibrils in tissues or organs leads to a 
group of disorders, called amyloidoses. Prominent diseases are Alzheimer's, 
Parkinson's, and Huntington's disease, but there are other, less well-known 
diseases wherein accumulation of misfolded protein is a prominent feature. 
Amyloidoses are a major burden to public health. In particular, Alzheimer's 
disease shows a strong increase in patient numbers. Accelerated development of 
effective therapies for amyloidoses is a necessity. A viable strategy can be the 
prevention or reduction of protein misfolding, thus reducing amyloid build-up by 
restoring the cellular aggretome. Amyloid-binding polyphenols affect amyloid 
formation on various levels, e.g. by inhibiting fibril formation or steering 
oligomer formation into unstructured, nontoxic pathways. Consequently, 
preclinical studies demonstrate reduction of amyloid-formation by polyphenols. 
Amyloid-binding polyphenols might be suitable lead structures for development of 
imaging agents for early detection of disease and monitoring amyloid deposition. 
Intake of dietary polyphenols might be relevant to the prevention of 
amyloidoses. Nutraceutical strategies might be a way to reduce amyloid diseases.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/mnfr.201400290
PMID: 25167846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3527. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2014;48(4):258-61. doi: 10.1016/j.pjnns.2014.07.005. Epub 
2014 Jul 29.

Cognitive impairment in carriers of glucocerebrosidase gene mutation in 
Parkinson disease patients.

Malec-Litwinowicz M(1), Rudzińska M(2), Szubiga M(3), Michalski M(4), 
Tomaszewski T(4), Szczudlik A(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, 
Poland. Electronic address: malec.mich@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Silesia, Katowice, Poland. 
Electronic address: rudzinsk@cm-uj.krakow.pl.
(3)Department of Medical Genetics, Polish-American Institute of Pediatrics, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland.
(4)Department of Neurology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, 
Poland.

AIM: Parkinson disease (PD) is the common neurodegenerative disease with motor 
and numerous non-motor symptoms, including cognitive impairment. Mutation of 
glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene is the most common genetic risk factor of sporadic 
PD. The aim of this study was to assess clinical features of PD associated with 
GBA mutation.
METHODS: One hundred and thirty-eight PD patients were involved and examined by 
the movement disorder specialist using several scales including Unified 
Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part II and III, Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y) 
staging, Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and Hamilton Depression Scale 
(HDS). The exons 8 and 9 of GBA was sequenced and screened for variants.
RESULTS: The GBA variants were found in 16 (11.6%) PD patients: N370S mutation 
in 5 (3.6%) and T369M variant in 11 (7.9%). No significant differences between 
the group of mutation carriers and non-carriers were found in relation to 
clinical features except for dementia (MMSE score<26) occurring more often in 
N370S mutation carriers (60.0% vs 19.6%, p=0.03).
CONCLUSION: The N370S GBA mutation is the risk factor for cognitive impairment 
in PD patients.

Copyright © 2014 Polish Neurological Society. Published by Elsevier Urban & 
Partner Sp. z o.o. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pjnns.2014.07.005
PMID: 25168325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3528. Neurology. 2014 Sep 30;83(14):1253-60. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000842. Epub 
2014 Aug 29.

Predictors of dementia in Parkinson disease: a prospective cohort study.

Anang JB(1), Gagnon JF(2), Bertrand JA(1), Romenets SR(1), Latreille V(1), 
Panisset M(1), Montplaisir J(1), Postuma RB(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery (J.B.M.A., S.R.R., R.B.P.), 
McGill University, Montreal; Centre d'Études Avancées en Médecine du Sommeill 
(J.-F.G., J.-A.B., V.L., M.P., J.M., R.B.P.), Hôpital du Sacré-coeur de 
Montréal; Department of Psychology (J.-F.G., J.-A.B.), Université du Québec à 
Montréal; and Department of Psychiatry (J.M.), Université de Montreal, Canada.
(2)From the Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery (J.B.M.A., S.R.R., R.B.P.), 
McGill University, Montreal; Centre d'Études Avancées en Médecine du Sommeill 
(J.-F.G., J.-A.B., V.L., M.P., J.M., R.B.P.), Hôpital du Sacré-coeur de 
Montréal; Department of Psychology (J.-F.G., J.-A.B.), Université du Québec à 
Montréal; and Department of Psychiatry (J.M.), Université de Montreal, Canada. 
ron.postuma@mcgill.ca gagnon.jean-francois.2@uqam.ca.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2015 Mar 24;84(12):1285.
    Neurology. 2015 Mar 24;84(12):1285-6.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated an array of possible markers of early dementia in 
Parkinson disease.
METHODS: We performed a comprehensive assessment of autonomic, sleep, 
psychiatric, visual, olfactory, and motor manifestations in 80 patients with 
Parkinson disease who were dementia-free at baseline. After 4.4 years' 
follow-up, patients were evaluated for dementia. Predictive variables were 
assessed using logistic regression adjusting for disease duration, follow-up 
duration, age, and sex.
RESULTS: Of 80 patients, 27 (34%) developed dementia. Patients destined to 
develop dementia were older and more often male (odds ratio [OR] = 3.64, p = 
0.023). Those with baseline mild cognitive impairment had increased dementia 
risk (OR = 22.5, p < 0.001). REM sleep behavior disorder at baseline 
dramatically increased dementia risk (OR = 49.7, p = 0.001); however, neither 
daytime sleepiness nor insomnia predicted dementia. Higher baseline blood 
pressure increased dementia risk (OR = 1.37 per 10 mm Hg, p = 0.032). 
Orthostatic blood pressure drop was strongly associated with dementia risk (OR = 
1.84 per 10 mm Hg, p < 0.001); having a systolic drop of >10 mm Hg increased 
dementia odds 7-fold (OR = 7.3, p = 0.002). Abnormal color vision increased 
dementia risk (OR = 3.3, p = 0.014), but olfactory dysfunction did not. Among 
baseline motor variables, proportion of gait involvement (OR = 1.12, p = 0.023), 
falls (OR = 3.02, p = 0.042), and freezing (OR = 2.63, p = 0.013), as well as 
the Purdue Pegboard Test (OR = 0.67, p = 0.049) and alternate tap test (OR = 
0.97, p = 0.033) predicted dementia.
CONCLUSION: Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction, REM sleep behavior disorder, 
color discrimination ability, and gait dysfunction strongly predict development 
of dementia in Parkinson disease.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000000842
PMCID: PMC4180482
PMID: 25171928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3529. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Nov;20(11):1260-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.006. Epub 2014 Aug 16.

Olfactory dysfunction in incidental Lewy body disease and Parkinson's disease.

Driver-Dunckley E(1), Adler CH(2), Hentz JG(3), Dugger BN(4), Shill HA(4), 
Caviness JN(2), Sabbagh MN(4), Beach TG(4); Arizona Parkinson Disease 
Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, Department of Neurology, 
Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA. Electronic address: 
driverdunckley.erika@mayo.edu.
(2)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, Department of Neurology, 
Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(3)Biostatistics Section, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(4)Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA.

BACKGROUND: Olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD) is 
well-established and may represent one of the earliest signs of the disease.
OBJECTIVE & METHODS: The objective of this study was to evaluate the 
relationship of olfactory dysfunction, using the University of Pennsylvania 
Smell Identification Test (UPSIT), to clinical and pathological parameters of 
clinicopathologically diagnosed PD (n = 10), incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) 
(n = 13), and identically assessed controls who lacked a neurodegenerative 
disease (n = 69).
RESULTS: Mean UPSIT scores were significantly lower in PD (16.3, p < 0.001) and 
ILBD (22.2, p = 0.004) compared to controls (27.7). Using an UPSIT cutoff score 
of <22 (the 15th percentile) the sensitivity for detecting PD was 9/10 (90%) and 
ILBD 6/13 (46%), while the specificity was 86% (Controls with score of 
<22 = 10/69).
CONCLUSIONS: These results add to the growing body of evidence suggesting that 
olfactory testing could be useful as a screening tool for identifying early, 
pre-motor PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.006
PMCID: PMC4835172
PMID: 25172126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3530. Neurobiol Dis. 2014 Dec;72 Pt A:72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.08.026. Epub 2014 
Aug 27.

Ghrelin: a link between ageing, metabolism and neurodegenerative disorders.

Stoyanova II(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Signals and Systems, Faculty of Electrical Engineering, 
Mathematics and Computer Sciences, Institute for Biomedical Engineering and 
Technical Medicine MIRA, University of Twente, Enschede, The Netherlands. 
Electronic address: stoyanovai@yahoo.co.uk.

Along with the increase in life expectancy over the last century comes the 
increased risk for development of age-related disorders, including metabolic and 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's 
diseases. These chronic disorders share two main characteristics: 1) neuronal 
loss in motor, sensory or cognitive systems, leading to cognitive and motor 
decline; and 2) a strong correlation between metabolic changes and 
neurodegeneration. In order to treat them, a better understanding of their 
complexity is required: it is necessary to interpret the neuronal damage in 
light of the metabolic changes, and to find the disrupted link between the 
peripheral organs governing energy metabolism and the CNS. This review is an 
attempt to present ghrelin as part of molecular regulatory interface between 
energy metabolism, neuroendocrine and neurodegenerative processes. Ghrelin takes 
part in lipid and glucose metabolism, in higher brain functions such as 
sleep-wake state, learning and memory consolidation; it influences mitochondrial 
respiration and shows neuroprotective effect. All these make ghrelin an 
attractive target for development of biomarkers or therapeutics for prevention 
or treatment of disorders, in which cell protection and recruitment of new 
neurons or synapses are needed.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.08.026
PMID: 25173805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3531. Arch Phys Med Rehabil. 2014 Dec;95(12):2390-5. doi: 10.1016/j.apmr.2014.08.006. 
Epub 2014 Aug 29.

Impaired executive function can predict recurrent falls in Parkinson's disease.

Mak MK(1), Wong A(2), Pang MY(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China. Electronic address: 
Margaret.Mak@polyu.edu.hk.
(2)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Hong Kong SAR, China.
(3)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, 
Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether impairment in executive function independently 
predicts recurrent falls in people with Parkinson's disease (PD).
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: University motor control research laboratory.
PARTICIPANTS: A convenience sample of community-dwelling people with PD (N=144) 
was recruited from a patient self-help group and movement disorders clinics.
INTERVENTIONS: Not applicable.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Executive function was assessed with the Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale Initiation/Perseveration (MDRS-IP) subtest, and fear of falling 
(FoF) with the Activities-specific Balance Confidence (ABC) Scale. All 
participants were followed up for 12 months to record the number of monthly fall 
events.
RESULTS: Forty-two people with PD had at least 2 falls during the follow-up 
period and were classified as recurrent fallers. After accounting for 
demographic variables and fall history (P=.001), multiple logistic regression 
analysis showed that the ABC scores (P=.014) and MDRS-IP scores (P=.006) were 
significantly associated with future recurrent falls among people with PD. The 
overall accuracy of the prediction was 85.9%. With the use of the significant 
predictors identified in multiple logistic regression analysis, a prediction 
model determined by the logistic function was generated: Z = 1.544 + .378 (fall 
history) - .045 (ABC) - .145 (MDRS-IP).
CONCLUSIONS: Impaired executive function is a significant predictor of future 
recurrent falls in people with PD. Participants with executive dysfunction and 
greater FoF at baseline had a significantly greater risk of sustaining a 
recurrent fall within the subsequent 12 months.

Copyright © 2014 American Congress of Rehabilitation Medicine. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.apmr.2014.08.006
PMID: 25175162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3532. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Nov;20(11):1145-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.002. Epub 2014 Aug 14.

Montreal Cognitive Assessment for the screening and prediction of cognitive 
decline in early Parkinson's disease.

Kandiah N(1), Zhang A(2), Cenina AR(2), Au WL(3), Nadkarni N(4), Tan LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore; 
Duke-NUS, Graduate Medical School, Singapore. Electronic address: 
Nagaendran_Kandiah@nni.com.sg.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore; 
Duke-NUS, Graduate Medical School, Singapore.
(4)Centre for Quantitative Medicine, Duke-NUS, Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Early diagnosis of cognitive impairment in PD would allow 
appropriate monitoring and timely intervention to reduce the progression to 
dementia (PDD).
OBJECTIVE: To study the usefulness of the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) 
in the screening for mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) and its predictive 
utility in determining longitudinal cognitive decline in PD.
METHODS: Prospective longitudinal study of patients with mild PD. PD-MCI and PDD 
was diagnosed based on the Movement Disorder taskforce (MDS) criteria. Receiver 
Operating Characteristic analyses and Cox regression analyses were performed.
RESULTS: 95 patients; mean age 66.37 (SD 7.86); mean H&Y score of 1.99 (SD 0.45) 
were studied. At baseline, 34 patients fulfilled the MDS criteria for PD-MCI. 
MoCA, compared to the MMSE had a high discriminatory power in detecting PD-MCI 
[Area Under Curve (AUC) of 0.912, p < 0.001]. A MoCA score of ≤26 provided a 
sensitivity of 93.1% for the diagnosis of PD-MCI. In the longitudinal cohort 
over 2 years, baseline MOCA was useful in predicting cognitive decline (AUC of 
0.707, p = 0.05). With Cox regression analyses, a 1-point lower score on 
baseline MoCA was associated with a 34% increased risk of cognitive decline 
[Hazard ratio (HR) 1.34; 95% CI: 1.03-1.74: p = 0.029]. A baseline MoCA ≤26 was 
highly predictive of progressive cognitive decline (HR 3.47, 95% CI: 2.38-5.07; 
p < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: MoCA is a reliable tool in predicting cognitive decline in early 
PD. A MoCA score of ≤26 significantly increases the risk for progressive 
cognitive decline.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.002
PMID: 25176439 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3533. J Vis Exp. 2014 Aug 17;(90):51625. doi: 10.3791/51625.

Methods to characterize spontaneous and startle-induced locomotion in a 
rotenone-induced Parkinson's disease model of Drosophila.

Liao J(1), Morin LW(1), Ahmad ST(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Colby College.
(2)Department of Biology, Colby College; stahmad@colby.edu.

Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder that results from the 
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the central nervous system, primarily in 
the substantia nigra. The disease causes motor deficiencies, which present as 
rigidity, tremors and dementia in humans. Rotenone is an insecticide that causes 
oxidative damage by inhibiting the function of the electron transport chain in 
mitochondria. It is also used to model Parkinson's disease in the Drosophila. 
Flies have an inherent negative geotactic response, which compels them to climb 
upwards upon being startled. It has been established that rotenone causes early 
mortality and locomotion defects that disrupt the flies' ability to climb after 
they have been tapped downwards. However, the effect of rotenone on spontaneous 
movement is not well documented. This study outlines two sensitive, 
reproducible, and high throughput assays to characterize rotenone-induced 
deficiencies in short-term startle-induced locomotion and long-term spontaneous 
locomotion in Drosophila. These assays can be conveniently adapted to 
characterize other Drosophila models of locomotion defects and efficacy of 
therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.3791/51625
PMCID: PMC4758753
PMID: 25178101 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3534. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Nov;71(11):1405-12. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1455.

APOE, MAPT, and SNCA genes and cognitive performance in Parkinson disease.

Mata IF(1), Leverenz JB(2), Weintraub D(3), Trojanowski JQ(4), Hurtig HI(5), Van 
Deerlin VM(6), Ritz B(7), Rausch R(8), Rhodes SL(9), Factor SA(10), Wood-Siverio 
C(10), Quinn JF(11), Chung KA(11), Peterson AL(11), Espay AJ(12), Revilla 
FJ(13), Devoto J(12), Hu SC(2), Cholerton BA(14), Wan JY(15), Montine TJ(16), 
Edwards KL(15), Zabetian CP(2).

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington3Department of Neurology, 
University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle.
(2)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington2Parkinson's Disease Research, 
Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, 
Seattle, Washington3Dep.
(3)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia7Department 
of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia8Parkinson's Disease 
Research, Education, and Clinical Center and Mental Illness Research, Education, 
and Clinical Center.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia10Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(6)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia.
(7)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles12Department of Environmental Health Sciences, School of 
Public Health, University of California, Los Angeles13Department of Neurology, 
University of California, Los.
(8)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles.
(9)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of 
California, Los Angeles.
(10)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia.
(11)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education, and Clinical Center,Portland 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Portland, Oregon16Department of Neurology, 
Oregon Health and Science University, Portland.
(12)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(13)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, University of 
Cincinnati, Cincinnati, Ohio18Department of Neurology, Cincinnati Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio.
(14)Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington4Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle.
(15)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle20currently 
with Department of Epidemiology, University of California, Irvine.
(16)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle.

IMPORTANCE: Cognitive impairment is a common and disabling problem in Parkinson 
disease (PD) that is not well understood and is difficult to treat. 
Identification of genetic variants that influence the rate of cognitive decline 
or pattern of early cognitive deficits in PD might provide a clearer 
understanding of the etiopathogenesis of this important nonmotor feature.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether common variation in the APOE, MAPT, and SNCA 
genes is associated with cognitive performance in patients with PD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We studied 1079 PD patients from 6 academic 
centers in the United States who underwent assessments of memory (Hopkins Verbal 
Learning Test-Revised [HVLT-R]), attention and executive function (Letter-Number 
Sequencing Test and Trail Making Test), language processing (semantic and 
phonemic verbal fluency tests), visuospatial skills (Benton Judgment of Line 
Orientation test), and global cognitive function (Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment). Participants underwent genotyping for the APOE ε2/ε3/ε4 alleles, 
MAPT H1/H2 haplotypes, and SNCA rs356219. We used linear regression to test for 
association between genotype and baseline cognitive performance with adjustment 
for age, sex, years of education, disease duration, and site. We used a 
Bonferroni correction to adjust for the 9 comparisons that were performed for 
each gene.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Nine variables derived from 7 psychometric tests.
RESULTS: The APOE ε4 allele was associated with lower performance on the HVLT-R 
Total Recall (P = 6.7 × 10(-6); corrected P [Pc] = 6.0 × 10(-5)), Delayed Recall 
(P = .001; Pc = .009), and Recognition Discrimination Index (P = .004; Pc 
= .04); a semantic verbal fluency test (P = .002; Pc = .02); the Letter-Number 
Sequencing Test (P = 1 × 10(-5); Pc = 9 × 10(-5)); and Trail Making Test B minus 
Trail Making Test A (P = .002; Pc = .02). In a subset of 645 patients without 
dementia, the APOE ε4 allele was associated with lower scores on the HVLT-R 
Total Recall (P = .005; Pc = .045) and the semantic verbal fluency (P = .005; Pc 
= .045) measures. Variants of MAPT and SNCA were not associated with scores on 
any tests.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our data indicate that the APOE ε4 allele is an 
important predictor of cognitive function in PD across multiple domains. Among 
PD patients without dementia, the APOE ε4 allele was only associated with lower 
performance on word list learning and semantic verbal fluency, a pattern more 
typical of the cognitive deficits seen in early Alzheimer disease than PD.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1455
PMCID: PMC4227942
PMID: 25178429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3535. Psychogeriatrics. 2014 Sep;14(3):152-64. doi: 10.1111/psyg.12054. Epub 2014 Sep 
3.

Corticobasal degeneration initially developing motor versus non-motor symptoms: 
a comparative clinicopathological study.

Ikeda C(1), Yokota O, Nagao S, Ishizu H, Morisada Y, Terada S, Nakashima Y, 
Akiyama H, Uchitomi Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan; Clinical 
Research Institute, National Hospital Organization Minami-Okayama Medical 
Center, Hayashima, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Clinical presentations of pathologically confirmed corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD) vary, and the heterogeneity makes its clinical diagnosis 
difficult, especially when a patient lacks any motor disturbance in the early 
stage.
METHODS: We compared clinical and pathological features of four pathologically 
confirmed CBD cases that initially developed non-motor symptoms, including 
behavioural and psychiatric symptoms but without motor disturbance (CBD-NM), and 
five CBD cases that initially developed parkinsonism and/or falls (CBD-M). The 
age range at death for the CBD-NM and CBD-M subjects (58-85 years vs 45-67 
years) and the range of disease duration (2-18 years vs 2-6 years) did not 
significantly differ between the groups.
RESULTS: Prominent symptoms in the early stage of CBD-NM cases included 
self-centred behaviours such as frontotemporal dementia (n = 1), apathy with and 
without auditory hallucination (n = 2), and aggressive behaviours with delusion 
and visual hallucination (n = 1). Among the four CBD-NM cases, only one 
developed asymmetric motor disturbance, and two could walk without support 
throughout the course. Final clinical diagnoses of the CBD-NM cases were 
frontotemporal dementia (n = 2), senile psychosis with delirium (n = 1), and 
schizophrenia (n = 1). Neuronal loss was significantly less severe in the 
subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra in the CBD-NM cases than in the CBD-M 
cases. The severity of tau pathology in all regions examined was comparable in 
the two groups.
CONCLUSION: CBD cases that initially develop psychiatric and behavioural changes 
without motor symptoms may have less severe degenerative changes in the 
subthalamic nucleus and substantia nigra, and some CBD cases can lack motor 
disturbance not only in the early stage but also in the last stage of the 
course.

© 2014 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2014 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12054
PMID: 25186621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3536. PLoS Genet. 2014 Sep 4;10(9):e1004606. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004606. 
eCollection 2014 Sep.

Genome-wide association meta-analysis of neuropathologic features of Alzheimer's 
disease and related dementias.

Beecham GW(1), Hamilton K(1), Naj AC(2), Martin ER(1), Huentelman M(3), Myers 
AJ(4), Corneveaux JJ(3), Hardy J(5), Vonsattel JP(6), Younkin SG(7), Bennett 
DA(8), De Jager PL(9), Larson EB(10), Crane PK(11), Kamboh MI(12), Kofler 
JK(13), Mash DC(14), Duque L(14), Gilbert JR(1), Gwirtsman H(15), Buxbaum 
JD(16), Kramer P(17), Dickson DW(7), Farrer LA(18), Frosch MP(19), Ghetti B(20), 
Haines JL(21), Hyman BT(22), Kukull WA(23), Mayeux RP(24), Pericak-Vance MA(1), 
Schneider JA(25), Trojanowski JQ(26), Reiman EM(27); Alzheimer's Disease 
Genetics Consortium (ADGC); Schellenberg GD(26), Montine TJ(28).

Author information:
(1)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida, United States of America.
(2)Division of Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(3)Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, 
Arizona, United States of America.
(4)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida, United States of America.
(5)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, University College London, London, 
United Kingdom.
(6)New York Brain Bank, Columbia University, New York, New York, United States 
of America.
(7)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Jacksonville, 
Florida, United States of America.
(8)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois, 
United States of America.
(9)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(10)Group Health Research Institute, Seattle, Washington, United States of 
America.
(11)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America.
(12)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh Graduate School of 
Public Health, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(13)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(14)Department of Neurology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida, United States 
of America.
(15)Department of Psychiatry, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee, 
United States of America.
(16)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai Hospital, New York, New York, United 
States of America.
(17)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, 
Oregon, United States of America.
(18)Biomedical Genetics, Boston University School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts, United States of America.
(19)C.S. Kubik Laboratory for Neuropathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(20)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, United States of America.
(21)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Case Western Reserve 
University School of Medicine, Cleveland, Ohio, United States of America.
(22)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(23)Department of Epidemiology, National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, 
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States of America.
(24)Department of Neurology, Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease 
and the Aging Brain, Columbia University, New York, New York, United States of 
America.
(25)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University, Chicago, Illinois, 
United States of America; Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America.
(26)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(27)Arizona Alzheimer's Consortium, Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, 
Arizona, United States of America; Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Arizona, Phoenix, Arizona, United States of America.
(28)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 
United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Genet. 2014 Nov;10(11):e1004867.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related dementias are a major public health 
challenge and present a therapeutic imperative for which we need additional 
insight into molecular pathogenesis. We performed a genome-wide association 
study and analysis of known genetic risk loci for AD dementia using 
neuropathologic data from 4,914 brain autopsies. Neuropathologic data were used 
to define clinico-pathologic AD dementia or controls, assess core 
neuropathologic features of AD (neuritic plaques, NPs; neurofibrillary tangles, 
NFTs), and evaluate commonly co-morbid neuropathologic changes: cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy (CAA), Lewy body disease (LBD), hippocampal sclerosis of the elderly 
(HS), and vascular brain injury (VBI). Genome-wide significance was observed for 
clinico-pathologic AD dementia, NPs, NFTs, CAA, and LBD with a number of 
variants in and around the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE). GalNAc transferase 7 
(GALNT7), ATP-Binding Cassette, Sub-Family G (WHITE), Member 1 (ABCG1), and an 
intergenic region on chromosome 9 were associated with NP score; and Potassium 
Large Conductance Calcium-Activated Channel, Subfamily M, Beta Member 2 (KCNMB2) 
was strongly associated with HS. Twelve of the 21 non-APOE genetic risk loci for 
clinically-defined AD dementia were confirmed in our clinico-pathologic sample: 
CR1, BIN1, CLU, MS4A6A, PICALM, ABCA7, CD33, PTK2B, SORL1, MEF2C, ZCWPW1, and 
CASS4 with 9 of these 12 loci showing larger odds ratio in the 
clinico-pathologic sample. Correlation of effect sizes for risk of AD dementia 
with effect size for NFTs or NPs showed positive correlation, while those for 
risk of VBI showed a moderate negative correlation. The other co-morbid 
neuropathologic features showed only nominal association with the known AD loci. 
Our results discovered new genetic associations with specific neuropathologic 
features and aligned known genetic risk for AD dementia with specific 
neuropathologic changes in the largest brain autopsy study of AD and related 
dementias.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004606
PMCID: PMC4154667
PMID: 25188341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.


3537. World J Nucl Med. 2014 May;13(2):120-7. doi: 10.4103/1450-1147.139143.

(99m)Tc-hexamethyl propyleneamine oxime brain perfusion single photon emission 
computed tomography in characterization of dementia: an initial experience in 
Indian clinical practice.

Santra A(1), Sinha GK(2), Neogi R(3), Thukral RK(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Medical College, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.
(2)Department of Brain Imaging Centre, Dakshi Diagnostics Services Private 
Limited, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Medical College, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

There is a growing health burden in developing countries due to recent trends of 
increasing incidence of neurodegenerative diseases. To reduce the healthcare 
cost and effective management of dementia illness, early diagnosis, accurate 
differentiation and their progression assessment is becoming crucially 
important. We are utilizing (99m)Tc-d, l-hexamethyl propyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) 
brain perfusion single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) to 
characterize dementia on the basis of perfusion patterns and observed 
significant improvement in their management. Eleven patients (median age of 60 
years range of 53-83 years) with clinical suspicion of dementia underwent 
(99m)Tc-HMPAO brain perfusion SPECT. SPECT-computed tomography acquisition done, 
data are reconstructed, reviewed in three view and further processed in 
"neurogam" to get voxel based analysis and the comparison with age based normal 
database and surface mapping. Final diagnosis was done with clinical 
correlation. Four patients are diagnosed as Alzheimer's disease, two as 
frontotemporal dementia, one as dementia of Lewy bodies, two as vascular 
dementia and two as pseudodementia. All imaging findings are well-correlated 
with clinical background. Brain perfusion SPECT with HMPAO was very helpful to 
us in characterizing the patients of dementia by its perfusion pattern.

DOI: 10.4103/1450-1147.139143
PMCID: PMC4150154
PMID: 25191127

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.


3538. Int J Psychiatry Clin Pract. 2015 Mar;19(1):2-7. doi: 
10.3109/13651501.2014.961931. Epub 2014 Oct 18.

World Federation of Societies of Biological Psychiatry guidelines for the 
pharmacological treatment of dementias in primary care.

Ihl R(1), Bunevicius R, Frölich L, Winblad B, Schneider LS, Dubois B, Burns A, 
Thibaut F, Kasper S, Möller HJ; WFSBP Task Force on Mental Disorders in Primary 
Care; WFSBP Task Force on Dementia.

Collaborators: Bunevicius R, Kasper S, Thibaut F, Baranska-Rybak W, Cubala WJ, 
Harro J, Pop VJ, Rancans E, Rasmussen J, Rihmer Z, Saravane D, Schlaepfer TE, 
Sher L, Tang SW, Valius L, Wong D, Zhitnikova LM, Zohar J, Dubois B, Burns A, 
Schneider LS, Frölich L, Ihl R, Benoit M, Blesa R, Brodaty H, Colimon N, Degrell 
I, DeKosky S, Eker E, Endo H, Erkinjuntti T, Förstl H, Frisoni G, Gauthier S, 
Giacobini E, Gomez-Isla T, Gottfries CG, Grundman M, Han C, Hock C, Kulaksizoglu 
IB, Marksteiner J, Masters C, McKeith I, Olofsdottir M, Rainer M, Reisberg B, 
Riederer P, Rossor M, Saletu B, Salmon E, Sunderland T, Takeda M, Taneli B, 
Vellas B, Verhey F, Waldemar G, Whitehouse P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Düsseldorf, Alexian Research Center 
Krefeld , Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To define a practice guideline for biological treatment of dementias 
for general practitioners in primary care.
METHODS: This paper is a short and practical summary of the World Federation of 
Biological Psychiatry (WFSBP) guidelines for the Biological treatment of 
Alzheimer's disease and other dementias for treatment in primary care ( Ihl et 
al. 2011 ). The recommendations were developed by a task force of international 
experts in the field and are based on randomized controlled studies.
RESULTS: Anti-dementia medications neither cure, nor arrest, or alter the course 
of the disease. The type of dementia, the individual symptom constellation and 
the tolerability and evidence for efficacy should determine what medications 
should be used. In treating neuropsychiatric symptoms, psychosocial intervention 
should be the treatment of first choice. For neuropsychiatric symptoms, 
medications should only be considered when psychosocial interventions are not 
adequate and after cautious risk-benefit analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Depending on the diagnostic entity and clinical presentation 
different anti-dementia drugs can be recommended. These guidelines provide a 
practical approach for general practitioners managing dementias.

DOI: 10.3109/13651501.2014.961931
PMID: 25195764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3539. Aging Ment Health. 2015;19(6):526-35. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2014.954527. Epub 
2014 Sep 8.

A pilot randomised controlled trial to compare changes in quality of life for 
participants with early diagnosis dementia who attend a 'Living Well with 
Dementia' group compared to waiting-list control.

Marshall A(1), Spreadbury J, Cheston R, Coleman P, Ballinger C, Mullee M, 
Pritchard J, Russell C, Bartlett E.

Author information:
(1)a Southern Health NHS Foundation Trust.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this paper is to report a pilot study in which 
participants who had recently received a diagnosis of dementia were randomised 
to either a 10-week group intervention or a waiting-list control.
METHOD: Memory clinic staff with limited previous experience of group therapy 
were trained to lead a 10-week group therapy intervention called 'Living Well 
with Dementia'. Fifty-eight participants, all of whom had received a diagnosis 
of Alzheimer's disease, vascular or Lewy body dementia within the previous 18 
months, were randomised to receive either the intervention or treatment as usual 
(waiting-list control). Data collection occurred at baseline, within two weeks 
after the intervention finished and at 10-week follow-up.
RESULTS: The study met its recruitment targets, with a relatively low attrition 
rate for the intervention arm. The acceptability of the intervention and 
research methods was examined qualitatively and will be reported on elsewhere. 
For the primary outcome, measure of quality of life in Alzheimer's disease 
(QoL-AD), and secondary outcome, self-esteem, there was some evidence of 
improvement in the intervention group compared to the control group. There was, 
also, evidence of a reduction in cognitive functioning in the treatment group 
compared to the control. Such reported differences should be treated with 
caution because they are obtained from a pilot and not a definitive study.
CONCLUSION: This pilot study succeeded in collecting data to inform a future 
definitive cost effectiveness clinical trial of Living Well with Dementia group 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2014.954527
PMID: 25196239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3540. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Nov;71(11):1394-404. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1491.

Effects of multiple genetic loci on age at onset in late-onset Alzheimer 
disease: a genome-wide association study.

Naj AC(1), Jun G(2), Reitz C(3), Kunkle BW(4), Perry W(4), Park YS(5), Beecham 
GW(6), Rajbhandary RA(4), Hamilton-Nelson KL(4), Wang LS(7), Kauwe JS(8), 
Huentelman MJ(9), Myers AJ(10), Bird TD(11), Boeve BF(12), Baldwin CT(13), 
Jarvik GP(14), Crane PK(15), Rogaeva E(16), Barmada MM(17), Demirci FY(17), 
Cruchaga C(18), Kramer PL(19), Ertekin-Taner N(20), Hardy J(21), Graff-Radford 
NR(20), Green RC(22), Larson EB(23), St George-Hyslop PH(24), Buxbaum JD(25), 
Evans DA(26), Schneider JA(27), Lunetta KL(28), Kamboh MI(29), Saykin AJ(30), 
Reiman EM(31), De Jager PL(32), Bennett DA(33), Morris JC(34), Montine TJ(35), 
Goate AM(18), Blacker D(36), Tsuang DW(37), Hakonarson H(38), Kukull WA(39), 
Foroud TM(40), Martin ER(6), Haines JL(41), Mayeux RP(42), Farrer LA(43), 
Schellenberg GD(7), Pericak-Vance MA(6); Alzheimer Disease Genetics Consortium; 
Albert MS(44), Albin RL(45), Apostolova LG(46), Arnold SE(47), Barber R(48), 
Barnes LL(49), Beach TG(50), Becker JT(51), Beekly D(52), Bigio EH(53), Bowen 
JD(54), Boxer A(55), Burke JR(56), Cairns NJ(57), Cantwell LB(7), Cao C(58), 
Carlson CS(59), Carney RM(10), Carrasquillo MM(60), Carroll SL(61), Chui HC(62), 
Clark DG(63), Corneveaux J(9), Cribbs DH(64), Crocco EA(10), DeCarli C(65), 
DeKosky ST(66), Dick M(67), Dickson DW(60), Duara R(68), Faber KM(40), Fallon 
KB(61), Farlow MR(69), Ferris S(70), Frosch MP(71), Galasko DR(72), Ganguli 
M(73), Gearing M(74), Geschwind DH(75), Ghetti B(76), Gilbert JR(6), Glass 
JD(77), Growdon JH(78), Hamilton RL(79), Harrell LE(63), Head E(80), Honig 
LS(81), Hulette CM(82), Hyman BT(78), Jicha GA(83), Jin LW(84), Karydas A(55), 
Kaye JA(85), Kim R(86), Koo EH(72), Kowall NW(87), Kramer JH(88), LaFerla 
FM(89), Lah JJ(77), Leverenz JB(35), Levey AI(77), Li G(90), Lieberman AP(91), 
Lin CF(7), Lopez OL(92), Lyketsos CG(93), Mack WJ(94), Martiniuk F(95), Mash 
DC(96), Masliah E(97), McCormick WC(15), McCurry SM(98), McDavid AN(59), McKee 
AC(87), Mesulam M(99), Miller BL(55), Miller CA(100), Miller JW(84), Murrell 
JR(101), Olichney JM(65), Pankratz VS(102), Parisi JE(103), Paulson HL(104), 
Peskind E(90), Petersen RC(12), Pierce A(64), Poon WW(67), Potter H(58), Quinn 
JF(105), Raj A(58), Raskind M(90), Reisberg B(106), Ringman JM(46), Roberson 
ED(63), Rosen HJ(55), Rosenberg RN(107), Sano M(108), Schneider LS(109), Seeley 
WW(55), Smith AG(58), Sonnen JA(35), Spina S(76), Stern RA(110), Tanzi RE(78), 
Thornton-Wells TA(111), Trojanowski JQ(7), Troncoso JC(112), Valladares O(7), 
Van Deerlin VM(7), Van Eldik LJ(113), Vardarajan BN(114), Vinters HV(115), 
Vonsattel JP(116), Weintraub S(117), Welsh-Bohmer KA(118), Williamson J(81), 
Wishnek S(4), Woltjer RL(119), Wright CB(120), Younkin SG(60), Yu CE(15), Yu 
L(121).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia.
(2)Genetics Program, Department of Medicine, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts4Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts5Department of Ophthalmology, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(3)Taub Institute on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Department of 
Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York7Gertrude H. Sergievsky 
Center, Columbia University, New York, New York8Department of Neurology, 
Columbia University, New York, New.
(4)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida.
(5)The Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, University 
of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(6)John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of Miami, Miami, 
Florida9The Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, 
University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(7)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Perelman School of Medicine, Philadelphia.
(8)Department of Biology, Brigham Young University, Provo, Utah.
(9)Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, 
Arizona.
(10)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Miller School of Medicine, 
University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(11)Department of Neurology, University of Washington, Seattle15Geriatric 
Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health 
Care System, Seattle, Washington.
(12)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(13)Genetics Program, Department of Medicine, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(14)Department of Genome Sciences, University of Washington, Seattle18Division 
of Medical Genetics, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.
(15)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle.
(16)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(17)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(18)Department of Psychiatry and Hope Center Program on Protein Aggregation and 
Neurodegeneration, School of Medicine, Washington University in St Louis, St 
Louis, Missouri.
(19)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland24Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health & Science 
University, Portland.
(20)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida26Department 
of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(21)Institute of Neurology, University College London, London, England.
(22)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, and Partners Center for 
Personalized Genetic Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical 
School, Boston, Massachusetts.
(23)Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle29Group Health 
Research Institute, Group Health Cooperative, Seattle, Washington.
(24)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease, University of 
Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada30Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, 
Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
England.
(25)Department of Neuroscience, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York32Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York33Department of Genetics and Genomic Sciences, Mount Sinai School of 
Medicine, New York, New York.
(26)Rush Institute for Healthy Aging, Department of Internal Medicine, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(27)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, Illinois36Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, Rush University 
Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(28)Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(29)Department of Human Genetics, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania37Alheimer Disease Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(30)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis39Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis.
(31)Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, 
Arizona40Arizona Alzheimer's Consortium, Phoenix41Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Arizona, Phoenix42Banner Alzheimer's Institute, Phoenix, Arizona.
(32)Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Institute for the 
Neurosciences, Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts44Program in Medical and 
Population Genetics, Broad Ins.
(33)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, Illinois45Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(34)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis, 
St Louis, Missouri47Department of Neurology, Washington University in St Louis, 
St Louis, Missouri.
(35)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle.
(36)Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, 
Massachusetts50Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston.
(37)Geriatric Research, Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington51Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle.
(38)Center for Applied Genomics, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
(39)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle.
(40)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis.
(41)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee55Vanderbilit Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, Tennessee.
(42)Taub Institute on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Columbia 
University, New York, New York57Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia 
University, New York, New York58Department of Neurology, Columbia University, 
New York, New York.
(43)Genetics Program, Department of Medicine, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts4Department of Biostatistics, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts5Department of Ophthalmology, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts59Department of Epidemiology, Bos.
(44)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(45)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor63Geriatric 
Research, Education and Clinical Center (GRECC), VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System 
(VAAAHS), Ann Arbor, Michigan64Michigan Alzheimer Disease Center, Ann Arbor.
(46)Department of Neurology, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles.
(47)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia.
(48)Department of Pharmacology and Neuroscience, University of North Texas 
Health Science Center, Fort Worth.
(49)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, Illinois68Department of Behavioral Sciences, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, Illinois.
(50)Civin Laboratory for Neuropathology, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 
Phoenix, Arizona.
(51)Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology, and Psychology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(52)National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, University of Washington, Seattle.
(53)Department of Pathology, Northwestern University Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois73Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease Center, 
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois.
(54)Swedish Medical Center, Seattle, Washington.
(55)Department of Neurology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco.
(56)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(57)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University in St Louis, 
St Louis, Missouri.
(58)USF Health Byrd Alzheimer's Institute, University of South Florida, Tampa.
(59)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, Washington.
(60)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida.
(61)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham.
(62)Department of Neurology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
(63)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham.
(64)Department of Neurology, University of California Irvine, Irvine.
(65)Department of Neurology, University of California Davis, Sacramento.
(66)University of Virginia School of Medicine, Charlottesville.
(67)Institute for Memory Impairments and Neurological Disorders, University of 
California Irvine, Irvine.
(68)Wien Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders, Mount Sinai 
Medical Center, Miami Beach, Florida.
(69)Department of Neurology, Indiana University, Indianapolis.
(70)Department of Psychiatry, New York University, New York.
(71)C.S. Kubik Laboratory for Neuropathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 
Charlestown.
(72)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla.
(73)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(74)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Emory University, Atlanta, 
Georgia93Emory Alzheimer's Disease Center, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(75)Neurogenetics Program, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles.
(76)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis.
(77)Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(78)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital/Harvard Medical 
School, Boston.
(79)Department of Pathology (Neuropathology), University of Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
(80)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Department of Molecular and Biomedical 
Pharmacology, University of Kentucky, Lexington.
(81)Taub Institute on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Department of 
Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(82)Department of Pathology, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
(83)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Department Neurology, University of Kentucky, 
Lexington.
(84)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California 
Davis, Sacramento.
(85)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland103Department of Neurology, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
Portland, Oregon.
(86)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of California 
Irvine, Irvine.
(87)Department of Neurology, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts105Department of Pathology, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts.
(88)Department of Neuropsychology, University of California San Francisco, San 
Francisco.
(89)Department of Neurobiology and Behavior, University of California Irvine, 
Irvine.
(90)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington 
School of Medicine, Seattle.
(91)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
(92)Alheimer Disease Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, 
Pennsylvania.
(93)Department of Psychiatry, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(94)Department of Preventive Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles.
(95)Department of Medicine - Pulmonary, New York University, New York.
(96)Department of Neurology, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(97)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La 
Jolla113Department of Pathology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla.
(98)School of Nursing Northwest Research Group on Aging, University of 
Washington, Seattle.
(99)Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease Center, Northwestern University, 
Chicago, Illinois115Department of Neurology, Northwestern University Feinberg 
School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(100)Department of Pathology, University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
(101)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Indiana University, 
Indianapolis95Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana 
University, Indianapolis.
(102)Department of Biostatistics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(103)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota119Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, Minnesota.
(104)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
(105)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland.
(106)Department of Psychiatry, New York University, New York120Alzheimer's 
Disease Center, New York University, New York.
(107)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas.
(108)Department of Psychiatry, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, New 
York.
(109)Department of Neurology, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles122Department of Psychiatry, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles.
(110)Department of Neurology, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts.
(111)Vanderbilit Center for Human Genetics Research, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee.
(112)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland.
(113)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, 
University of Kentucky, Lexington.
(114)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(115)Department of Neurology, University of California Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles125Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, University of 
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles.
(116)Taub Institute on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, Department of 
Pathology, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(117)Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease Center, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, Illinois127Department of Psychiatry, Northwestern 
University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(118)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North 
Carolina128Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Duke University, 
Durham, North Carolina.
(119)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland.
(120)Evelyn F. McKnight Brain Institute, Department of Neurology, Miller School 
of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, Florida.
(121)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, Illinois.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol. 2014 Nov;71(11):1457.

IMPORTANCE: Because APOE locus variants contribute to risk of late-onset 
Alzheimer disease (LOAD) and to differences in age at onset (AAO), it is 
important to know whether other established LOAD risk loci also affect AAO in 
affected participants.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the effects of known Alzheimer disease risk loci in 
modifying AAO and to estimate their cumulative effect on AAO variation using 
data from genome-wide association studies in the Alzheimer Disease Genetics 
Consortium.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: The Alzheimer Disease Genetics Consortium 
comprises 14 case-control, prospective, and family-based data sets with data on 
9162 participants of white race/ethnicity with Alzheimer disease occurring after 
age 60 years who also had complete AAO information, gathered between 1989 and 
2011 at multiple sites by participating studies. Data on genotyped or imputed 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms most significantly associated with risk at 10 
confirmed LOAD loci were examined in linear modeling of AAO, and individual data 
set results were combined using a random-effects, inverse variance-weighted 
meta-analysis approach to determine whether they contribute to variation in AAO. 
Aggregate effects of all risk loci on AAO were examined in a burden analysis 
using genotype scores weighted by risk effect sizes.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Age at disease onset abstracted from medical records 
among participants with LOAD diagnosed per standard criteria.
RESULTS: Analysis confirmed the association of APOE with earlier AAO (P = 3.3 × 
10(-96)), with associations in CR1 (rs6701713, P = 7.2 × 10(-4)), BIN1 
(rs7561528, P = 4.8 × 10(-4)), and PICALM (rs561655, P = 2.2 × 10(-3)) reaching 
statistical significance (P < .005). Risk alleles individually reduced AAO by 3 
to 6 months. Burden analyses demonstrated that APOE contributes to 3.7% of the 
variation in AAO (R(2) = 0.256) over baseline (R(2) = 0.221), whereas the other 
9 loci together contribute to 2.2% of the variation (R(2) = 0.242).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: We confirmed an association of APOE (OMIM 107741) 
variants with AAO among affected participants with LOAD and observed novel 
associations of CR1 (OMIM 120620), BIN1 (OMIM 601248), and PICALM (OMIM 603025) 
with AAO. In contrast to earlier hypothetical modeling, we show that the 
combined effects of Alzheimer disease risk variants on AAO are on the scale of, 
but do not exceed, the APOE effect. While the aggregate effects of risk loci on 
AAO may be significant, additional genetic contributions to AAO are individually 
likely to be small.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.1491
PMCID: PMC4314944
PMID: 25199842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3541. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2014;114(7):79-82.

[Pathogenetic mechanisms of dementia in the older patients with Parkinson's 
diseases].

[Article in Russian]

Chukhlovina ML.

The review covers the current literature on the pathogenetic mechanisms of 
dementia in older patients with Parkinson's disease(PD). The author emphasizes 
that, along with the degeneration of brain structures, there are vascular 
changes that promote the development of mixed dementia. Neurodegenerative 
process and cerebrovascular pathology are in reciprocal relationship and their 
combination enhances the development of cognitive impairment. The cholinergic 
deficit is one of the key patterns of pathogenesis of dementia in PD. In this 
connection, the efficacy of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors: galantamine 
(reminil),neuromidin, rivastigmine in the treatment of PD patients with dementia 
is discussed. It is concluded, that correction of vascular risk factors should 
be administered to older PD patients with mixed dementia. A multidimensional 
approach with the close relationship between neurologists, psychiatrists and 
therapists is needed.

PMID: 25202788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3542. Respir Care. 2014 Dec;59(12):1838-45. doi: 10.4187/respcare.03063. Epub 2014 Sep 
9.

Neurodegenerative disorders increase decline in respiratory muscle strength in 
older adults.

Sanches VS(1), Santos FM(1), Fernandes JM(1), Santos ML(1), Müller PT(1), 
Christofoletti G(2).

Author information:
(1)Biological and Health Sciences Centre, Federal University of Mato Grosso do 
Sul, Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil.
(2)Biological and Health Sciences Centre, Federal University of Mato Grosso do 
Sul, Campo Grande, Mato Grosso do Sul, Brazil. g.christofoletti@ufms.br.

INTRODUCTION: Respiratory muscle strength (RMS) is a determinant of vital 
capacity, and its decline can lead to inadequate ventilation and deficiency in 
the elimination of secretions from the airways. Studies analyzing RMS in older 
adults with Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) remain scarce, 
making the analysis of this variable still very uncertain. The aim of this study 
was to analyze the RMS of older adults diagnosed with PD and AD, in relation to 
healthy control peers.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study was conducted involving 65 older adults 
comprising 3 groups: PD (n = 20), AD (n = 20), and control (n = 25). The 
participants underwent anthropometric and cirtometric measurements associated 
with maximal respiratory pressures. We analyzed data using descriptive (mean and 
SD) and inferential statistics (1-way analysis of variance, Student t test, and 
Scheffé post hoc) with a level of significance of 5% (P < .05) and a CI of 95%.
RESULTS: Although the anthropometric and cirtometric variables indicated 
similarity of values between groups (P > .05), the maximal inspiratory and 
expiratory pressures were considerably lower in the subjects with PD and AD (P < 
.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The control of the anthropometric and cirtometric variables of the 
subjects indicates that RMS is affected by the aging process, and its decline 
increases in neurodegenerative conditions. This fact represents a serious risk 
for the development of atelectasis and other pneumo-functional complications, 
which must be considered in proposing of future therapies.

Copyright © 2014 by Daedalus Enterprises.

DOI: 10.4187/respcare.03063
PMID: 25205817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3543. J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4(4):677-86. doi: 10.3233/JPD-140398.

Longitudinal assessment of the pattern of cognitive decline in non-demented 
patients with advanced Parkinson's disease.

Gasca-Salas C(1), Estanga A(2), Clavero P(3), Aguilar-Palacio I(4), 
González-Redondo R(1), Obeso JA(1), Rodríguez-Oroz MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Area, CIMA, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Clínica 
Universidad de Navarra, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain Centro de 
Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Madrid, Spain.
(2)Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain Department of Neurology and 
Neuroscience, University Hospital Donostia, BioDonostia Research Institute, San 
Sebastian, Spain.
(3)Neurosciences Area, CIMA, Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Clínica 
Universidad de Navarra, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(4)Departamento de Microbiología, Medicina Preventiva y Salud Pública, Facultad 
de Medicina, Universidad de Zaragoza, Zaragoza, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Dementia and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) are frequent in 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Deficits in some cognitive tests are considered risk 
factors for dementia in PD. However, how cognitive deficits progress in aged and 
long-lasting non-demented PD is not known.
OBJECTIVE: To study the rate and pattern of progression of cognitive deficits in 
aged and long-lasting non-demented PD.
METHODS: Forty-nine non-demented patients (23 cognitively normal (PD-CN) and 26 
with MCI (PD-MCI)) were studied over 31 months using individual tests and 
z-scores covering five cognitive domains. All patients were at least 60 year old 
and have had PD ≥ 10 years.
RESULTS: Attention, executive function and memory worsened in 5 PD-CN patients 
who progressed to MCI (21.7% of the sample) and in 1 patient who became demented 
(4.3% of the sample). Eleven PD-MCI patients who developed dementia (42.3% of 
the sample) showed aggravation of visuospatial, executive and attention domains. 
Multidomain-MCI and poor execution of Stroop-Words, copy of intersecting 
pentagons and Raven Progressive Matrices tests were associated with conversion 
to dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: This pilot study shows that in long-lasting PD 21.7% of PD-CN 
patients progress to MCI and 42.3% of PD-MCI progress to dementia over a 31 
months observation period. The transition from cognitively normal to MCI is 
featured by attention, executive and memory dysfunction and the evolution from 
MCI to dementia is marked by the appearance of visuospatial deficits and 
worsening of attention and executive function. These data are compatible with 
the concept that cognitive decline in PD follows a distinct dysfunction pattern 
with progressive anterior to posterior cortical involvement.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-140398
PMID: 25208730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3544. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 11;9(9):e106883. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106883. 
eCollection 2014.

Cross dimerization of amyloid-β and αsynuclein proteins in aqueous environment: 
a molecular dynamics simulations study.

Jose JC(1), Chatterjee P(1), Sengupta N(1).

Author information:
(1)Physical Chemistry Division, CSIR-National Chemical Laboratory, Pune, 
Maharashtra, India.

Self-assembly of the intrinsically unstructured proteins, amyloid beta (Aβ) and 
alpha synclein (αSyn), are associated with Alzheimer's Disease, and Parkinson's 
and Lewy Body Diseases, respectively. Importantly, pathological overlaps between 
these neurodegenerative diseases, and the possibilities of interactions between 
Aβ and αSyn in biological milieu emerge from several recent clinical reports and 
in vitro studies. Nevertheless, there are very few molecular level studies that 
have probed the nature of spontaneous interactions between these two 
sequentially dissimilar proteins and key characteristics of the resulting cross 
complexes. In this study, we have used atomistic molecular dynamics simulations 
to probe the possibility of cross dimerization between αSyn1-95 and Aβ1-42, and 
thereby gain insights into their plausible early assembly pathways in aqueous 
environment. Our analyses indicate a strong probability of association between 
the two sequences, with inter-protein attractive electrostatic interactions 
playing dominant roles. Principal component analysis revealed significant 
heterogeneity in the strength and nature of the associations in the key 
interaction modes. In most, the interactions of repeating Lys residues, mainly 
in the imperfect repeats 'KTKEGV' present in αSyn1-95 were found to be essential 
for cross interactions and formation of inter-protein salt bridges. 
Additionally, a hydrophobicity driven interaction mode devoid of salt bridges, 
where the non-amyloid component (NAC) region of αSyn1-95 came in contact with 
the hydrophobic core of Aβ1-42 was observed. The existence of such hetero 
complexes, and therefore hetero assembly pathways may lead to polymorphic 
aggregates with variations in pathological attributes. Our results provide a 
perspective on development of therapeutic strategies for preventing pathogenic 
interactions between these proteins.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106883
PMCID: PMC4161357
PMID: 25210774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3545. Mov Disord. 2014 Sep 15;29(11):1391-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.26010.

Preclinical models: needed in translation? A Pro/Con debate.

Philips T(1), Rothstein JD, Pouladi MA.

Author information:
(1)Johns Hopkins University, Brain Science Institute, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

The discovery of the causative mutations and many of the predisposing risk 
factors for neurodegenerative disorders such as Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, 
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and Huntington's disease (HD), has led to the 
development of a large number of genetic animal models of disease. In the case 
of HD, for example, over 20 different transgenic rodent models have been 
generated. These models have been of immense value in providing novel insights 
into mechanisms of disease, with the promise of accelerating the development of 
therapies that can delay the onset or slow the progression of the disease. Yet, 
despite extensive use of such models, no effective treatment for HD has been 
developed. Here, we discuss the value of animal models, highlighting their 
strengths and shortcomings in the context of translational research for HD.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.26010
PMID: 25216370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3546. Brain Res. 2015 Aug 18;1617:155-73. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.09.008. Epub 
2014 Sep 8.

The role of the immune system in neurodegenerative disorders: Adaptive or 
maladaptive?

Doty KR(1), Guillot-Sestier MV(1), Town T(2).

Author information:
(1)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine of the University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine of the University of 
Southern California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: ttown@usc.edu.

Neurodegenerative diseases share common features, including catastrophic 
neuronal loss that leads to cognitive or motor dysfunction. Neuronal injury 
occurs in an inflammatory milieu that is populated by resident and sometimes, 
infiltrating, immune cells - all of which participate in a complex interplay 
between secreted inflammatory modulators and activated immune cell surface 
receptors. The importance of these immunomodulators is highlighted by the number 
of immune factors that have been associated with increased risk of 
neurodegeneration in recent genome-wide association studies. One of the more 
difficult tasks for designing therapeutic strategies for immune modulation 
against neurodegenerative diseases is teasing apart beneficial from harmful 
signals. In this regard, learning more about the immune components of these 
diseases has yielded common themes. These unifying concepts should eventually 
enable immune-based therapeutics for treatment of Alzheimer׳s and Parkinson׳s 
diseases and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Targeted immune modulation should be 
possible to temper maladaptive factors, enabling beneficial immune responses in 
the context of neurodegenerative diseases. This article is part of a Special 
Issue entitled SI: Neuroimmunology in Health And Disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.09.008
PMCID: PMC4362937
PMID: 25218556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3547. Med Hypotheses. 2014 Nov;83(5):559-62. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.08.025. Epub 
2014 Sep 6.

Mutations in Niemann Pick type C gene are risk factor for Alzheimer's disease.

Kresojević N(1), Dobričić V(1), Svetel M(1), Kostić V(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Clinic, CCS, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Dr 
Subotića starijeg 6, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia.
(2)Neurology Clinic, CCS, School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Dr 
Subotića starijeg 6, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia. Electronic address: 
vladimir.s.kostic@gmail.com.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia characterized by 
deterioration of memory and other cognitive domains which leads to death in 
3-9years after diagnosis. In addition to mutations in APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2 
genes, that cause early onset autosomal dominant AD, several genetic risk 
factors for late onset AD are now known. There is another distinctive 
neurodegenerative lysosomal storage disorder - Niemann-Pick type C (NPC) that is 
sometimes referred to as "Childhood Alzheimer's". NPC is autosomal recessive 
disease caused by mutations in the NPC1 or NPC2 genes. NPC and AD share some 
biochemical and pathological similarities which are discussed in this paper. On 
the other hand, there is a well documented connection between other autosomal 
recessive lysosomal storage disorder - Gaucher's disease (GD) and 
neurodegenerative disorder - Parkinson's disease (PD). It has been shown that GD 
patients have 20-fold increased life-time risk of developing PD. Surprisingly, 
even heterozygous carriers of mutations in glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) have 
increased risk for developing PD. Having in mind above mentioned correlations, 
we hypothesized that heterozygous mutations in the NPC gene may act as an 
independent risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. If true, this would expand link 
between lysosomal disorders and neurodegenerative diseases. Also, if 
heterozygous NPC1/2 mutation carriers develop AD we assume it would be worth 
trying with miglustat-specific therapy recommended for NPC disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.08.025
PMID: 25220527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3548. Eur J Neurol. 2015 Feb;22(2):305-12. doi: 10.1111/ene.12567. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Dementia and severity of parkinsonism determines the handicap of patients in 
late-stage Parkinson's disease: the Barcelona-Lisbon cohort.

Coelho M(1), Marti MJ, Sampaio C, Ferreira JJ, Valldeoriola F, Rosa MM, Tolosa 
E.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Department of Neurosciences, Hospital Santa Maria, Lisbon, 
Portugal; Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Lisbon, 
Portugal.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Handicap has not been explored as a patient-centred 
outcome measure in Parkinson's disease (PD). The clinical features and 
medication use in late stages of PD (LS-PD) were reported previously.
METHODS: Handicap, medical conditions, use of healthcare resources and the 
impact of LS-PD upon caregivers were characterized in a cross-sectional study of 
LS-PD stages 4 or 5 of Hoehn and Yahr (H&Y). Handicap was measured using the 
London Handicap Scale (LHS: 0, maximal handicap; 1, no handicap).
RESULTS: The mean LHS score in 50 patients was 0.33 (SD ±0.15). The presence of 
dementia, the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale part I score and the H&Y 
stage in 'off' independently predicted the LHS score (adjusted R(2) = 0.62; P = 
0.000). Comorbidities and past medical conditions were frequent. Thirty-five 
patients lived at their house. Forty-five received unpaid care. Mean visits to 
the family doctor in the preceding 6 months were 2.2 (SD ±3.0) and to a 
neurologist 1.7 (SD ±1.0). Use of other health resources was low. Unpaid 
caregivers spent much time with patients and reported a high burden.
CONCLUSION: Handicap could be measured in LS-PD and the LHS was easily completed 
by patients and caregivers. The high handicap in our cohort was mostly driven by 
the presence of dementia, behavioural complaints and the severity of 
non-dopaminergic motor features. Patients visited doctors infrequently and made 
low use of health resources, whilst unpaid caregivers reported a high burden.

© 2014 EAN.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.12567
PMID: 25220687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3549. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 15;9(9):e107465. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107465. 
eCollection 2014.

Initial medication in patients of newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease in Taiwan.

Guo YJ(1), Liao YC(2), Lin CH(3), Chang MH(4).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; 
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Section of Neurology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; 
Department of Neurology, National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medical education and Research, Taichung Veterans General 
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Section of Neurology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; 
Department of Neurology, National Yang-Ming University School of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

INTRODUCTION: Several treatment guidelines for Parkinson's disease (PD) had been 
proposed in recent decades. The aim of current study was to investigate the 
initial medication utilized in newly diagnosed PD subjects in Taiwan during an 
eleven-year period.
METHODS: A total of 7,550 patients with newly diagnosed Parkinsonism were 
retrospectively enrolled from the National Health Insurance Research Database of 
Taiwan from 2000 to 2010. After excluding patients at risk of secondary or 
atypical Parkinsonism, those never receiving medication or having incomplete 
data, 1,645 subjects were included. The participants were then divided into four 
treating regimen groups, namely levodopa (LD) only group, dopamine agonist (DA) 
only group, LD+DA group, and No-LD, No-DA group. The demographic data and 
medication retention rate were compared across the four treatment groups.
RESULTS: LD only and No-LD, No-DA regimens were the main initial choice of PD 
treatment in Taiwan. LD containing drugs were more often prescribed to the 
elderly population than the other two treatment regimens, while No-LD, No-DA 
medication was the major initial choice for younger patients. DA only regimen 
occupied only 3-4% of the initial PD prescriptions and was given predominantly 
by neurologists. Over the eleven-year period, there is a trend for the 
middle-aged population to receive medication containing LD as initial treatment. 
The one year retention rate of anti-Parkinsonism medication was around 30-50% in 
our population. Age, polypharmacy, change of one-year daily levodopa equivalent 
dosage and newly onset of dementia, stroke and psychiatric diseases all affect 
drug compliance in PD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first long-term study to explore initial 
pharmacotherapies in an Asian PD population. We hope to provide evidence for 
adjusting government policies and public education of physicians and PD patients 
in the future.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107465
PMCID: PMC4164642
PMID: 25222829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3550. EMBO Rep. 2014 Oct;15(10):1036-52. doi: 10.15252/embr.201439225. Epub 2014 Sep 
15.

Cholesterol in brain disease: sometimes determinant and frequently implicated.

Martín MG(1), Pfrieger F(2), Dotti CG(3).

Author information:
(1)Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas Mercedes y Martín Ferreyra 
(INIMEC-CONICET-UNC), Universidad Nacional de Córdoba, Córdoba, Argentina 
mmartin@immf.uncor.edu frank.pfrieger@inci-cnrs.unistra.fr cdotti@cbm.csic.es.
(2)Institute of Cellular and Integrative Neurosciences, CNRS UPR 3212, 
University of Strasbourg, Strasbourg, France mmartin@immf.uncor.edu 
frank.pfrieger@inci-cnrs.unistra.fr cdotti@cbm.csic.es.
(3)Centro Biología Molecular 'Severo Ochoa' CSIC-UAM, Madrid, Spain 
mmartin@immf.uncor.edu frank.pfrieger@inci-cnrs.unistra.fr cdotti@cbm.csic.es.

Cholesterol is essential for neuronal physiology, both during development and in 
the adult life: as a major component of cell membranes and precursor of steroid 
hormones, it contributes to the regulation of ion permeability, cell shape, 
cell-cell interaction, and transmembrane signaling. Consistently, hereditary 
diseases with mutations in cholesterol-related genes result in impaired brain 
function during early life. In addition, defects in brain cholesterol metabolism 
may contribute to neurological syndromes, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Huntington's disease (HD), and Parkinson's disease (PD), and even to the 
cognitive deficits typical of the old age. In these cases, brain cholesterol 
defects may be secondary to disease-causing elements and contribute to the 
functional deficits by altering synaptic functions. In the first part of this 
review, we will describe hereditary and non-hereditary causes of cholesterol 
dyshomeostasis and the relationship to brain diseases. In the second part, we 
will focus on the mechanisms by which perturbation of cholesterol metabolism can 
affect synaptic function.

© 2014 The Authors.

DOI: 10.15252/embr.201439225
PMCID: PMC4253844
PMID: 25223281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3551. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Jul;86(7):767-73. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2014-308764. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Cholinesterase inhibitors for Parkinson's disease: a systematic review and 
meta-analysis.

Pagano G(1), Rengo G(2), Pasqualetti G(3), Femminella GD(4), Monzani F(3), 
Ferrara N(5), Tagliati M(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Health Sciences, School of Medicine, University of 
Molise, Campobasso, Italy Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico 
II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.
(2)Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, IRCCS Institute of Telese Terme, Telese Terme, 
Benevento, Italy.
(3)Geriatrics Unit, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.
(4)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University of 
Naples, Naples, Italy.
(5)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, Federico II University of 
Naples, Naples, Italy Salvatore Maugeri Foundation, IRCCS Institute of Telese 
Terme, Telese Terme, Benevento, Italy.
(6)Department of Neurology, Cedar-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, California, 
USA.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative movement 
disorder frequently associated with a wide variety of non-motor symptoms related 
to non-dopaminergic pathways. Although the depletion of dopamine is the key 
neurochemical impairment in PD and anticholinergic medications are used for 
symptomatic treatment, significant deficits in cholinergic transmission are also 
present and have been associated with cognitive decline and gait dysfunction. 
Therefore, use of a cholinesterase inhibitor (ChI) might improve cognitive 
function and reduce the risk of falls in patients with PD, although it could 
plausibly worsen motor features. Our objective was to conduct a systematic 
review of prospective, randomised controlled trials, in order to assess the 
efficacy and safety of ChIs compared with placebo in patients with PD.
METHODS AND RESULTS: MEDLINE, Web of Science, CENTRAL and Scopus databases were 
searched to identify studies published before 5 May 2014 and including patients 
with PD treated with ChIs. From 945 references identified and screened, 19 were 
assessed for eligibility and 4 trials were included for a total of 941 patients 
with PD. ChIs significantly slowed Mini-Mental State Examination decline without 
effect on risk of falls. Tremor rates and adverse drug reactions favoured the 
placebo group. Alzheimer Disease Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale, global 
assessment and behavioural disturbance improved in the ChI group without effect 
on disability. There was no significant difference between the groups for 
Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale III. A significantly reduced death rate 
was observed in the treated cohort as compared with placebo.
CONCLUSIONS: ChIs are effective in the treatment of cognitive impairment in 
patients with PD, but do not affect risk of falls. The choice of treatment has 
to be balanced considering the increased tremor and adverse drug reactions.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-308764
PMID: 25224676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3552. J Nutr Health Aging. 2014 Jul;18(7):718-22. doi: 10.1007/s12603-014-0506-4.

Caregiver-reported swallowing difficulties, malnutrition, and mortality among 
older people in assisted living facilities.

Lindroos E(1), Saarela RK, Soini H, Muurinen S, Suominen MH, Pitkälä KH.

Author information:
(1)Eeva Lindroos, M.Sc, Helsinki Metropolia, University of Applied Sciences, 
Finland, Mannerheimintie 172, FIN-00300 Helsinki, Finland, tel. +358-50-5695677, 
E-mail address:eeva.lindroos@metropolia.fi.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study is to explore the prevalence of swallowing 
difficulties (SWD) and their associations with nutritional status, eating 
habits, nutritional care, and mortality among older people in assisted living.
DESIGN: A cross-sectional study with interviews and nutritional assessments at 
baseline and 3-year follow-up for mortality.
SETTING: Assisted living facilities in the Helsinki metropolitan area, Finland.
PARTICIPANTS: All residents (N=1466) in assisted living facilities.
MEASUREMENTS: Personal interviews yielded information on demographics, medical 
history, functional status, SWDs and eating habits. Residents' nutritional 
status was assessed with the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA). Three-year 
mortality data were retrieved from central registers.
RESULTS: SWDs were common; 11.8% of subjects suffered from them. Those with SWDs 
were older, more often female, and more frequently had Parkinson's disease, 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), and chronic/ recurrent infections 
than those without SWDs. No differences were present between the groups in 
prevalence of stroke or dementia, but more severe cognitive decline occurred 
among those with SWDs. According to the MNA, 30.6% of those with SWDs were 
malnourished (<17 points), whereas the respective figure for those without SWDs 
was 11.0% (p < .001). Those with SWDs ate more often fluid or puréed food (27.8% 
vs. 3.8%, p < .001), ate more often little or quite little of their food portion 
(32.6% vs. 23.5%, p < .010), and consumed less fluids (< 5 cups/day 51.7% vs. 
35.6%, p< .001) than those without SWDs. Of those with SWDs, 55.0% died by the 
end of follow-up, whereas the respective figure for those without SWDs was 
41.5%. In logistic regression analysis using age, sex, comorbidities, and MNA as 
covariates, SWDs continued to predict mortality (OR=1.49, 95% CI=1.04 -2.12).
CONCLUSIONS: SWDs are common and associated with poor nutrition and risk of 
death of patients in assisted living facilities. Nurses should be trained to 
assess SWDs and nutritional problems in order to take optimal care of these 
residents.

DOI: 10.1007/s12603-014-0506-4
PMID: 25226112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3553. Biomed Mater Eng. 2014;24(6):3405-10. doi: 10.3233/BME-141164.

Early detection of subjective memory impairment in Parkinson's disease using 
cerebral perfusion SPECT.

Song IU(1), Kim JS(1), Chung SW(1), Lee KS(1), Oh JK(2), Chung YA(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seocho-gu, Banpo-dong 505 Seoul, 137-701, Korea.
(2)Department of Radiology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seocho-gu, Banpo-dong 505 Seoul, 137-701, Korea.

Cognitive dysfunction is a common feature of Parkinson's disease (PD). Recent 
research has focused on the detection and management of subjective memory 
impairment (SMI) as the stage that precedes mild cognitive impairment (MCI). 
Nevertheless, few clinical studies have biomarkers of SMI in PD. Therefore, this 
study was designed to investigate differences in perfusion brain SPECT between 
PD with SMI (PD+SMI) and PD without SMI (PD-SMI) to identify a potential 
prodromal biomarker of progression to dementia in patients with PD. In this 
study, 30 PD patients with SMI and 24 PD patients without SMI have been 
recruited. All subjects underwent perfusion brain SPECT and neuropsychological 
testing. Brain SPECT images were analyzed by using the SPM program and comparing 
between patients with PD+SMI and PD-SMI. The PD+SMI and PD-SMI groups did not 
differ in any neuropsychological tests, except for MMSE. Despite a significant 
difference in MMSE scores, all scores of both groups were in the normal range. 
Brain SPECT analysis of PD+SMI patients showed hypoperfusion in the frontal and 
inferior temporal regions, anterior cingulate and thalamus compared with PD-SMI 
patients. This pilot study investigated the role of decreased brain perfusion 
SPECT findings in PD+SMI patients compared with PD-SMI patients as a predictive 
biomarker of pre-dementia as the stage that precedes MCI in PD. Larger, 
prospective studies are warranted for further investigation of the 
pathophysiology of neuronal systems during cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.3233/BME-141164
PMID: 25227051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3554. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014;13(7):1160-8. doi: 
10.2174/1871527313666140917122739.

The impact of dementia development concurrent with Parkinson's disease: a new 
perspective.

Russell A, Drozdova A, Wang W, Thomas M(1).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Centre, School of Medical Sciences, Edith Cowan University, 270 
Joondalup Dr, Joondalup, WA 6027, Australia. mgthomas54@gmail.com.

Dementia is the leading cause of disability worldwide among chronic diseases in 
the elderly and is a major contributor to mortality. Importantly, dementia that 
develops as a comorbid condition significantly compounds the burden of disease 
on the person, their caregivers and the health care system. Dementia is a 
frequent comorbidity of Parkinson's disease (PD) and about 80% of people with PD 
will develop dementia during the course of the disease. Incidence of dementia in 
PD ranges from 54.7 to 107.14 per 1000 person-years while point prevalence 
estimates range from 19.7 to 35.3%. The range in incidence and point prevalence 
can be attributed to varying diagnostic criteria, sample biases, and sample 
size. Nosologically, there is still disagreement on the origins of dementia in 
PD. Dementia development may be most often caused by the progression of PD-type 
pathology; however, the occurrence of Alzheimer's disease (AD)-type pathology 
suggests that an interplay exists between the genes and proteins associated with 
PD and AD. Furthermore, these genes and proteins may increase the risk and 
severity of dementia development in people with PD. Understanding the mechanisms 
of neurodegeneration in PD and AD may, therefore, improve efforts to manage and 
treat PD dementia. Given this, it is important to adequately define the 
frequency of PD dementia for informed decision making, particularly in the areas 
of aged-care and government health policy.

DOI: 10.2174/1871527313666140917122739
PMID: 25230219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3555. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Apr;1852(4):633-43. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.09.005. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis: A degenerative muscle disease associated with 
aging, impaired muscle protein homeostasis and abnormal mitophagy.

Askanas V(1), Engel WK(2), Nogalska A(2).

Author information:
(1)USC Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA. Electronic address: askanas@usc.edu.
(2)USC Neuromuscular Center, Department of Neurology, University of Southern 
California Keck School of Medicine, Good Samaritan Hospital, Los Angeles, CA, 
USA.

Sporadic inclusion-body myositis (s-IBM) is the most common degenerative muscle 
disease in which aging appears to be a key risk factor. In this review we focus 
on several cellular molecular mechanisms responsible for multiprotein 
aggregation and accumulations within s-IBM muscle fibers, and their possible 
consequences. Those include mechanisms leading to: a) accumulation in the form 
of aggregates within the muscle fibers, of several proteins, including 
amyloid-β42 and its oligomers, and phosphorylated tau in the form of paired 
helical filaments, and we consider their putative detrimental influence; and b) 
protein misfolding and aggregation, including evidence of abnormal 
myoproteostasis, such as increased protein transcription, inadequate protein 
disposal, and abnormal posttranslational modifications of proteins. Pathogenic 
importance of our recently demonstrated abnormal mitophagy is also discussed. 
The intriguing phenotypic similarities between s-IBM muscle fibers and the 
brains of Alzheimer and Parkinson's disease patients, the two most common 
neurodegenerative diseases associated with aging, are also discussed. This 
article is part of a Special Issue entitled: Neuromuscular Diseases: Pathology 
and Molecular Pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2014.09.005
PMID: 25241263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3556. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Nov;20(11):1215-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.09.003. Epub 2014 Sep 9.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations in primary parkinsonism.

Asselta R(1), Rimoldi V(1), Siri C(2), Cilia R(2), Guella I(1), Tesei S(2), 
Soldà G(1), Pezzoli G(2), Duga S(3), Goldwurm S(4).

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.
(2)Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy.
(3)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Mediche e Medicina Traslazionale, Università 
degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy. Electronic address: stefano.duga@unimi.it.
(4)Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy. 
Electronic address: goldwurm@parkinson.it.

INTRODUCTION: Mutations in the lysosomal glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene increase 
the risk of Parkinson's Disease (PD). We determined the frequency and relative 
risk of major GBA mutations in a large series of Italian patients with primary 
parkinsonism.
METHODS: We studied 2766 unrelated consecutive patients with clinical diagnosis 
of primary degenerative parkinsonism (including 2350 PD), and 1111 controls. The 
entire cohort was screened for mutations in GBA exons 9 and 10, covering 
approximately 70% of mutations, including the two most frequent defects, p.N370S 
and p.L444P.
RESULTS: Four known mutations were identified in heterozygous state: 3 missense 
mutations (p.N370S, p.L444P, and p.D443N), and the splicing mutation IVS10+1G>T, 
which results in the in-frame exon-10 skipping. Molecular characterization of 2 
additional rare variants, potentially interfering with splicing, suggested a 
neutral effect. GBA mutations were more frequent in PD (4.5%, RR = 7.2, 
CI = 3.3-15.3) and in Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) (13.8%, RR = 21.9, 
CI = 6.8-70.7) than in controls (0.63%). but not in the other forms of 
parkinsonism such as Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP, 2%), and Corticobasal 
Degeneration (CBD, 0%). Considering only the PD group, GBA-carriers were younger 
at onset (52 ± 10 vs. 57 ± 10 years, P < 0.0001) and were more likely to have a 
positive family history of PD (34% vs. 20%, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: GBA dysfunction is relevant for synucleinopathies, such as PD and 
DLB, except for MSA, in which pathology involves oligodendrocytes, and the 
tauopathies PSP and CBD. The risk of developing DLB is three-fold higher than 
PD, suggesting a more aggressive phenotype.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.09.003
PMCID: PMC4228056
PMID: 25249066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3557. J Biophotonics. 2015 Jul;8(7):584-96. doi: 10.1002/jbio.201400060. Epub 2014 Sep 
25.

Raman spectroscopy of blood serum for Alzheimer's disease diagnostics: 
specificity relative to other types of dementia.

Ryzhikova E(1), Kazakov O(2), Halamkova L(1), Celmins D(3), Malone P(3), Molho 
E(4), Zimmerman EA(3), Lednev IK(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University at Albany, SUNY, 1400 Washington Avenue, 
Albany, NY 12222, USA.
(2)Department of Physics, University at Albany, SUNY, 1400 Washington Avenue, 
Albany, NY 12222, USA.
(3)Alzheimer's Center and Movement Disorders Program, Department of Neurology of 
Albany Medical Center, Albany, NY, USA.
(4)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center of Albany Medical Center, 
Albany, NY, USA.
(5)Department of Chemistry, University at Albany, SUNY, 1400 Washington Avenue, 
Albany, NY 12222, USA. ilednev@albany.edu.

The key moment for efficiently and accurately diagnosing dementia occurs during 
the early stages. This is particularly true for Alzheimer's disease (AD). In 
this proof-of-concept study, we applied near infrared (NIR) Raman 
microspectroscopy of blood serum together with advanced multivariate statistics 
for the selective identification of AD. We analyzed data from 20 AD patients, 18 
patients with other neurodegenerative dementias (OD) and 10 healthy control (HC) 
subjects. NIR Raman microspectroscopy differentiated patients with more than 95% 
sensitivity and specificity. We demonstrated the high discriminative power of 
artificial neural network (ANN) classification models, thus revealing the high 
potential of this developed methodology for the differential diagnosis of AD. 
Raman spectroscopic, blood-based tests may aid clinical assessments for the 
effective and accurate differential diagnosis of AD, decrease the labor, time 
and cost of diagnosis, and be useful for screening patient populations for AD 
development and progression. Multivariate data analysis of blood serum Raman 
spectra allows for the differentiation between patients with Alzheimer's 
disease, other types of dementia and healthy individuals.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

DOI: 10.1002/jbio.201400060
PMCID: PMC4575592
PMID: 25256347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3558. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Nov;20(11):1203-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.024. Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Hippocampal volume and white matter disease in the prediction of dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Kandiah N(1), Zainal NH(2), Narasimhalu K(2), Chander RJ(2), Ng A(2), Mak E(2), 
Au WL(3), Sitoh YY(4), Nadkarni N(5), Tan LC(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, 11 Jalan Tan Tock 
Seng, Singapore 308433, Singapore; Duke-NUS, Graduate Medical School, 8 College 
Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore. Electronic address: 
Nagaendran_Kandiah@nni.com.sg.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, 11 Jalan Tan Tock 
Seng, Singapore 308433, Singapore.
(3)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, 11 Jalan Tan Tock 
Seng, Singapore 308433, Singapore; Duke-NUS, Graduate Medical School, 8 College 
Road, Singapore 169857, Singapore.
(4)Duke-NUS, Graduate Medical School, 8 College Road, Singapore 169857, 
Singapore; Department of Neuroradiology, National Neuroscience Institute, 11 
Jalan Tan Tock Seng, Singapore 308433, Singapore.
(5)Centre for Quantitative Medicine, Duke-NUS, 8 College Road, Singapore 169857, 
Singapore.

BACKGROUND: Longitudinal neuroimaging studies could provide insights into 
pathophysiology of cognitive impairment in PD. We examined the role of 
hippocampal atrophy and cerebral white matter disease as risk factors for mild 
cognitive impairment and dementia in PD.
METHODS: Prospective longitudinal study of patients with mild PD in a tertiary 
neurology center. All subjects underwent baseline MRI brain and had baseline and 
6 monthly cognitive evaluations. Cognitive impairment was diagnosed based on the 
Movement Disorder Society Criteria. The predictive role of hippocampal volume 
and white matter hyperintensity at baseline on progression of cognitive 
impairment was studied.
RESULTS: 97 subjects with mean age 65.3 years, mean education of 10.3 years and 
mean Hoehn & Yahr of 1.9 were studied. Over 2 years, 16 subjects developed mild 
cognitive impairment and 8 subjects with mild cognitive impairment progressed to 
dementia. After adjusting for age and vascular risk factors, hippocampal volume 
was a significant predictor for mild cognitive impairment (OR 7.05, CI 1.5-34.1; 
p = 0.015) and dementia (OR 7.03, CI 2.39-25.2; p = 0.001). With Cox regression, 
hippocampal volume was a significant predictor for "time to cognitive 
impairment" (HR 7.67; CI 3.47-16.95, p < 0.001). Difference between survival 
curves based on volume of white matter hyperintensity in predicting "time to 
mild cognitive impairment" was significant (p = 0.0295).
CONCLUSIONS: Hippocampal volume is a major factor predicting the development of 
mild cognitive impairment and dementia in PD. White matter hyperintensity also 
contributes to the longitudinal cognitive status in PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.024
PMID: 25258331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3559. J Psychosom Res. 2014 Dec;77(6):535-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2014.09.008. 
Epub 2014 Sep 16.

Increased depression risk among patients with chronic osteomyelitis.

Tseng CH(1), Huang WS(1), Muo CH(2), Chang YJ(3), Kao CH(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; 
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science and School of Medicine, College 
of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Health Promotion and Health Education, National Taiwan Normal 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science and School of Medicine, 
College of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of 
Nuclear Medicine and PET Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan. Electronic address: d10040@mail.cmuh.org.tw.

OBJECTIVE: Inflammatory processes, which provoke alternations of 
neurotransmitter metabolism, neuroendocrine function, and neuroplasticity in the 
brain, might promote depression. In depression patients who do not exhibit risk 
factors, including hypertension, diabetes, coronary heart disease, stroke, 
Parkinson's disease and dementia, particularly in young people, inflammation is 
a likely risk factor for depression. We explored whether chronic osteomyelitis 
(COM), a chronic inflammatory disease, increases depression risk.
METHODS: A Taiwanese national insurance claims data set of more than 22 million 
enrollees was used to select 15,529 COM patients without depression history and 
62,116 randomly selected age- and gender-matched controls without depression and 
COM history to trace depression development for an 12-year follow-up period from 
January 1, 1999 to December 31, 2010. The depression risk was analyzed using the 
Cox proportional hazards regression model.
RESULTS: The above-mentioned risk factors for depression were more frequent in 
the COM cohort, who exhibited significantly higher depression risk than the 
control group did. Comparing only those without comorbidities, the COM group 
exhibited higher depression risk than the control group did (hazard ratio 
[HR]=3.04, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 2.55-3.62). The younger population 
carried even greater risk (age<45: HR=6.08, 95% CI: 1.71-7.85; age>65: HR=1.75, 
95% CI: 1.39-2.19).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study connecting COM to increased risk of 
developing depression. The outcomes suggest that COM is a substantial depression 
predictor and call for a closer focus on these patients for more rigorous 
depression prevention, particularly in young people.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychores.2014.09.008
PMID: 25258357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3560. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Nov;20(11):1268-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.012. Epub 2014 Aug 27.

Applause sign in advanced Parkinson's disease.

Weerkamp NJ(1), Tissingh G(2), Poels PJ(3), Zuidema SU(4), Munneke M(3), 
Koopmans RT(5), Bloem BR(6).

Author information:
(1)Bronovo Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands; Radboud University Nijmegen, 
Department of Neurology, Nijmegen Center for Evidence Based Practice, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Bronovo Hospital, The Hague, The Netherlands.
(3)Radboud University Nijmegen, Department of Neurology, Nijmegen Center for 
Evidence Based Practice, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of General Practice, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Primary and Community Care, Center for Family Medicine, 
Geriatric Care and Public Health, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 
The Netherlands.
(6)Radboud University Nijmegen, Department of Neurology, Nijmegen Center for 
Evidence Based Practice, The Netherlands; Department of Neurology, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Center, The Netherlands. Electronic address: b.bloem@neuro.umcn.nl.

BACKGROUND: The 'applause sign' a tendency to continue applauding in response to 
instructions to clap three times was described in 1995 and was considered 
specific to degenerative disease, especially to atypical parkinsonian disorders. 
In early phase Parkinson's disease (PD) the sign has been reported positive as 
well. In late stage PD it is unknown whether and to what extent the sign may be 
elicited and it remains unknown if and to what degree the sign correlates to 
cognitive impairment and PD related dementia.
METHODS: Nursing home residents with PD (MMSE >17) were included. All patients 
underwent the clapping test and were tested for cognitive disturbance by making 
use of accepted clinimetrics (MMSE and Scopa-cog). T-testing was performed with 
the hypothesis that patients expressing the applause sign would score lower on 
the MMSE or Scopa-cog.
RESULTS: Seventy three nursing home residents (mainly Hoehn and Yahr 4/5) with a 
mean disease duration of 10 years and a mean age of 78.7 years were included. 
The applause sign was found positive in 15 of 73 residents (20.5%). Residents 
expressing the applause sign had significantly lower mean scores on the MMSE 
(25.1 vs 22.9 points, p < 0.006) and Scopa-cog (14.8 vs 12.0 points, p < 0.039).
CONCLUSIONS: The applause sign is present in late stage PD and correlates with a 
higher degree of cognitive impairment as established with accepted clinimetric 
tests. A higher degree of frontal lobe involvement explains the presence of the 
applause sign.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.08.012
PMID: 25260968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3561. Eur J Clin Nutr. 2014 Nov;68(11):1186-91. doi: 10.1038/ejcn.2014.189. Epub 2014 
Oct 1.

Clinical workout for the early detection of cognitive decline and dementia.

Tsolaki M(1).

Author information:
(1)3rd Department of Neurology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Aging is the major risk factor for the development of human neurodegenerative 
maladies such as Alzheimer's, Huntington's and Parkinson's diseases (PDs) and 
prion disorders, all of which stem from toxic protein aggregation. All of these 
diseases are correlated with cognitive decline. Cognitive Decline is a dynamic 
state from normal cognition of aging to dementia. According to the original 
criteria for Alzheimer's Disease (AD) (1984), a clinical diagnosis was possible 
only when someone was already demented. The prevalence rates of Cognitive 
Decline (mild cognitive impairment plus dementia) are very high now and will be 
higher in future because of the increasing survival time of people. Many 
neurological and psychiatric diseases are correlated with cognitive decline. 
Diagnosis of cognitive decline is mostly clinical (clinical criteria), but there 
are multiple biomarkers that could help us mostly in research programs such as 
short or long, paper and pencil or computerized neuropsychological batteries for 
cognition, activities of daily living and behavior, electroencephalograph, 
event-related potentials, and imaging-structural magnetic resonance imaging 
(MRI) and functional (fMRI, Pittsburgh bound positron emission tomography, 
FDG-PET, single photon emission computerized tomography and imaging of tau 
pathology)-cerebrospinal fluid proteins (Abeta, tau and phospho-tau in AD and 
α-synuclein (αSyn) for PD). Blood biomarkers need more studies to confirm their 
usefulness. Genetic markers are also studied but until now are not used in 
clinical praxis. Finally, in everyday clinical praxis and in research workout 
for early detection of cognitive decline, the combination of biomarkers is 
useful.

DOI: 10.1038/ejcn.2014.189
PMID: 25271010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3562. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 2;9(9):e108938. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108938. 
eCollection 2014.

Glaucoma, Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease: an 8-year 
population-based follow-up study.

Lin IC(1), Wang YH(2), Wang TJ(3), Wang IJ(4), Shen YD, Chi NF(5), Chien LN(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan; Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
College of Medicine, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Ophthalmology, Taipei Medical University Hospital, Taipei 
Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Ophthalmology, National Taiwan University Hospital, School of 
Medicine, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Department of Neurology, Shuang Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Taipei Medical 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(6)School of Health Care Administration, College of Public Health and Nutrition, 
Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(3):e0150789. Shen, Yun-Den [corrected to Shen, Yun-Dun].

BACKGROUND: Glaucoma is the leading cause of irreversible blindness worldwide 
and primary open-angle glaucoma (POAG) is the most common type of glaucoma. An 
association between POAG and the subsequent risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD) was unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between POAG (including normal-tension 
glaucoma) and the subsequent risk of AD or PD 8 years following a diagnosis of 
POAG.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective, propensity-score-matched analysis of a 
population-based cohort consisting of patients with and without POAG aged 60 
years and older. Control patients without POAG were propensity-score matched to 
POAG patients based on their baseline characteristics.
RESULTS: The incidence rates and confidence intervals (CIs) of AD among the 
patients with and without POAG were 2.85 (95% CI: 2.19-3.70) and 1.98 (95% CI: 
1.68-2.31) per 1000 person-years, respectively. The incidence rates of PD among 
the POAG and non-POAG cohorts were 4.36 (95% CI: 3.52-5.39) and 4.37 (95% CI: 
3.92-4.86) per 1000 person-years, respectively. Kaplan-Meier failure curves 
showed that the POAG patients had a higher risk of AD than the control patients 
did (log-rank test, P= .0189). However, the cumulative PD hazard ratios for the 
POAG and non-POAG patients did not differ significantly (log-rank test, 
P= .9953).
CONCLUSION: In elderly patients, POAG is a significant predictor of AD, but POAG 
is not a predictor of PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108938
PMCID: PMC4183534
PMID: 25275530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3563. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Aug;86(8):849-55. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2014-308786. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

Parkinson's disease beyond 20 years.

Cilia R(1), Cereda E(2), Klersy C(3), Canesi M(1), Zecchinelli AL(1), Mariani 
CB(1), Tesei S(1), Sacilotto G(1), Meucci N(1), Zini M(1), Ruffmann C(1), Isaias 
IU(1), Goldwurm S(1), Pezzoli G(1).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milano, Italy.
(2)Nutrition and Dietetics Service, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San Matteo, 
Pavia, Italy.
(3)Biometry and Clinical Epidemiology Service, Fondazione IRCCS Policlinico San 
Matteo, Pavia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: A very limited number of studies report data on the clinical 
features of Parkinson's disease (PD) 20 years after onset and beyond.
OBJECTIVE: To characterise PD 20 years after onset, investigating the impact of 
age at onset and disease duration on the clinical picture and the predictors of 
outcomes in patients reaching the 20-year time point.
METHODS: We conducted a retrospective, cross-sectional study and a longitudinal 
study. All case visits of patients with a disease duration ≥20 years (N=401) 
were stratified by disease duration (20-22, 23-25, ≥26 years) and by age at 
onset (cut-off, 50 years). Patients with a disease duration of 20-22 years 
(N=320) were prospectively followed up for a median of 45 months (IQR 23-89) for 
the new occurrence of fracture, percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy, 
institutionalisation, confinement to a wheelchair or bed and death.
RESULTS: Older age at onset and longer disease duration were independently 
associated with a higher prevalence of major motor and non-motor milestones of 
disease disability (no interaction observed). In the longitudinal study, the 
most frequent outcomes were death (N=92), confinement to a wheelchair or bed 
(N=67) and fracture (N=52). Mortality was associated with the gender: male, 
older age, dysphagia, orthostatic hypotension, postural instability, fractures 
and institutionalisation. Fracture was associated with postural instability. 
Predictors of permanent confinement to a wheelchair or bed were older age, 
postural instability and institutionalisation. Comorbid dementia at the 20-year 
examination did not predict any of the outcomes.
CONCLUSIONS: Age at onset and disease duration are independent determinants of 
the clinical features of PD beyond 20 years. Non-motor symptoms depend more on 
age at onset rather than the disease duration itself. Non-levodopa-responsive 
axial symptoms are the main predictors of all relevant outcomes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-308786
PMID: 25280915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3564. Neuroscience. 2015 Aug 27;302:138-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.09.050. 
Epub 2014 Oct 2.

What happens to microglial TREM2 in Alzheimer's disease: Immunoregulatory turned 
into immunopathogenic?

Lue LF(1), Schmitz C(2), Walker DG(3).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 
West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA. Electronic address: 
lihfen.lue@bannerhealth.com.
(2)Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 
West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Neuroinflammation, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 
West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA.

Microglia play major roles in initiation, coordination and execution of innate 
immunity in the brain. In the adult brain, these include maintenance of 
homeostasis, neuron and tissue repair, and eliminating infectious agents, 
apoptotic cells, and misfolded proteins. Some of these activities are 
accompanied by inflammatory reactions; and others are performed with no 
inflammatory effects. Under normal conditions, triggering receptor expressed on 
myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) belongs to the second category. It pairs with the 
adaptor protein DNAX-activating protein of 12kDa (DAP12) to induce phagocytosis 
of apoptotic neurons without inflammatory responses, and to regulate Toll-like 
receptor-mediated inflammatory responses, and microglial activation. Although 
ligands for TREM2 are largely unknown, the mitochondrial heat shock protein 60, 
expressed on cell surface of apoptotic neurons, is a specific ligand that 
activates TREM2-mediated phagocytosis by microglia. TREM2 also phagocytoses 
amyloid beta peptide in cultured cells. Several TREM2 mutations have been 
identified recently that increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease, 
Frontotemporal dementia, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. 
Some of these mutations cause impaired proteolysis of full-length TREM2 at the 
plasma membrane to different degrees. The defects in the intramembrane cleavage 
result in dysfunction of phagocytosis signaling. The association of TREM2 
mutations with neurodegenerative disease also calls for the understanding of the 
biology and pathological role of non-mutated TREM2 on human brains and 
microglia. This review provides a summary of current literature in TREM2 and 
DAP12 from several aspects, and proposes a theory that loss of TREM2 functions 
might contribute to the immunopathogenic role of microglia in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Copyright © 2014 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.09.050
PMID: 25281879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3565. Mayo Clin Proc. 2014 Oct;89(10):1452-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.06.019.

Mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia: a clinical perspective.

Knopman DS(1), Petersen RC(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Division of Behavioral Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN. Electronic address: knopman@mayo.edu.
(2)Department of Neurology, Division of Behavioral Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 
Rochester, MN.

Mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia are common problems in the elderly. 
Primary care physicians are the first point of contact for most patients with 
these disorders and should be familiar with their diagnosis, prognosis, and 
management. Both mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia are characterized 
by objective evidence of cognitive impairment. The main distinctions between 
mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia are that in the latter, more than 
one cognitive domain is invariably involved and substantial interference with 
daily life is evident. The diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment and mild 
dementia is based mainly on the history and cognitive examination. The prognosis 
for mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia is an important motivation for 
diagnosis because in both, there is a heightened risk for further cognitive 
decline. The etiology of mild cognitive impairment and mild dementia can often 
be established through the clinical examination, although imaging and other 
laboratory tests may also contribute. Although Alzheimer disease is the most 
common cause of both, cerebrovascular disease and Lewy body disease make 
important contributions. Pharmacological treatments are of modest value in mild 
dementia due to Alzheimer disease, and there are no approved pharmacological 
treatments for mild cognitive impairment of any etiology. Nonetheless, new-onset 
cognitive impairment is a worrisome symptom to patients and families that 
demands answers and advice. If a patient is having difficulties managing 
medications, finances, or transportation independently, diagnosis and 
intervention are necessary to ensure the health and safety of the patient.

Copyright © 2014 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2014.06.019
PMCID: PMC4185370
PMID: 25282431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3566. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Dec;20(12):1371-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.09.026. Epub 2014 Sep 28.

Risk of Parkinson's disease following severe constipation: a nationwide 
population-based cohort study.

Lin CH(1), Lin JW(2), Liu YC(3), Chang CH(4), Wu RM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Cardiovascular Center, National Taiwan University Hospital 
Yun-Lin Branch, Dou-Liou City, Yun-Lin County, Taiwan.
(3)Institute of Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan. Electronic address: 
chiahsuin123@yahoo.com.tw.
(5)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan. 
Electronic address: robinwu@ntu.edu.tw.

INTRODUCTION: Constipation is a non-motor symptom of Parkinson's disease (PD). 
We investigated the association between the severity of constipation and 
subsequent risk of PD in a population-based sample.
METHODS: 551,324 participants free of PD, dementia, and stroke were 
retrospectively ascertained between January 1, 2005 and December 31, 2005 using 
the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database. The association between 
constipation at the beginning of the study and the incidence of PD was examined 
using a Cox regression model. Information regarding comorbidities and 
concomitant medications use was adjusted in the proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: After an average follow-up of 5.5 years, 2336 incident PD cases were 
diagnosed. The crude incidence rate of PD per 1,000,000 person-days was 1.57 for 
subjects without constipation and 4.04, 5.28, and 12.67 for mild, moderate, and 
severe constipation, respectively. After adjusting for age, sex, comorbidities, 
and concomitant medication use, patients with constipation were more likely to 
develop PD than subjects without constipation; the adjusted hazard ratio (aHR) 
was 3.28 (95% CI: 2.14-5.03), 3.83 (2.51-5.84), and 4.22 (2.95-6.05) for 
individual constipation severity categories. Constipation severity was also 
associated with an increased likelihood of PD in the time-varying analysis; the 
aHR was 2.84 (2.43-3.33), 5.22 (4.61-5.92), and 10.47 (9.46-11.58) for mild, 
moderate, and severe constipation, respectively (P < 0.0001). After excluding PD 
patients diagnosed within 3 years of constipation, the association remained 
significant.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that the severity of constipation is associated 
with a future diagnosis of PD in a dose-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.09.026
PMID: 25293395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3567. Rev Med Interne. 2015 Jan;36(1):31-7. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2014.09.008. Epub 
2014 Oct 7.

[Changes in olfaction during ageing and in certain neurodegenerative diseases: 
up-to-date].

[Article in French]

Bianchi AJ(1), Guépet-Sordet H(2), Manckoundia P(3).

Author information:
(1)Service de soins de suite et de réadaptation gériatrique, hospices civils de 
Beaune, BP 40104, avenue Guigone-de-Salins, 21203 Beaune cedex, France.
(2)Service de médecine interne gériatrie, hôpital de Champmaillot, CHU, BP 
87 909, 2, rue Jules-Violle, 21079 Dijon cedex, France.
(3)Service de médecine interne gériatrie, hôpital de Champmaillot, CHU, BP 
87 909, 2, rue Jules-Violle, 21079 Dijon cedex, France; Inserm U1093 
motricité-plasticité : performance, dysfonctionnement, vieillissement et 
technologies d'optimisation, université de Bourgogne, BP 27877, 21078 Dijon 
cedex, France. Electronic address: patrick.manckoundia@chu-dijon.fr.

Olfaction is a complex sensory system, and increasing interest is being shown in 
the link between olfaction and cognition, notably in the elderly. In this 
literature review, we revisit the specific neurophysiological features of the 
olfactory system and odorants that lead to a durable olfactory memory and an 
emotional memory, for which the implicit component produces subconscious 
olfactory conditioning. Olfaction is known to affect cognitive abilities and 
mood. We also consider the impairment of olfactory function due to ageing and to 
neurodegenerative diseases, in particular Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease, through anatomopathological changes in the peripheral and central 
olfactory structures. The high frequency of these olfactory disorders as well as 
their early occurrence in Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease are in favour 
of their clinical detection in subjects suffering from these two 
neurodegenerative diseases. Finally, we analyse the impact of olfactory 
stimulation on cognitive performance and attention. Current observational data 
from studies in elderly patients with Alzheimer-type dementia are limited to 
multiple sensory stimulation methods, such as the Snoezelen method, and 
aromatherapy. These therapies have shown benefits for dementia-related mood and 
behaviour disorders in the short term, with few side effects. Since olfactory 
chemosensory stimulation may be beneficial, it may be proposed in patients with 
dementia, especially Alzheimer-type dementia, as a complementary or even 
alternative therapy to existing medical strategies.

Copyright © 2014 Société nationale française de médecine interne (SNFMI). 
Published by Elsevier SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2014.09.008
PMID: 25304170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3568. Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Nov;10(11):643-60. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2014.187. Epub 
2014 Oct 14.

Maternal immune activation and abnormal brain development across CNS disorders.

Knuesel I(1), Chicha L(2), Britschgi M(1), Schobel SA(1), Bodmer M(3), Hellings 
JA(4), Toovey S(5), Prinssen EP(1).

Author information:
(1)Roche Pharma Research and Early Development, Roche Innovation Centre Basel, 
Grenzacherstrasse 124, 4070 Basel, Switzerland.
(2)Brain Ischemia &Regeneration Group, Department of Biomedicine, University 
Hospital, Hebelstrasse 20, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Emergency Unit, University Hospital, 
Petersgraben 2, 4031 Basel, Switzerland.
(4)The Nisonger Centre, Ohio State University, 1581 Dodd Drive, Columbus, OH 
43210, USA.
(5)Pegasus Research, Burggartenstrasse 32, 4103 Bottmingen, Switzerland.

Epidemiological studies have shown a clear association between maternal 
infection and schizophrenia or autism in the progeny. Animal models have 
revealed maternal immune activation (mIA) to be a profound risk factor for 
neurochemical and behavioural abnormalities in the offspring. Microglial priming 
has been proposed as a major consequence of mIA, and represents a critical link 
in a causal chain that leads to the wide spectrum of neuronal dysfunctions and 
behavioural phenotypes observed in the juvenile, adult or aged offspring. Such 
diversity of phenotypic outcomes in the mIA model are mirrored by recent 
clinical evidence suggesting that infectious exposure during pregnancy is also 
associated with epilepsy and, to a lesser extent, cerebral palsy in children. 
Preclinical research also suggests that mIA might precipitate the development of 
Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. Here, we summarize and critically review the 
emerging evidence that mIA is a shared environmental risk factor across CNS 
disorders that varies as a function of interactions between genetic and 
additional environmental factors. We also review ongoing clinical trials 
targeting immune pathways affected by mIA that may play a part in disease 
manifestation. In addition, future directions and outstanding questions are 
discussed, including potential symptomatic, disease-modifying and preventive 
treatment strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2014.187
PMID: 25311587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3569. Eur Neurol. 2014;72(5-6):349-59. doi: 10.1159/000364903. Epub 2014 Oct 14.

Cognitive and sleep features of multiple system atrophy: review and prospective 
study.

Stanzani-Maserati M(1), Gallassi R, Calandra-Buonaura G, Alessandria M, Oppi F, 
Poda R, Sambati L, Provini F, Cortelli P.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche di Bologna, Università di Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The profile and degree of cognitive impairment in Multiple System 
Atrophy (MSA) and the impact of sleep disorders, REM sleep behavior disorder 
(RBD) in particular, in parkinsonism-related cognitive deficits are currently 
being debated.
SUMMARY: We reviewed the cognitive, affective and sleep findings in MSA and also 
carried out a longitudinal investigation of 10 MSA patients. At the first 
evaluation, 3 patients showed isolated cognitive deficits. After a mean of 16 
months, these patients remained unchanged, while 1 patient worsened from a 
normal condition. No significant differences emerged when the cognitive, 
affective and video-polysomnographic findings of MSA-P and MSA-C were compared. 
Depression was present in half of the patients, although it did not influence 
their cognitive performance. Comparisons between the first and second evaluation 
data showed significant worsening in visual attention and in ADL/IADL and 
UMSARS.
KEY MESSAGES: Isolated cognitive deficits are evidenced in a minority of MSA 
patients with the absence of a clear-cut diagnosis of dementia in the early 
stages of the disease. Attention and executive functions are often impaired. 
This study with a short follow-up period showed that RBD, although present in 
almost all patients affected by MSA, does not appear a clear early marker of 
cognitive impairment. Future longer-term studies with a larger patient sample 
are thus encouraged.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000364903
PMID: 25322750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3570. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2014 Dec;70(12):1471-6. doi: 10.1007/s00228-014-1772-0. 
Epub 2014 Oct 18.

Clozapine serum concentrations in dopamimetic psychosis in Parkinson's disease 
and related disorders.

Lutz UC(1), Sirfy A, Wiatr G, Altpass D, Farger G, Gasser T, Karle KN, Batra A.

Author information:
(1)University Hospital of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Calwerstr. 14, 72076, 
Tuebingen, Germany, u.lutz@zfp-winnenden.de.

PURPOSE: Psychotic symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD) caused by dopamimetic 
treatment are a relevant clinical problem. As clozapine does not cause 
extrapyramidal side effects, it is suitable for treatment of dopamimetic 
psychosis. The main aim of the present study was (1) to establish an 
indication-specific recommendation for therapeutic reference range of clozapine 
among patients with dopamimetic psychosis in PD and related disorders. Secondary 
goals were (2) to test whether clozapine therapy is safe and calculable despite 
pharmacokinetic changes expected in the study population and (3) to assess 
influencing variables on clozapine serum levels.
METHODS: We carried out a retrospective chart review of patients suffering from 
dopamimetic psychosis as well as Lewy body dementia treated with clozapine. We 
extracted demographic and clinical data as well as results from therapeutic drug 
monitoring that was carried out via high-performance liquid chromatography in 
order to analyse clozapine and norclozapine serum concentrations.
RESULTS: n = 35 patients could be identified and were included in the study. 
Mean age was 72.4 years. Clozapine treatment for patients with dopamimetic 
psychosis in PD and related disorders seems to be safe and calculable. Mean 
clozapine serum concentration was 77.9 ng/ml (SD 63.4 ng/ml). Clozapine dose is 
significantly correlated with serum clozapine concentration (r = 0.35; R 
(2) = 0.122). Women showed lower clozapine serum concentrations although they 
received higher weight-corrected clozapine doses.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest an orienting indication-specific therapeutic reference 
range of 15-141 ng/ml among PD patients with dopamimetic psychosis. Therapeutic 
drug monitoring is recommended and might help to minimize the risk of adverse 
events by screening for unexpectedly high serum concentrations of clozapine.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-014-1772-0
PMID: 25323805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3571. Neurology. 2014 Nov 18;83(21):1906-13. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001012. Epub 
2014 Oct 17.

Global investigation and meta-analysis of the C9orf72 (G4C2)n repeat in 
Parkinson disease.

Theuns J(1), Verstraeten A(1), Sleegers K(1), Wauters E(1), Gijselinck I(1), 
Smolders S(1), Crosiers D(1), Corsmit E(1), Elinck E(1), Sharma M(1), Krüger 
R(1), Lesage S(1), Brice A(1), Chung SJ(1), Kim MJ(1), Kim YJ(1), Ross OA(1), 
Wszolek ZK(1), Rogaeva E(1), Xi Z(1), Lang AE(1), Klein C(1), Weissbach A(1), 
Mellick GD(1), Silburn PA(1), Hadjigeorgiou GM(1), Dardiotis E(1), Hattori N(1), 
Ogaki K(1), Tan EK(1), Zhao Y(1), Aasly J(1), Valente EM(1), Petrucci S(1), 
Annesi G(1), Quattrone A(1), Ferrarese C(1), Brighina L(1), Deutschländer A(1), 
Puschmann A(1), Nilsson C(1), Garraux G(1), LeDoux MS(1), Pfeiffer RF(1), 
Boczarska-Jedynak M(1), Opala G(1), Maraganore DM(1), Engelborghs S(1), De Deyn 
PP(1), Cras P(1), Cruts M(1), Van Broeckhoven C(2); GEO-PD Consortium.

Collaborators: Maraganore DM, Farrer MJ, Aasly JO, Krüger R, Elbaz A, Ioannidis 
JP, Annesi G, Valente EM, Bozi M, Brice A, Curie M, Carmine-Belin A, Carr J, 
Carroll C, Chen SD, Chung SJ, Cosentino C, Cresswell S, Deutschlaender A, 
Ferrarese C, Foroud T, Garraux G, Goldwurm S, Hadjigeorgiou G, Chartier-Harlin 
MC, Hassan A, Hattori N, Hentati F, Jeon BS, Kawakami H, Kim YJ, Kishore A, 
Klein C, Koks S, Krainc D, Krüger R, Krygowska-Wajs A, Lin JJ, Lynch T, 
Maraganore DM, Mellick G, Morrison KE, Munhoz RP, Opala G, Pastor P, Payami H, 
Pchelina SN, Petersburg S, Petersen MS, Puschmann A, Ritz B, Rogaeva E, Sazci A, 
Slawek J, Stefanis L, Tan EK, Toda T, Toft M, Van Broeckhoven C, Wirdefeldt K, 
Woitalla D, Wszolek ZK, Zimprich A.

Author information:
(1)Authors' affiliations are listed at the end of the article.
(2)Authors' affiliations are listed at the end of the article. 
christine.vanbroeckhoven@molgen.vib-ua.be.

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study is to clarify the role of (G4C2)n 
expansions in the etiology of Parkinson disease (PD) in the worldwide 
multicenter Genetic Epidemiology of Parkinson's Disease (GEO-PD) cohort.
METHODS: C9orf72 (G4C2)n repeats were assessed in a GEO-PD cohort of 7,494 
patients diagnosed with PD and 5,886 neurologically healthy control individuals 
ascertained in Europe, Asia, North America, and Australia.
RESULTS: A pathogenic (G4C2)n>60 expansion was detected in only 4 patients with 
PD (4/7,232; 0.055%), all with a positive family history of neurodegenerative 
dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, or atypical parkinsonism, while no 
carriers were detected with typical sporadic or familial PD. Meta-analysis 
revealed a small increase in risk of PD with an increasing number of (G4C2)n 
repeats; however, we could not detect a robust association between the C9orf72 
(G4C2)n repeat and PD, and the population attributable risk was low.
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these findings indicate that expansions in C9orf72 do not 
have a major role in the pathogenesis of PD. Testing for C9orf72 repeat 
expansions should only be considered in patients with PD who have overt symptoms 
of frontotemporal lobar degeneration/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or apparent 
family history of neurodegenerative dementia or motor neuron disease.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001012
PMCID: PMC4248456
PMID: 25326098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors report no disclosures relevant to 
the manuscript. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.


3572. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 20;9(10):e110547. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110547. 
eCollection 2014.

Neural substrates of cognitive subtypes in Parkinson's disease: a 3-year 
longitudinal study.

Shoji Y(1), Nishio Y(1), Baba T(1), Uchiyama M(2), Yokoi K(1), Ishioka T(3), 
Hosokai Y(4), Hirayama K(5), Fukuda H(6), Aoki M(7), Hasegawa T(7), Takeda A(8), 
Mori E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Tohoku 
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(2)Department of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Tohoku 
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Department of Speech, Language and 
Hearing Sciences, Niigata University of Health and Welfare, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Department of Occupational Therapy, Saitama Prefectural University, 
Koshigaya, Japan.
(4)Department of Diagnostic Image Analysis, Tohoku University School of 
Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(5)Department of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Tohoku 
University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan; Department of Occupational 
Therapy, Yamagata Prefectural University of Health Science, Yamagata, Japan.
(6)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Institute of Development, 
Aging, and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai, Japan.
(8)Department of Neurology, Sendai Nishitaga Hospital, Sendai, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The neuropsychological features and neuropathological progression 
patterns associated with rapidly evolving cognitive decline or dementia in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) remain to be elucidated.
METHODS: Fifty-three PD patients without dementia were recruited to participate 
in a 3-year longitudinal cohort study. The patients were grouped according to 
the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR). Group-wise comparisons were made with regard 
to demographic characteristics, motor symptoms, neuropsychological performances 
and 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography.
RESULTS: Patients who had memory-plus cognitive impairment (patients whose CDR 
was 0 at baseline and 0.5 in memory and other domains at follow-up, and those 
whose baseline CDR was 0.5 in memory and other domains) exhibited higher age at 
onset, visuoperceptual impairment, non-tremor-dominant motor disturbance, rapid 
symptomatic progression and posterior neocortical hypometabolism. In patients 
who were cognitively unimpaired and those who had memory-dominant cognitive 
impairment (patients whose CDR was 0 at baseline and 0.5 only in memory domain 
at follow-up, and those whose baseline CDR was 0.5 only in memory domain), the 
posterior neocortex was relatively unaffected until a later stage of the 
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that visuoperceptual impairment and the early 
involvement of the posterior neocortex may be risk factors for rapid symptomatic 
progression and dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0110547
PMCID: PMC4203806
PMID: 25330390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3573. J Orthop Traumatol. 2015 Mar;16(1):9-13. doi: 10.1007/s10195-014-0324-9. Epub 
2014 Oct 21.

Outcomes of dual-mobility acetabular cup for instability in primary and revision 
total hip arthroplasty.

Mohammed R(1), Hayward K, Mulay S, Bindi F, Wallace M.

Author information:
(1)Wrightington Hospital, Appley Bridge, Wigan, WN6 9EP, UK, 
riaz22@hotmail.co.uk.

BACKGROUND: The concept of a dual-mobility hip socket involves the standard 
femoral head component encased in a larger polyethylene liner, which in turn 
articulates inside a metal shell implanted in the native acetabulum. The aim of 
this study was to assess outcomes from using a Serf Novae(®) Dual Mobility 
Acetabular cup (Orthodynamics Ltd, Gloucestershire, UK) to address the problem 
of instability in primary and revision total hip arthroplasty (THA).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A retrospective review was carried out of all hip 
arthroplasties performed in a District General Hospital utilising the 
dual-mobility socket from January 2007 to December 2012. Clinical and 
radiological outcomes were analysed for 44 hips in 41 patients, comprising 20 
primary and 24 revision THA. The average age of the study group was 70.8 years 
(range 56-84 years) for primary and 76.4 years (range 56-89 years) for revision 
arthroplasty. Among the primary THA, always performed for hip osteoarthritis or 
in presence of osteoarthritic changes, the reasons to choose a dual mobility cup 
were central nervous system problems such as Parkinson's disease, stroke, 
dementia (10), hip fracture (5), failed hip fracture fixation (2), severe fixed 
hip deformity (2) and diffuse peripheral neuropathy (1). The indications for 
revisions were recurrent dislocation (17), aseptic loosening with abductor 
deficiency (4), failed hemiarthroplasty with abductor deficiency (2) and 
neglected dislocation (1).
RESULTS: At a mean follow-up of 22 months (range 6-63 months), none of the hips 
had any dislocation, instability or infection and no further surgical 
intervention was required. Radiological assessment showed that one uncemented 
socket in a revision arthroplasty performed for recurrent dislocation had 
changed position, but was stable in the new position. The patient did not have 
complications from this and did not need any surgical intervention.
CONCLUSIONS: Even though postoperative hip stability depends on several factors 
other than design-related ones, our study shows promising early results for 
reducing the risk of instability in this challenging group of patients 
undergoing primary and revision hip arthroplasty.
LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: IV.

DOI: 10.1007/s10195-014-0324-9
PMCID: PMC4348500
PMID: 25330736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3574. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2014 Oct 25;66(5):497-510.

Drugs developed for treatment of diabetes show protective effects in Alzheimer's 
and Parkinson's diseases.

Hölscher C(1).

Author information:
(1)Biomedical and Life Sciences, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, UK. 
c.holscher@lancaster.ac.uk.

Type 2 diabetes has been identified as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). In the brains of patients with AD and PD, 
insulin signaling is impaired. This finding has motivated new research that 
showed good effects using drugs that initially had been developed to treat 
diabetes. Preclinical studies showed good neuroprotective effects applying 
insulin or long lasting analogues of incretin peptides. In transgenic animal 
models of AD or PD, analogues of the incretin GLP-1 prevented neurodegenerative 
processes and improved neuronal and synaptic functionality and reduced the 
symptoms of the diseases. Amyloid plaque load and synaptic loss as well as 
cognitive impairment had been prevented in transgenic AD mouse models, and 
dopaminergic loss of transmission and motor function has been reversed in animal 
models of PD. On the basis of these promising findings, several clinical trials 
are being conducted with the first encouraging clinical results already 
published. In several pilot studies in AD patients, the nasal application of 
insulin showed encouraging effects on cognition and biomarkers. A pilot study in 
PD patients testing a GLP-1 receptor agonist that is currently on the market as 
a treatment for type 2 diabetes (exendin-4, Byetta) also showed encouraging 
effects. Several other clinical trials are currently ongoing in AD patients, 
testing another GLP-1 analogue that is on the market (liraglutide, Victoza). 
Recently, a third GLP-1 receptor agonist has been brought to the market in 
Europe (Lixisenatide, Lyxumia), which also shows very promising neuroprotective 
effects. This review will summarise the range of these protective effects that 
those drugs have demonstrated. GLP-1 analogues show promise in providing novel 
treatments that may be protective or even regenerative in AD and PD, something 
that no current drug does.

PMID: 25331995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3575. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2014 Dec;14(12):501. doi: 10.1007/s11910-014-0501-5.

Imaging the aetiology of sleep disorders in dementia and Parkinson's disease.

Pavese N(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Brain Sciences-Neurology Imaging Unit (NIU), Imperial College 
London, 1st Floor, B Block Hammersmith Campus DuCane Road, London, W12 0NN, UK, 
nicola.pavese@imperial.ac.uk.

Sleep disorders are commonly observed in patients with neurodegenerative 
disorders such as Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease and often 
represent an early manifestation of the underlying degenerative process. The 
pathophysiology of sleep dysfunction in these conditions is complex and 
incompletely understood. However, in recent years, functional imaging in vivo 
with SPECT and PET has significantly improved our understanding of the possible 
molecular mechanisms. These include dysfunction of both dopaminergic and 
non-dopaminergic pathways involved in sleep/wakefulness control. This paper 
summarizes the main findings of the imaging studies performed to elucidate the 
aetiology of sleep disorders in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-014-0501-5
PMID: 25341374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3576. RNA. 2014 Dec;20(12):1929-43. doi: 10.1261/rna.047225.114. Epub 2014 Oct 24.

Generation of a neuro-specific microarray reveals novel differentially expressed 
noncoding RNAs in mouse models for neurodegenerative diseases.

Gstir R(1), Schafferer S(1), Scheideler M(2), Misslinger M(1), Griehl M(1), 
Daschil N(3), Humpel C(3), Obermair GJ(4), Schmuckermair C(5), Striessnig J(5), 
Flucher BE(4), Hüttenhofer A(6).

Author information:
(1)Division of Genomics and RNomics, Innsbruck Biocenter, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(2)RNA Biology Group, Institute for Genomics and Bioinformatics, Graz University 
of Technology, 8010 Graz, Austria.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Clinic of General and 
Social Psychiatry, Innsbruck Medical University, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(4)Division of Physiology, Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, 
Innsbruck Medical University, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(5)Pharmacology and Toxicology, Institute of Pharmacy, and Center for Molecular 
Biosciences, University of Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria.
(6)Division of Genomics and RNomics, Innsbruck Biocenter, Medical University of 
Innsbruck, 6020 Innsbruck, Austria alexander.huettenhofer@i-med.ac.at.

We have generated a novel, neuro-specific ncRNA microarray, covering 1472 ncRNA 
species, to investigate their expression in different mouse models for central 
nervous system diseases. Thereby, we analyzed ncRNA expression in two mouse 
models with impaired calcium channel activity, implicated in Epilepsy or 
Parkinson's disease, respectively, as well as in a mouse model mimicking 
pathophysiological aspects of Alzheimer's disease. We identified well over a 
hundred differentially expressed ncRNAs, either from known classes of ncRNAs, 
such as miRNAs or snoRNAs or which represented entirely novel ncRNA species. 
Several differentially expressed ncRNAs in the calcium channel mouse models were 
assigned as miRNAs and target genes involved in calcium signaling, thus 
suggesting feedback regulation of miRNAs by calcium signaling. In the Alzheimer 
mouse model, we identified two snoRNAs, whose expression was deregulated prior 
to amyloid plaque formation. Interestingly, the presence of snoRNAs could be 
detected in cerebral spine fluid samples in humans, thus potentially serving as 
early diagnostic markers for Alzheimer's disease. In addition to known ncRNAs 
species, we also identified 63 differentially expressed, entirely novel ncRNA 
candidates, located in intronic or intergenic regions of the mouse genome, 
genomic locations, which previously have been shown to harbor the majority of 
functional ncRNAs.

© 2014 Gstir et al.; Published by Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press for the 
RNA Society.

DOI: 10.1261/rna.047225.114
PMCID: PMC4238357
PMID: 25344396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3577. Ugeskr Laeger. 2014 Jan 27;176(5A):V04130252.

[The forgotten cranial nerve--clinical importance of olfaction].

[Article in Danish]

Fjældstad A, Clausen CH, Kjærgaard T, Ovesen T(1).

Author information:
(1)Øre-næse-hals-afdeling H, Aarhus Universitetshospital, 8000 Aarhus C. 
theroves@rm.dk.

Hyposmia is often undiagnosed despite the known negative effect on taste, 
appetite and life quality. However, a new focus on the first cranial nerve has 
emerged as a consequence of a discovered connection between neurodegenerative 
disorders and hyposmia. In Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease hyposmia 
is not only one of the earliest clinical presentations, the degree of hyposmia 
also correlates with the later progression of these two conditions. Hyposmia 
should not be ignored nor accepted; instead it should be integrated in any 
neurological examination, especially in elderly patients.

PMID: 25347335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3578. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2015 Jan;168B(1):54-65. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.32276. Epub 2014 Oct 28.

No evidence of association between common European mitochondrial DNA variants in 
Alzheimer, Parkinson, and migraine in the Spanish population.

Fachal L(1), Mosquera-Miguel A, Pastor P, Ortega-Cubero S, Lorenzo E, 
Oterino-Durán A, Toriello M, Quintáns B, Camiña-Tato M, Sesar A, Vega A, Sobrido 
MJ, Salas A.

Author information:
(1)Fundación Pública Galega de Medicina Xenómica-SERGAS, Grupo de Medicina 
Xenómica, CIBERER, IDIS, Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

Certain mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variants and haplogroups have been found to be 
associated with neurological disorders. Several studies have suggested that 
mtDNA variation could have an etiologic role in these disorders by affecting the 
ATP production on high-energy demanding organs, such as the brain. We have 
analyzed 15 mtDNA SNPs (mtSNPs) in five cohorts of cases presenting Alzheimer 
disease (AD), Parkinson disease (PD), and migraine, and in controls, to evaluate 
the role mtDNA variation in disease risk. Association tests were undertaken both 
for mtSNPs and mitochondrial haplogroups. No significant association was 
detected for any mtSNP or haplogroup in AD and PD cohorts. Two mtSNPs were 
associated with one migraine cohort after correcting for multiple tests, namely, 
T4216C and G13708A and haplogroup J (FDR q-value = 0.02; Santiago's cohort). 
However, this association was not confirmed in a second replication migraine 
series. A review of the literature reveals the existence of inconsistent 
findings and methodological shortcomings affecting a large proportion of mtDNA 
association studies on AD, PD, and migraine. A detailed inspection of the 
literature highlights the need for performing more rigorous methodological and 
statistical standards in mtDNA genetic association studies aimed to avoid false 
positive results of association between mtDNA variants and neurological 
diseases.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.32276
PMID: 25349034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3579. Mol Biosyst. 2015 Jan;11(1):190-6. doi: 10.1039/c4mb00356j. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

Alpha-synuclein oligomers and fibrils originate in two distinct conformer pools: 
a small angle X-ray scattering and ensemble optimisation modelling study.

Curtain CC(1), Kirby NM, Mertens HD, Barnham KJ, Knott RB, Masters CL, Cappai R, 
Rekas A, Kenche VB, Ryan T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Bio21 Molecular Science and Technology Institute, 
The University of Melbourne, Victoria 3010, Australia. ccurtain@unimelb.edu.au.

The 140 residue intrinsically disordered protein α-synuclein (α-syn) 
self-associates to form fibrils that are the major constituent of the Lewy body 
intracellular protein inclusions, and neurotoxic oligomers. Both of these 
macromolecular structures are associated with a number of neurodegenerative 
diseases, including Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. Using 
ensemble optimisation modelling (EOM) and small angle X-ray scattering (SAXS) on 
a size-exclusion column equipped beamline, we studied how the distribution of 
structural conformers in α-syn may be influenced by the presence of the familial 
early-onset mutations A30P, E45K and A53T, by substituting the four methionine 
residues with alanines and by reaction with copper (Cu2+) or an anti-fibril 
organic platinum (Pt) complex. We found that the WT had two major conformer 
groups, representing ensembles of compact and extended structures. The 
population of the extended group was increased in the more rapidly 
fibril-forming E45K and A53T mutants, while the compact group was enlarged in 
the oligomer-forming A30P mutant. Addition of Cu2+ resulted in the formation of 
an ensemble of compact conformers, while the anti-fibril agent and alanine 
substitution substantially reduced the population of extended conformers. Since 
our observations with the mutants suggest that fibrils may be drawn from the 
extended conformer ensemble, we propose that the compact and extended ensembles 
represent the beginning of oligomer and fibril formation pathways respectively, 
both of which have been reported to lead to a toxic gain of function. 
Manipulating these pathways and monitoring the results by EOM and SAXS may be 
useful in the development of anti-Parkinson's disease therapies.

DOI: 10.1039/c4mb00356j
PMID: 25352253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3580. J Neurol. 2015 Jan;262(1):165-72. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7541-2. Epub 2014 Oct 
30.

Tissue microstructural changes in dementia with Lewy bodies revealed by 
quantitative MRI.

Su L(1), Blamire AM, Watson R, He J, Aribisala B, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Clinical Medicine, University of 
Cambridge, Level E4, Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, Box 189, CB2 0SP, 
UK, ls514@cam.ac.uk.

We aimed to characterize dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) by the quantitative MRI 
parameters of longitudinal relaxation time (qT1) and transverse relaxation time 
(qT2). These parameters reflect potential pathological changes in tissue 
microstructures, which may be detectable noninvasively in brain areas without 
evident atrophy, so may have potential value in revealing the early 
neuropathological changes in DLB. We conducted a cross-sectional study of 
subjects with DLB (N = 35) and similarly aged control participants (N = 35). All 
subjects underwent a detailed clinical and neuropsychological assessment and 
structural and quantitative 3T MRI. Quantitative MRI maps were obtained using 
relaxation time mapping methods. Statistical analysis was performed on gray 
matter qT1 and qT2 values. We found significant alterations of quantitative 
parameters in DLB compared to controls. In particular, qT1 decreases in 
bilateral temporal lobes, right parietal lobes, basal ganglia including left 
putamen, left caudate nucleus and left amygdala, and left 
hippocampus/parahippocampus; qT2 decreases in left putamen and increases in left 
precuneus. These regions showed only partial overlap with areas where grey 
matter loss was found, making atrophy an unlikely explanation for our results. 
Our findings support that DLB is predominantly associated with changes in 
posterior regions, such as visual association areas, and subcortical structures, 
and that qT1 and qT2 measurement can detect subtle changes not seen on 
structural volumetric imaging. Hence, quantitative MRI may compliment other 
imaging techniques in detecting early changes in DLB and in understanding 
neurobiological changes associated with the disorder.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7541-2
PMID: 25355453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3581. Neurology. 2014 Dec 9;83(24):2278-84. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001084. Epub 
2014 Oct 31.

Motoric cognitive risk syndrome: Multicenter incidence study.

Verghese J(1), Ayers E(2), Barzilai N(2), Bennett DA(2), Buchman AS(2), Holtzer 
R(2), Katz MJ(2), Lipton RB(2), Wang C(2).

Author information:
(1)From the Departments of Neurology (J.V., E.A., R.H., M.J.K., R.B.L.), 
Medicine (J.V., N.B.), and Epidemiology and Population Health (R.B.L., C.W.), 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY; Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center 
(D.A.B., A.S.B.), Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL; and Ferkauf 
School of Psychology (R.H.), Yeshiva University, Bronx, NY. 
joe.verghese@einstein.yu.edu.
(2)From the Departments of Neurology (J.V., E.A., R.H., M.J.K., R.B.L.), 
Medicine (J.V., N.B.), and Epidemiology and Population Health (R.B.L., C.W.), 
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY; Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center 
(D.A.B., A.S.B.), Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL; and Ferkauf 
School of Psychology (R.H.), Yeshiva University, Bronx, NY.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2015 Jul 28;85(4):388-9.
    Neurology. 2015 Jul 28;85(4):389.

OBJECTIVE: To report incidence and risk factors for motoric cognitive risk 
syndrome (MCR), a newly described predementia syndrome characterized by slow 
gait and cognitive complaints.
METHODS: We examined incidence rates of MCR in 3,128 adults aged 60 years and 
older, MCR- and dementia-free at baseline, participating in 4 US-based cohort 
studies. Hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) for the 
association of modifiable risk factors with risk of MCR were computed using Cox 
models.
RESULTS: Over a median follow-up time of 3.2 years, 823 of the 3,128 
participants met MCR criteria. The overall age- and sex-adjusted incidence of 
MCR was 65.2/1,000 person-years (95% CI: 53.3-77.1), and ranged from 50.8/1,000 
person-years to 79.6/1,000 person-years in the individual cohorts. MCR incidence 
was higher with older age but there were no sex differences. In the pooled 
sample adjusted for age, sex, education, and cohort source, strokes (HR 1.42, 
95% CI: 1.14-1.77), Parkinson disease (HR 2.52, 95% CI: 1.68-3.76), depressive 
symptoms (HR 1.65, 95% CI: 1.28-2.13), sedentariness (HR 1.76, 95% CI: 
1.44-2.17), and obesity (HR 1.39, 95% CI: 1.17-1.65) predicted risk of incident 
MCR.
CONCLUSIONS: The incidence of MCR is high in older adults. Identification of 
modifiable risk factors for MCR will improve identification of high-risk 
individuals and help develop interventions to prevent cognitive decline in 
aging.

© 2014 American Academy of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0000000000001084
PMCID: PMC4277675
PMID: 25361778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3582. Ann Nucl Med. 2015 Feb;29(2):149-56. doi: 10.1007/s12149-014-0923-9. Epub 2014 
Nov 1.

Assessment of the efficacy of early phase parameters by (123)I-MIBG dynamic 
imaging for distinguishing Lewy body-related diseases from Parkinson's syndrome.

Shiiba T(1), Nishii R, Sasaki M, Kihara Y, Tsuruta K, Maeda M, Morishita J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiological Technology, Koga General Hospital, 1749-1 Sudaki, 
Ikeuchi-Cho, Miyazaki, 880-0041, Japan, tshiiba@kgh.or.jp.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the efficacy of early phase 
washout rate (early WR) and area under the time-activity curve (AUTAC) by 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) dynamic chest imaging for distinguishing 
Lewy body-related diseases (LBRD) from Parkinson's syndrome (PS) and reducing 
examination time.
METHODS: Sixty-two patients with suspected LBRD who underwent (123)I-MIBG 
dynamic imaging in early phase were retrospectively selected. The early WR and 
AUTAC were calculated from (123)I-MIBG dynamic data of the heart. We evaluated 
the relationships between proposed and conventional parameters by using 
Spearman's rank correlation coefficient. Differences in parameters between LBRD 
and PS groups were tested for statistical significance using the Mann-Whitney U 
test. The diagnostic performance of all parameters for distinguishing LBRD from 
PS was assessed in terms of receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis. 
Additionally, combination diagnostic performance and concordance rate between 
early phase parameters and late H/M ratio by kappa statistics were also 
assessed.
RESULTS: The early WR and AUTAC showed a positive and negative correlation with 
conventional parameters. Both the early WR and AUTAC of LBRD group were 
significantly distinguishable from those of the PS group (p < 0.001). Area under 
the ROC curve of the early WR (0.98) was greater than that of AUTAC (0.91). The 
diagnostic performance of combination of the early phase parameters was 93 % 
sensitivity and 100 % specificity. Moreover, the early phase parameters showed 
excellent agreement with late H/M ratio (k = 0.93).
CONCLUSIONS: The early WR and AUTAC showed high performance for distinguishing 
LBRD from PS, and the combination diagnosis with early H/M ratio and early WR 
contribute to improve the diagnostic performance. Thus, these parameters would 
be useful for reducing the examination time of myocardial (123)I-MIBG 
scintigraphy to diagnose LBRD.

DOI: 10.1007/s12149-014-0923-9
PMID: 25366472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3583. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2014 Dec;58(4):366-75. Epub 2014 Nov 4.

Functional imaging in pre-motor Parkinson's disease.

Arnaldi D(1), Morbelli S, Picco A, Ferrara M, Buschiazzo A, Famà F, De Carli F, 
Nobili F.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Clinical Neurology Department of Neuroscience (DINOGMI) University of 
Genoa, IRCCS AOU San Martino‑IST Genoa, Italy - dario.arnaldi@gmail.com.

Several non motor symptoms (NMS) can precede the onset of the classical motor 
Parkinson's disease (PD) syndrome. The existence of pre-motor and even 
pre-clinical PD stages has been proposed but the best target population to be 
screened to disclose PD patients in a pre-clinical, thus asymptomatic, stage is 
still matter of debate. The REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) often affects PD 
patients at different stages of the disease and could precede the onset of motor 
symptoms by several years. However, RBD could also precede other 
synucleinopathies (namely, dementia with Lewy bodies and multisystem atrophy), 
and less frequently could be related to other neurological conditions or remain 
idiopathic. Moreover, not all PD patients exhibit RBD. Despite these caveats, 
RBD probably represents the best feature to disclose pre-motor PD patients given 
its high-risk of developing a full motor syndrome. Other clinical clues in the 
premotor stages of PD undergoing active investigation include hyposmia, 
depression, and autonomic dysfunction. Effective biomarkers are needed in order 
to improve the diagnostic accuracy in the pre-motor stage of PD, to monitor 
disease progression and to plan both pharmacological and non-pharmacological 
intervention. Functional imaging, in particular radionuclide methodologies, has 
been often used to investigate dopaminergic and non-dopaminergic features as 
well as cortical functioning in patients with RBD in its idiopathic form (iRBD) 
and/or associated with PD. Recently, new tracers to image α-synuclein 
pathologies are under development. Functional imaging in pre-motor PD, and in 
particular in iRBD, could improve our knowledge about the underlying mechanisms 
and the neurodegenerative progress of PD.

PMID: 25366709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3584. Intern Med J. 2014 Nov;44(11):1066-73. doi: 10.1111/imj.12572.

Dementia in older people: an update.

LoGiudice D(1), Watson R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Aged Care, The Royal Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

Comment in
    Intern Med J. 2015 Jul;45(7):790.
    Intern Med J. 2015 Jul;45(7):791.

Dementia is a common condition of the elderly characterised by multiple 
cognitive deficits resulting in a decline from previous level of function. In 
the older person, multiple pathologies contribute, including changes commonly 
seen in Alzheimer disease, dementia with Lewy bodies in addition to vascular 
changes. Comorbid factors, such as depression, delirium and polypharmacy can 
contribute to cognitive decline. Novel biomarkers and neuroimaging techniques 
may assist in the near future to improve accuracy of diagnosis. To date, 
pharmacological therapies have been largely unsuccessful and provide symptomatic 
relief only. The timely diagnosis of dementia can facilitate important 
discussions regarding personal and financial planning and introduce education 
and supports to the person with dementia and their carers. The person with 
dementia commonly experiences behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia 
that may cause much distress, including to families and carers. Clinical 
guidelines indicate non-pharmacological approaches as first line measures, 
including attention to pain, nutrition and the environment. Dementia is 
recognised as a National Health Priority in Australia, and efforts to target 
risk factors as preventative measures to delay onset of dementia require further 
urgent consideration.

© 2014 The Authors; Internal Medicine Journal © 2014 Royal Australasian College 
of Physicians.

DOI: 10.1111/imj.12572
PMID: 25367725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3585. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Dec;52(3):1629-1636. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8946-8. Epub 
2014 Nov 5.

Identifying the Association Between Alzheimer's Disease and Parkinson's Disease 
Using Genome-Wide Association Studies and Protein-Protein Interaction Network.

Liu G(1)(2), Bao X(3), Jiang Y(4), Liao M(5), Jiang Q(6), Feng R(7), Zhang L(8), 
Ma G(1), Chen Z(9), Wang G(10), Wang R(11), Zhao B(12), Li K(13).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, 524001, China.
(2)Genome Analysis Laboratory, Tianjin Institute of Industrial Biotechnology, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Xiqi Dao 32, Tianjin Airport Economic Area, 
Tianjin, 300308, China.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China.
(4)College of Bioinformatics Science and Technology, Harbin Medical University, 
Harbin, China.
(5)College of Life Science, Northwest A&F University, Yangling, Shaanxi, China.
(6)School of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, 
Harbin, China.
(7)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Harbin 
Medical University, Harbin, China.
(8)Department of Statistics, Rice University, Houston, TX, USA.
(9)Department of Human Genetics, University of California at Los Angeles, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.
(10)Department of Oncology, The First Hospital of Harbin, Harbin, China.
(11)Department of Neurosurgery, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Chinese 
Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, 
China. wangrz@126.com.
(12)Institute of Neurology, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, 524001, China. 
binzhao0759@163.com.
(13)Institute of Neurology, Guangdong Medical College, Zhanjiang, 524001, China. 
keshenli2012@163.com.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are the first and second 
most common neurodegenerative diseases in the elderly. Shared clinical and 
pathological features have been reported. Recent large-scale genome-wide 
association studies (GWAS) have been conducted and reported a number of AD and 
PD variants. Until now, the underlying genetic mechanisms for all these newly 
identified PD variants as well as the association between AD and PD are still 
unclear exactly. We think that PD variants may contribute to AD and PD by 
influence on brain gene expression. Here, we conducted a systems analysis using 
(1) AD and PD variants (P < 5.00E-08) identified by the published GWAS; (2) four 
brain expression GWAS datasets using expression quantitative trait loci from the 
cerebellum and temporal cortex; (3) large-scale AD GWAS from the Alzheimer 
Disease Genetics Consortium (ADGC); (4) a protein-protein interaction network. 
Our results indicated that PD variants around the 17q21 were associated with 
gene expression and suggestive AD risk. We also identified significant 
interaction among AD and PD susceptibility genes. We believe that our findings 
may explain the underlying genetic mechanisms for newly identified PD variants 
in PD and AD, as well as the association between AD and PD, which may be very 
useful for future genetic studies for both diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-014-8946-8
PMID: 25370933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3586. Can J Neurol Sci. 2014 Sep;41(5):597-602. doi: 10.1017/cjn.2014.3.

Nonmotor Symptoms and Cognitive Decline in de novo Parkinson's Disease.

Kwon KY(1), Kang SH(1), Kim M(1), Lee HM(1), Jang JW(1), Kim JY(2), Lee SM(1), 
Koh SB(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology and Parkinson's Disease Centre,Korea University Guro 
Hospital,Korea University College of Medicine,Seoul,Korea.
(2)2Parkinson/Alzheimer Center,Department of Neurology,Asan Medical 
Center,University of Ulsan College of Medicine,Seoul,Korea.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive impairments are common in Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Despite its clinical importance, the development of dementia is still difficult 
to predict. In this study, we investigated the possible associations between 
non-motor symptoms and the risk of developing dementia within a 2-year 
observation period in PD.
METHODS: A total of 80 patients with PD participated in this study. Nonmotor 
symptoms (the Nonmotor Symptoms Questionnaire), PD status (Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale), depression (Geriatric d Depression Scale or 
Montgomery-Asberg Depression Scale), stereopsis and severity of nonmotor 
symptoms (Non-motor symptoms scale) were assessed. Global cognitive function 
(Mini-Mental State Examination) were evaluated at baseline and 2 years later.
RESULTS: Presence of depression, vivid dreaming, REM sleep behavior disorders, 
hyposmia, abnormal stereopsis, non-smoking and postural instability/ gait 
disturbance phenotype were associated with a significantly more rapid decline of 
Mini-Mental State Examination. Logistic regression analyses demonstrated that 
depression (odds ratio=13.895), abnormal stereopsis (odds ratio=10.729), vivid 
dreaming (odds ratio=4.16), REM sleep behavior disorders (odds ratio=5.353) and 
hyposmia (odds ratio=4.911) were significant independent predictors of dementia 
risk within 2 years. Postural instability/ gait disturbance phenotype and age 
>62 years were also independent predictors of dementia risk (odd ratio=38.333, 
odds ratio=10.625).
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that depression, vivid dreaming, REM sleep behavior 
disorders, hyposmia and abnormal stereopsis are closely associated with 
cognitive decline, and that presence of these nonmotor symptoms predict the 
subsequent development of Parkinson's disease dementia.

DOI: 10.1017/cjn.2014.3
PMID: 25373810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3587. Chiropr Man Therap. 2014 Nov 4;22(1):38. doi: 10.1186/s12998-014-0038-3. 
eCollection 2014.

Summary of the findings of the International Collaboration on Mild Traumatic 
Brain Injury Prognosis.

Donovan J(1), Cancelliere C(2), Cassidy JD(3).

Author information:
(1)Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
(2)Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada ; 
Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada.
(3)Division of Health Care and Outcomes Research, Toronto Western Research 
Institute, University Health Network, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada ; 
Institute of Health Policy, Management and Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Canada ; Institute of Sports Science and Clinical Biomechanics, Faculty 
of Health, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

In 2004, the WHO Collaborating Centre for Neurotrauma, Prevention, Management 
and Rehabilitation Task Force published the first large systematic review and 
best evidence synthesis on the clinical course and prognosis for recovery after 
MTBI. Ten years later, the International Collaboration on Mild Traumatic Brain 
Injury Prognosis (ICoMP) formed to update the original WHO Task Force results. 
This summary review highlights important clinical findings from the full ICoMP 
results including the current evidence on the course and prognosis of recovery 
after MTBI in diverse patient populations (e.g., adults, athletes and children) 
and injury environments (e.g., motor vehicle collisions) as well as on the risk 
of long-term outcomes after MTBI, such as Parkinson's disease and dementia. 
Additional clinical areas of interest in MTBI are also discussed including the 
similarities between MTBI and other traumatic injuries and the risk of Second 
Impact Syndrome after sport concussion. Clinicians can use this information to 
help inform patients on the likely course of recovery after MTBI/concussion and 
guide better decision-making in the care of these patients.

DOI: 10.1186/s12998-014-0038-3
PMCID: PMC4221725
PMID: 25379171


3588. Nervenarzt. 2014 Dec;85(12):1521-8. doi: 10.1007/s00115-013-3978-2.

[Physical training for neurological and mental diseases].

[Article in German]

Henkel K(1), Reimers CD, Knapp G, Schneider F.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Psychiatrie, Psychotherapie und Psychosomatik, Uniklinik RWTH 
Aachen, Pauwelsstr. 30, 52072, Aachen, Deutschland, khenkel@ukaachen.de.

BACKGROUND: Physical activity has beneficial effects on somatic and mental 
health factors; therefore, regular exercise has preventive and therapeutic 
capabilities to improve neurological and mental dysfunction.
OBJECTIVES: In this overview of the current literature, the evidence of the 
effects of exercise on such disorders is summarized. Physical exercise 
interventions for stroke, Parkinson's disease, dementia, depression, psychoses, 
anxiety disorders, and chronic pain syndromes are considered in detail.
RESULTS: Physical activity reduces the risk of suffering from stroke, dementia 
and Parkinson's disease. Furthermore, it is negatively correlated with dysthymia 
and other depressive symptoms and various anxiety and pain disorders as well as 
headache syndromes. A therapeutic effect of systematic physical exercise was 
revealed for depression, some symptoms of psychosis and multiple sclerosis, 
addiction, eating disorders, the fibromyalgia syndrome as well as short-term 
interventions for anxiety disorders.
CONCLUSION: The concerted integration of physical exercise into prophylactic and 
therapeutic interventions can lower the burden of neurological and mental 
diseases; however, scientific evidence is still lacking concerning the optimal 
duration, type, and intensity as well as potential risks of physical exercise.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-013-3978-2
PMID: 25380564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3589. Int Psychogeriatr. 2015 Mar;27(3):357-66. doi: 10.1017/S1041610214002245. Epub 
2014 Nov 10.

Awareness of memory deficits in subjective cognitive decline, mild cognitive 
impairment, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

Lehrner J(1), Kogler S(2), Lamm C(2), Moser D(1), Klug S(1), Pusswald G(1), 
Dal-Bianco P(1), Pirker W(1), Auff E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology,Medical University of Vienna,Vienna,Austria.
(2)Faculty of Psychology,University of Vienna,Vienna,Austria.

Comment on
    Int Psychogeriatr. 2015 Mar;27(3):355-6.

BACKGROUND: Impaired awareness of memory deficits has been recognized as a 
common phenomenon in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and research is now increasingly 
focusing on awareness in groups at risk for future dementia. This study aimed to 
determine whether levels of awareness differ among healthy elderly people and 
patients with subjective cognitive decline (SCD), amnestic and non-amnestic 
subtypes of mild cognitive impairment (aMCI, naMCI), Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and Parkinson's disease (PD), to explore correlates of awareness and to 
establish frequencies of memory over- and underestimation within each diagnostic 
group.
METHODS: 756 consecutive outpatients of a memory clinic and 211 healthy controls 
underwent thorough neuropsychological testing. Impairment of awareness was 
measured as the difference between subjective memory appraisals (16-item 
questionnaire on current memory-related problems in everyday life) and objective 
memory performance (15-item delayed recall task). Subgroups of over- and 
underestimators were classified using percentile ranks of controls.
RESULTS: At group level, awareness significantly decreased along the 
naMCI→aMCI→AD continuum, with naMCI patients showing a tendency towards 
overestimation of memory dysfunction. PD patients showed accurate 
self-appraisals as long as memory function was largely unaffected. However, 
there was a considerable between-group overlap in awareness scores. Furthermore, 
different correlates of awareness were observed depending on the diagnostic 
group. In general, unawareness seems to be associated with decreased cognitive 
performance in various domains (especially memory), higher age and lower levels 
of depression and self-reported functional impairment.
CONCLUSION: Impaired awareness is an important symptom in aMCI. Yet, given the 
considerable variability in awareness scores, longitudinal studies are required 
to evaluate their predictive power.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610214002245
PMID: 25382659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3590. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2014 Dec;73(12):1144-51. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0000000000000137.

Early and persistent expression of phosphorylated α-synuclein in the enteric 
nervous system of A53T mutant human α-synuclein transgenic mice.

Bencsik A(1), Muselli L, Leboidre M, Lakhdar L, Baron T.

Author information:
(1)From the French Agency for Food, Environmental and Occupational Health and 
Safety (ANSES), Unité Maladies Neurodégénératives (AB, LM, ML, TB); PFEA (LL), 
Lyon, France.

Alpha-synuclein is a key protein in Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. It is found in Lewy bodies in the brains of PD patients and has 
been reported in the peripheral nervous system in postmortem tissues from PD 
patients and in biopsies from patients in the preclinical phase of PD. Here, we 
used a transgenic mouse model of human synucleinopathies expressing the A53T 
mutant α-synuclein (TgM83) in which a neurodegenerative process associated with 
α-synuclein occurs spontaneously and increases with age. In particular, 
α-synuclein protein phosphorylated at serine 129 (pSer129 α-synuclein) naturally 
and progressively increases in diseased brains. We examined the time course of 
pSer129 α-synuclein presence in the gut of these mice between 1.5 and 22 months 
of age using immunohistochemistry and paraffin-embedded tissue blots. The 
pSer129 α-synuclein accumulated early (before the onset of motor signs) and 
persistently in the enteric nervous system and was concomitantly found in the 
brain. These results suggest that the accumulation of phosphorylated α-synuclein 
in the enteric and central nervous systems may result from parallel pathologic 
processes when the disease is linked to a mutation of α-synuclein.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0000000000000137
PMID: 25383638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3591. Mov Disord. 2014 Dec;29(14):1774-80. doi: 10.1002/mds.26055. Epub 2014 Nov 10.

Five-year follow-up of substantia nigra echogenicity in idiopathic REM sleep 
behavior disorder.

Iranzo A(1), Stockner H, Serradell M, Seppi K, Valldeoriola F, Frauscher B, 
Molinuevo JL, Vilaseca I, Mitterling T, Gaig C, Vilas D, Santamaria J, Högl B, 
Tolosa E, Poewe W.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERNED, 
Barcelona, Spain.

Hyperechogenicity of the substantia nigra visualized by transcranial sonography 
occurs in most Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. Idiopathic rapid eye movement 
(REM) sleep behavior disorder (IRBD) subjects eventually develop PD and other 
synucleinopathies. This study was undertaken to evaluate whether in IRBD, 
transcranial sonography identifies subjects who convert to PD and other 
synucleinopathies, and whether substantia nigra echogenic size changes with 
time. It was a prospective study in which 55 IRBD patients underwent 
transcranial sonography at baseline and were invited to follow-up after 5 years. 
Patients were assessed by the same experienced sonographer who was blinded to 
clinical data and baseline transcranial sonography results, and used the same 
equipment and adjustments. Twenty-one (38.2%) subjects were diagnosed with a 
synucleinopathy (PD in 11, dementia with Lewy bodies in nine, and multiple 
system atrophy in one). Sensitivity of baseline substantia nigra 
hyperechogenicity for the development of a synucleinopathy was 42.1%, 
specificity 67.7%, positive predictive value 44.4%, negative predictive value 
65.6%, and relative risk 1.29. No differences were detected between the first 
and second examination in mean size of the substantia nigra (0.20 ± 0.09 cm(2) 
vs. 0.19 ± 0.07 cm(2) ; P = 0.777) and in percentage of patients with substantia 
nigra hyperechogenicity (33.3% vs. 42.8%, P = 0.125). Transcranial sonography of 
the substantia nigra alone is not a useful tool to identify IRBD subjects at 
risk for the development of PD or a synucleinopathy after 5 years of follow-up. 
In IRBD, transcranial sonography cannot be used to monitor the degenerative 
process in the substantia nigra, because echogenicity size remains stable over 
time.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.26055
PMID: 25384461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3592. Front Neurol. 2014 Oct 27;5:224. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00224. eCollection 
2014.

Predicting cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease: can we ask the genes?

De Marchi F(1), Carecchio M(1), Cantello R(1), Comi C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Eastern Piedmont , Novara , Italy.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00224
PMCID: PMC4209831
PMID: 25386162


3593. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2014 Dec;58(4):376-86. Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Radioligand imaging of α4β2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors in Alzheimer's 
disease and Parkinson's disease.

Meyer PM(1), Tiepolt S, Barthel H, Hesse S, Sabri O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine University of Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany - 
Osama.Sabri@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.

The α4β2* nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (α4β2*-nAChR) are highly abundant in 
the human brain. As neuromodulators they play an important role in cognitive 
functions such as memory, learning and attention as well as mood and motor 
function. Post mortem studies suggest that abnormalities of α4β2*-nAChRs are 
closely linked to histopathological hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD), such 
as amyloid aggregates/oligomers and tangle pathology and of Parkinson's disease 
(PD) such as Lewy body pathology and the nigrostriatal dopaminergic deficit. In 
this review we summarize and discuss nicotinic receptor imaging findings of 
2-[18F]FA-85380 PET, [11C]nicotine PET and 5-[123I]IA-85380 SPECT studies 
investigating α4β2*-nAChR binding in vivo and their relationship to mental 
dysfunction in the brain of patients with AD and patients out of the spectrum of 
Lewy body disorders such as PD and Lewy body dementia (DLB). Furthermore, recent 
developments of novel α4β2*-nAChR-specific PET radioligands, such as 
(-)[18F]Flubatine or [18F]AZAN are summarized. We conclude that 
α4β2*-nAChR-specific PET might become a biomarker for early diagnostics and drug 
developments in patients with AD, DLB and PD, even at early or prodromal stages.

PMID: 25387119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3594. Neuroimage Clin. 2014 Oct 24;6:445-54. doi: 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.10.009. 
eCollection 2014.

Validation of an optimized SPM procedure for FDG-PET in dementia diagnosis in a 
clinical setting.

Perani D(1), Della Rosa PA(2), Cerami C(3), Gallivanone F(2), Fallanca F(4), 
Vanoli EG(4), Panzacchi A(4), Nobili F(5), Pappatà S(6), Marcone A(5), Garibotto 
V(7), Castiglioni I(2), Magnani G(8), Cappa SF(9), Gianolli L(4); EADC-PET 
Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy ; 
Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy ; Nuclear Medicine Unit, San 
Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy ; Istituto di Bioimmagini e Fisiologia 
Molecolare, CNR, Segrate, Italy.
(2)Istituto di Bioimmagini e Fisiologia Molecolare, CNR, Segrate, Italy.
(3)Division of Neuroscience, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy ; 
Clinical Neurosciences Department, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(4)Nuclear Medicine Unit, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(5)Dept of Neuroscience (DINOGMI), University of Genoa, Genoa, Italy.
(6)Institute of Biostructure and Bioimaging, CNR, Naples, Italy.
(7)Department of Medical Imaging, Geneva University, Geneva, Switzerland.
(8)Neurology Department, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy.
(9)Clinical Neurosciences Department, San Raffaele Hospital, Milan, Italy ; 
Istituto Universitario degli Studi Superiori, Pavia, Italy.

Diagnostic accuracy in FDG-PET imaging highly depends on the operating 
procedures. In this clinical study on dementia, we compared the diagnostic 
accuracy at a single-subject level of a) Clinical Scenarios, b) Standard FDG 
Images and c) Statistical Parametrical (SPM) Maps generated via a new optimized 
SPM procedure. We evaluated the added value of FDG-PET, either Standard FDG 
Images or SPM Maps, to Clinical Scenarios. In 88 patients with neurodegenerative 
diseases (Alzheimer's Disease-AD, Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration-FTLD, 
Dementia with Lewy bodies-DLB and Mild Cognitive Impairment-MCI), 9 neuroimaging 
experts made a forced diagnostic decision on the basis of the evaluation of the 
three types of information. There was also the possibility of a decision of 
normality on the FDG-PET images. The clinical diagnosis confirmed at a long-term 
follow-up was used as the gold standard. SPM Maps showed higher sensitivity and 
specificity (96% and 84%), and better diagnostic positive (6.8) and negative 
(0.05) likelihood ratios compared to Clinical Scenarios and Standard FDG Images. 
SPM Maps increased diagnostic accuracy for differential diagnosis (AD vs. FTD; 
beta 1.414, p = 0.019). The AUC of the ROC curve was 0.67 for SPM Maps, 0.57 for 
Clinical Scenarios and 0.50 for Standard FDG Images. In the MCI group, SPM Maps 
showed the highest predictive prognostic value (mean LOC = 2.46), by identifying 
either normal brain metabolism (exclusionary role) or hypometabolic patterns 
typical of different neurodegenerative conditions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nicl.2014.10.009
PMCID: PMC4225527
PMID: 25389519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3595. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2014 Dec;58(4):332-43. Epub 2014 Nov 13.

Guidance for reading FDG PET scans in dementia patients.

Herholz K(1).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre and Manchester Academic Health Science 
Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK - 
karl.herholz@manchester.ac.uk.

18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) is a 
powerful method for detection of disease-related impairment of cerebral glucose 
metabolism in neurodegenerative diseases. It is of particular interest for early 
and differential diagnosis of dementia. Reading FDG PET scans requires training 
to recognise deviations from normal functional brain anatomy and its variations. 
This paper provides guidance for displaying FDG PET brain scans in a 
reproducible manner that allows reliable recognition of characteristic 
disease-related metabolic changes. It also describes typical findings in 
Alzheimer's disease, Frontotemporal Dementia and Dementia with Lewy Bodies and 
possible confounding factors, such as vascular changes and brain atrophy. It 
provides a brief overview on findings in other neurodegenerative diseases and 
addresses the potential and limitations of software packages for comparison of 
individual scans with reference data.

PMID: 25391316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3596. Age Ageing. 2015 Mar;44(2):252-7. doi: 10.1093/ageing/afu156. Epub 2014 Nov 14.

Individuals with neurological diseases are at increased risk of fractures within 
180 days of admission to long-term care in Ontario.

Jantzi M(1), Maher AC(2), Ioannidis G(2), Hirdes JP(1), Giangregorio LM(3), 
Papaioannou A(2).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health and Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
Ontario, Canada.
(2)Department of Medicine, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.
(3)Department of Kinesiology, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Individuals residing in long-term care (LTC) are more likely to have 
a fragility fracture than community-dwelling seniors. The purpose of this study 
was to determine whether the presence of neurological diseases was associated 
with an increased risk of fracture within 180 days of admission to LTC.
METHODS: This retrospective cohort study used data collected in the LTC setting 
using the Resident Assessment Instrument (RAI) 2.0 during the period from 2006 
to 2011 (N=42,089). Multivariable logistic regression analyses were conducted to 
determine the associations between the presence of neurological conditions and 
incident fractures, with and without adjustment for clinical variables.
RESULTS: The incident fracture rate for all LTC residents was 2.6% (N=1,094). 
Neurological condition group size ranged from n=21,015 for Alzheimer's disease 
or related dementias (ADRD) to n=21 for muscular dystrophy (MD). The incidence 
of fracture among residents with specific neurological diseases was as follows: 
ADRD, 3.2% (n=672), MD, 4.8% (n=1), Parkinson's disease, 2.5% (n=57), stroke, 
2.3% (n=166), epilepsy, 2.5% (n=38), Huntington's disease, 1.4% (n=1), multiple 
sclerosis, 0.3% (n=1) and traumatic brain injury, 3.8% (n=11); among the 
comparison group with no neurological conditions, the fracture rate was 2.0% 
(n=366). The neurological diseases that were associated with a significantly 
greater odds of having an incident fracture in the first 180 days of LTC 
admission were as follows: ADRD (1.3; 95% CI: 1.1-1.5), epilepsy (1.5; 95% CI: 
1.0-2.1) and traumatic brain injury (2.7; 95% CI: 1.4-5.0).
CONCLUSION: LTC residents with ADRD, epilepsy and traumatic brain injury are at 
a higher risk for sustaining an incident fracture in the first 180 days of 
admission and should be considered for fracture prevention strategies.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the British 
Geriatrics Society. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/afu156
PMCID: PMC5104564
PMID: 25398885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest: None declared.


3597. CNS Neurosci Ther. 2015 Jan;21(1):1-7. doi: 10.1111/cns.12344. Epub 2014 Nov 15.

Synopsis on the linkage of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease with chronic 
diseases.

Jabir NR(1), Firoz CK, Baeesa SS, Ashraf GM, Akhtar S, Kamal W, Kamal MA, Tabrez 
S.

Author information:
(1)King Fahd Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah, Saudi 
Arabia.

Neurodegeneration is the progressive loss of neuronal structure and function, 
which ultimately leads to neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple sclerosis, and Huntington's disease. 
Even after the recent significant advances in neurobiology, the above-mentioned 
disorders continue to haunt the global population. Several studies have 
suggested the role of specific environmental and genetic risk factors associated 
with these disorders. However, the exact mechanism associated with the 
progression of these disorders still needs to be elucidated. In the recent 
years, sophisticated research has revealed interesting association of prominent 
neurodegenerative disorders such as AD and PD with chronic diseases such as 
cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular diseases. Several common molecular 
mechanisms such as generation of free radicals, oxidative DNA damage, 
aberrations in mitochondrial DNA, and dysregulation of apoptosis have been 
highlighted as possible points of connection. The present review summarizes the 
possible mechanism of coexistence of AD and PD with other chronic diseases.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/cns.12344
PMCID: PMC6495953
PMID: 25399848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3598. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 18;9(11):e112638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112638. 
eCollection 2014.

Diffusion tensor imaging of Parkinson's disease, multiple system atrophy and 
progressive supranuclear palsy: a tract-based spatial statistics study.

Worker A(1), Blain C(2), Jarosz J(3), Chaudhuri KR(4), Barker GJ(5), Williams 
SC(6), Brown RG(1), Leigh PN(7), Dell'Acqua F(1), Simmons A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; 
National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Mental 
Health at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; National Institute 
for Health Research Biomedical Research Unit for Dementia at South London and 
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of Psychiatry, King's College 
London, London, United Kingdom.
(2)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; 
King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(3)King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(4)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; 
National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Mental 
Health at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; National Institute 
for Health Research Biomedical Research Unit for Dementia at South London and 
Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of Psychiatry, King's College 
London, London, United Kingdom; King's College Hospital, London, United Kingdom.
(5)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(6)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom; 
National Institute for Health Research Biomedical Research Centre for Mental 
Health at South London and Maudsley NHS Foundation Trust and Institute of 
Psychiatry, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Trafford Centre for Biomedical Research, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, 
University of Sussex, Falmer, Brighton, United Kingdom.

Although often clinically indistinguishable in the early stages, Parkinson's 
disease (PD), Multiple System Atrophy (MSA) and Progressive Supranuclear Palsy 
(PSP) have distinct neuropathological changes. The aim of the current study was 
to identify white matter tract neurodegeneration characteristic of each of the 
three syndromes. Tract-based spatial statistics (TBSS) was used to perform a 
whole-brain automated analysis of diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) data to compare 
differences in fractional anisotropy (FA) and mean diffusivity (MD) between the 
three clinical groups and healthy control subjects. Further analyses were 
conducted to assess the relationship between these putative indices of white 
matter microstructure and clinical measures of disease severity and symptoms. In 
PSP, relative to controls, changes in DTI indices consistent with white matter 
tract degeneration were identified in the corpus callosum, corona radiata, 
corticospinal tract, superior longitudinal fasciculus, anterior thalamic 
radiation, superior cerebellar peduncle, medial lemniscus, retrolenticular and 
anterior limb of the internal capsule, cerebral peduncle and external capsule 
bilaterally, as well as the left posterior limb of the internal capsule and the 
right posterior thalamic radiation. MSA patients also displayed differences in 
the body of the corpus callosum corticospinal tract, cerebellar peduncle, medial 
lemniscus, anterior and superior corona radiata, posterior limb of the internal 
capsule external capsule and cerebral peduncle bilaterally, as well as the left 
anterior limb of the internal capsule and the left anterior thalamic radiation. 
No significant white matter abnormalities were observed in the PD group. Across 
groups, MD correlated positively with disease severity in all major white matter 
tracts. These results show widespread changes in white matter tracts in both PSP 
and MSA patients, even at a mid-point in the disease process, which are not 
found in patients with PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112638
PMCID: PMC4236070
PMID: 25405990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: GJB has received honoraria 
for teaching for General Electric Healthcare, and acts as a consultant for 
IXICO. This does not alter the authors’ adherence to PLOS ONE policies on 
sharing data and materials.


3599. J Comput Aided Mol Des. 2015 Feb;29(2):183-98. doi: 10.1007/s10822-014-9816-1. 
Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Predicting targets of compounds against neurological diseases using 
cheminformatic methodology.

Nikolic K(1), Mavridis L, Bautista-Aguilera OM, Marco-Contelles J, Stark H, do 
Carmo Carreiras M, Rossi I, Massarelli P, Agbaba D, Ramsay RR, Mitchell JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Chemistry, University of Belgrade, Vojvode Stepe 450, 11000, 
Belgrade, Serbia, knikolic@pharmacy.bg.ac.rs.

Recently developed multi-targeted ligands are novel drug candidates able to 
interact with monoamine oxidase A and B; acetylcholinesterase and 
butyrylcholinesterase; or with histamine N-methyltransferase and histamine 
H3-receptor (H3R). These proteins are drug targets in the treatment of 
depression, Alzheimer's disease, obsessive disorders, and Parkinson's disease. A 
probabilistic method, the Parzen-Rosenblatt window approach, was used to build a 
"predictor" model using data collected from the ChEMBL database. The model can 
be used to predict both the primary pharmaceutical target and off-targets of a 
compound based on its structure. Molecular structures were represented based on 
the circular fingerprint methodology. The same approach was used to build a 
"predictor" model from the DrugBank dataset to determine the main 
pharmacological groups of the compound. The study of off-target interactions is 
now recognised as crucial to the understanding of both drug action and 
toxicology. Primary pharmaceutical targets and off-targets for the novel 
multi-target ligands were examined by use of the developed cheminformatic 
method. Several multi-target ligands were selected for further study, as 
compounds with possible additional beneficial pharmacological activities. The 
cheminformatic targets identifications were in agreement with four 3D-QSAR 
(H3R/D1R/D2R/5-HT2aR) models and by in vitro assays for serotonin 5-HT1a and 
5-HT2a receptor binding of the most promising ligand (71/MBA-VEG8).

DOI: 10.1007/s10822-014-9816-1
PMID: 25425329 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3600. Br J Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;206(2):145-52. doi: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.148643. Epub 
2014 Nov 27.

Clinical usefulness of dopamine transporter SPECT imaging with 123I-FP-CIT in 
patients with possible dementia with Lewy bodies: randomised study.

Walker Z(1), Moreno E(1), Thomas A(1), Inglis F(1), Tabet N(1), Rainer M(1), 
Pizzolato G(1), Padovani A(1); DaTSCAN DLB Phase 4 Study Group.

Collaborators: Rainer M, Leitha T, Ransmayr G, Gabriel M, Pasquier F, Semah F, 
Castelnovo G, Collombier L, Ehret R, Stabell U, Danek A, La Fougere C, Pizzolato 
G, Dore F, Padovani A, Paghera B, Bonucelli U, Ceravolo R, Volterrani D, Lladó 
A, Lomeña F, Lozano DM, Flores D, Neciga EG, Solis DG, Ferrer GA, Daumal J, de 
Mallorca P, Moreno Carretero MJ, Serena A, McCleery J, Oliver G, Tabet N, 
Jenkins L, Dizdarevik S, Stevens T, Barber C, Walker Z, Thomas A, Howe K, Inglis 
F, Brown D, Prosser J, Chahal J, Moreno E, Alan S.

Author information:
(1)Zuzana Walker, MD, FRCPsych, Division of Psychiatry, University College 
London, London, and North Essex Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust, 
Essex, UK; Emilio Moreno, MD, PhD, GE Healthcare, Amersham, UK; Alan Thomas, 
PhD, FRCPsych, Biological Research Building, Newcastle University, Newcastle, 
UK; Fraser Inglis, FRCP, Glasgow Memory Clinic, Glasgow, UK; Naji Tabet, MD, 
MRCPsych, Postgraduate Medicine, Brighton and Sussex Medical School, Brighton, 
UK; Michael Rainer, MD, Karl Landsteiner Institut für Gedächtnis- und 
Alzheimerforschung, Vienna, Austria; Gilberto Pizzolato (deceased), MD, 
previously at Department of Medicine, Surgery and Health Sciences, University of 
Trieste, Trieste, Italy; Alessandro Padovani, MD, PhD, Scienze Cliniche e 
Sperimentali, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

Comment in
    Br J Psychiatry. 2015 Oct;207(4):364.
    Br J Psychiatry. 2015 Oct;207(4):364-5.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is underrecognised in clinical 
settings.
AIMS: To investigate whether performing a (123)I-ioflupane injection 
((123)I-FP-CIT also called DaTSCAN™) single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) scan in patients with possible DLB would lead to a more certain 
diagnosis (probable DLB or non-DLB dementia).
METHOD: We randomised 187 patients with possible DLB 2:1 to have a scan or not 
(control group). The outcome measure was a change in diagnosis to probable DLB 
or non-DLB.
RESULTS: There were 56 controls and 114 scanned patients, of whom 43% had an 
abnormal scan. More patients in the imaging group had a change in diagnosis 
compared with controls at 8 and 24 weeks (61% (n = 70) v. 4% (n = 2) and 71% (n 
= 77) v. 16% (n = 9); both P<0.0001). Clinicians were more likely to change the 
diagnosis if the scan was abnormal (82%) than if it was normal (46%).
CONCLUSIONS: Imaging significantly contributed to a more certain diagnosis, 
proving to be a useful adjunct in the work-up of patients with possible DLB.

Royal College of Psychiatrists.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.bp.114.148643
PMID: 25431431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


