701. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;924:136-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05572.x.

Impaired cerebromicrovascular perfusion. Summary of evidence in support of its 
causality in Alzheimer's disease.

de la Torre JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California 92093, USA. jdelator@nctimes.net

After nearly a century of inquiry, the cause of Alzheimer's disease (AD) remains 
to be found. In this review, basic and clinical evidence is presented that 
assembles and hypothetically explains most of the key pathologic events 
associated with the development of AD. These pathologic events are triggered in 
AD by impaired cerebral perfusion originating in the microvasculature that 
affects the optimal delivery of glucose and oxygen and results in an energy 
metabolic breakdown of brain cell biosynthetic and synaptic pathways. We propose 
that two factors must be present before cognitive dysfunction and 
neurodegeneration is expressed in the AD brain: (1) advanced aging, (2) presence 
of a condition that lowers cerebral perfusion, such as a vascular risk factor. 
The first factor introduces a normal but potentially menacing process that 
lowers cerebral blood flow in proportion to increased aging, while the second 
factor adds a crucial burden that further lowers brain perfusion and places 
vulnerable neurons in a state of metabolic compromise leading to a death 
pathway. These two factors will lead to a critically attained threshold of 
cerebral hypoperfusion (CATCH). CATCH is a self-sustaining and progressive 
circulatory insufficiency that will destabilize neurons, synapses, 
neurotransmission, and cognitive function, creating in its wake a 
neurodegenerative process characterized by the formation of senile plaques, 
neurofibrillary tangles, amyloid angiopathy, and, in some cases, Lewy bodies. 
Since any of a considerable number of vessel-related conditions must be present 
in the aging individual for cognition to be affected, CATCH supports the 
heterogeneic disease profile assumed to be characteristic of the AD syndrome. A 
brief discussion of target therapy based on the proposed pathogenesis of AD is 
also reviewed.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05572.x
PMID: 11193790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


702. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;924:62-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05561.x.

"Fatal attractions" of proteins. A comprehensive hypothetical mechanism 
underlying Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders.

Trojanowski JQ(1), Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, HUP, Maloney 
Building, 3rd Floor, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4283, USA. 
trojanow@mail.med.upenn.edu

Abnormal protein-protein interactions that result in the formation of 
intracellular and extracellular aggregates of proteinacious fibrils are common 
neuropathological features of many, albeit diverse, neurodegenerative disorders, 
such as sporadic and familial Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and prion encephalopathies. Indeed, increasing 
evidence suggests that abnormal protein-protein interactions and/or the lesions 
that result from the aggregation of pathological protein fibrils could play a 
mechanistic role in the dysfunction and death of neurons or glial cells in 
neurodegenerative diseases. Here we propose that "fatal attractions" between 
brain proteins are the key pathological events underlying Alzheimer's disease 
and a large number of other seemingly diverse neurodegenerative disorders. This 
hypothesis predicts that the abnormal interaction between normal brain proteins 
alters their conformation and promotes the assembly of these pathological 
conformers into filaments that progressively accumulate as intracellular or 
extracellular fibrous deposits in the central nervous system. Further, the 
transformation of the normal proteins into pathological conformers is predicted 
to result in losses of critical functions, and the disease proteins or their 
progressive accumulation into filamentous aggregates are predicted to acquire 
neurotoxic properties, all of which culminate in the dysfunction and death of 
affected brain cells. Thus, the "fatal attractions" hypothesis describes a 
plausible unifying mechanism that accounts for the onset/progression of 
Alzheimer's disease and a large number of other seemingly unrelated 
neurodegenerative disorders characterized neuropathologically by filamentous 
brain lesions formed by different proteins.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb05561.x
PMID: 11193803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


703. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2001 Jan;16(1):1-19. doi: 
10.1097/00004850-200101000-00001.

Does risperidone have a place in the treatment of nonschizophrenic patients?

Schweitzer I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. 
i.schweitzer@medicine.unimelb.edu.au

There is a now a substantial body of evidence that suggests the new 
antipsychotic agent, risperidone, may be safe and effective for treating 
psychotic, affective or behavioural symptoms associated with various disorders 
other than schizophrenia, schizophreniform disorder or schizo-affective 
disorder. These conditions include bipolar disorder, obsessive-compulsive 
disorder, Tourette's syndrome, dementia, Lewy body disease, mental retardation, 
Parkinson's disease, idiopathic segmental dystonia and organic catatonia. 
Although much of the data is anecdotal or in the form of open studies, there is 
now emerging a small number of well controlled investigations supporting 
efficacy for mania, dementia, behavioural disturbance in mental retardation and 
conduct disorder. Conventional antipsychotics have long been used, either in a 
primary capacity or as an adjunct to treat these disorders; however, they have 
limited benefit, pose significant risks of extrapyramidal side-effects, and may 
cause the potentially life-threatening neuroleptic malignant syndrome. In 
contrast, risperidone at the recommended low doses may be efficacious and pose 
reduced risk of motor side-effects. This article reviews the evidence that 
risperidone may be an effective new treatment for disorders other than 
schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1097/00004850-200101000-00001
PMID: 11195255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


704. J Neurol. 2000 Sep;247 Suppl 4:IV/40-1. doi: 10.1007/pl00007776.

Workshop IV: drug treatment guidelines for the long-term management of 
Parkinson's disease.

Reichmann H(1), Sommer U, Fuchs G, Hefter H, Mark G, Müller T, Thümler R, Ulm G, 
Vieregge P.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Neurology, University of Dresden, Germany.

An attempt was made to establish a decision algorithm for the treatment of 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease at various stages and in different subgroups such 
as akinetic-rigid or tremor dominance type. We suggest treating young patients 
with selegiline and a dopamine agonist. In the tremor dominance type we use 
either budipine or a dopamine agonist. Due to levodopa-induced dyskinesia, we 
try to avoid levodopa in the early stages of the disease and use it only later 
in more advanced situations in a combination therapy with dopamine agonists. 
Since IPS is not only based upon dopamine deficiency but also on resulting 
glutamatergic overstimulation, we advocate the use of a glutamate antagonist 
such as amantadine or budipine. Catechol-O-methyl inhibitors are very helpful 
when wearing-off occurs. Anticholinergics are only used in the early stages of 
tremor-dominant IPS because we fear enhancing the risk of dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00007776
PMID: 11199819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


705. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2000;(60):101-16. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6301-6_6.

Importance of familial Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism to the understanding 
of nigral degeneration in sporadic Parkinson's disease.

Hattori N(1), Shimura H, Kubo S, Wang M, Shimizu N, Tanaka K, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Bunkyo, 
Tokyo, Japan. nhattori@med.juntendo.ac.jp

We review here familial Parkinson's disease (PD) from clinical as well as 
molecular genetic aspects. The contribution of genetic factors to the 
pathogenesis of PD is supported by the demonstration of the high concordance in 
twins, increased risk among relatives of PD patients in case control and family 
studies, and the existence of familial PD and parkinsonism based on single gene 
defects. Recently, several genes have been mapped and/or identified in patients 
with familial PD. Alpha-synuclein is involved in a rare dominant form of 
familial PD with dopa responsive parkinsonian features and Lewy body positive 
pathology. In contrast, parkin is responsible for autosomal recessive form of 
early-onset PD with Lewy body-negative pathology. This form is identified 
world-wide among patients with young-onset PD. Furthermore, ubiquitin carboxy 
terminal hydrolase L1 gene is responsible for an autosomal dominant form of 
typical PD, although only a single family has so far been identified with a 
mutation of this gene, and tau has been identified as a causative gene for 
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism. In addition, five other chromosome 
loci have been identified to be linked to familial PD or dystonia-parkinsonism. 
The presence of different loci or different causative genes indicates that PD is 
not a single entity but a highly heterogeneous. Identification and elucidation 
of the causative genes should enhance our understanding of the pathogenesis of 
sporadic PD.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6301-6_6
PMID: 11205133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


706. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2000;(60):21-36. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6301-6_2.

The enigma of cell death in neurodegenerative disorders.

Jellinger KA(1), Stadelmann CH.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Progressive cell loss in specific neuronal populations is the pathological 
hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases, but its mechanisms remain unresolved. 
Apoptotic cell death has been implicated as a major mechanism in Alzheimer 
disease (AD), Parkinson disease (PD) and other neurodegenerative disorders. 
However, DNA fragmentation in human brain as a sign of neuronal cell injury is 
too frequent to account for the continuous loss in these slowly progressive 
diseases. In a series of autopsy confirmed cases of AD, PD, related disorders, 
and age-matched controls, DNA fragmentation using the TUNEL method, an array of 
apoptosis-related proteins (ARP), proto-oncogenes, and activated caspase-3, the 
key enzyme of late-stage apoptosis, were examined. In AD, a considerable number 
of hippocampal neurons and glial cells showed DNA fragmentation with a 3- to 
6-fold increase related to neurofibrillary tangles and amyloid deposits, but 
only 1 in 2.600 to 5.600 neurons displayed apoptotic morphology and cytoplasmic 
immunoreactivity for activated caspase-3, whereas no neurons were labeled in 
age-matched controls. caspase-3 immunoreactivity was seen in granules of cells 
with granulovacuolar degeneration, in around 25% co-localized with early 
cytoplasmic deposition of tau-protein. In progressive supranuclear palsy, only 
single neurons and several oligodendrocytes in brainstem, some with 
tau-deposits, were TUNEL-positive and expressed both ARPs and activated 
caspase-3. In PD, dementia with Lewy bodies, multisystem atrophy (MSA), and 
corticobasal degeneration, TUNEL-positivity and expression of ARPs or activated 
caspase-3 were only seen in microglia and oligodendrocytes with cytoplasmic 
inclusions, but not in neurons. These data provide evidence for extremely rare 
apoptotic neuronal death in AD and PSP compatible with the progression of 
neuronal degeneration in these chronic diseases. Apoptosis mainly involves 
reactive microglia and oligodendroglia, the latter often involved by deposits of 
insoluble fibrillary proteins, while alternative mechanisms of neuronal death 
may occur. Susceptible cell populations in a proapoptotic environment show 
increased vulnerability towards metabolic or other noxious factors, with 
autophagy as a possible protective mechanism in early stages of programmed cell 
death. The intracellular cascade leading to cell death still awaits elucidation.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6301-6_2
PMID: 11205141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


707. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2000;(60):303-14. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6301-6_21.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: prevalence, clinical spectrum and natural history.

Ransmayr G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Innsbruck, Austria.

The article summarises history, terminology, the clinical and neuropathological 
diagnostic criteria, neurochemical and genetic findings, sensitivity and 
specificity of the clinical diagnostic criteria, prevalence, demographical data 
and nosology, differential diagnosis, and therapy of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB). DLB shares clinical symptoms of Parkinson's disease and dementia of the 
Alzheimer-type (DAT). However, DLB is also different to PD and DAT (less tremor 
and asymmetry of the motor symptoms, more falls, and less favourable response to 
L-Dopa than PD; in contrast to DAT marked cognitive fluctuations and phases of 
reduced alertness, hallucinations and delirium). There are genetic similarities 
to DAT and PD in terms of common genetic risk factors. A genetic cause of the 
disease has so far not been detected. Whether or not DLB is a disease entity or 
an association of diseases (Lewy body disease and DAT) has so far not been 
elucidated. Clinical distinction from DAT and PD has clinical importance because 
of different therapeutic and prognostic implications. Studies are needed to 
standardize the treatment of motor, cognitive, psychiatric and vegetative 
symptoms.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6301-6_21
PMID: 11205149 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


708. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2000;(60):345-50.

The serotonin transporter in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Mössner R(1), Schmitt A, Syagailo Y, Gerlach M, Riederer P, Lesch KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Würzburg, Federal Republic of 
Germany.

The etiology of late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) and idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (PD) is not known. In both disorders there is an extensive degeneration 
of serotonergic neurons, with corresponding losses of the serotonin (5HT) 
transporter (5HTT), which is responsible for the reuptake of 5HT from the 
synaptic cleft. An increasing body of evidence indicates that allelic variation 
of the 5HTT gene promoter (5HTT gene-linked polymorphic region, 5HTTLPR) 
determines high or low 5HT uptake in normal human brain. Association studies 
show that the low-activity allele of the 5HTTLPR is a risk factor for late-onset 
AD. In PD, the 5HTTLPR influences the risk of developing depression, a common 
symptom in PD patients. A compromised serotonergic system thus plays an 
important role in the pathophysiology of both AD and PD.

PMID: 11205152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


709. J Chem Neuroanat. 2000 Dec;20(3-4):225-44. doi: 10.1016/s0891-0618(00)00100-9.

New insights into genetic and molecular mechanisms of brain degeneration in 
tauopathies.

Forman MS(1), Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 3400 Spruce Street, Maloney 
Building, 3rd Floor, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Abundant neurofibrillary lesions consisting of the microtubule associated 
protein tau and amyloid beta peptide deposits are the defining lesions of 
Alzheimer's disease. Prominent filamentous tau pathology and brain degeneration 
in the absence of extracellular amyloid deposition characterize a number of 
other neurodegenerative disorders (i.e. progressive supranuclear palsy, 
corticobasal degeneration, Pick's disease) collectively referred to as 
tauopathies. The discovery of multiple tau gene mutations that are pathogenic 
for hereditary frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
in many kindreds, as well as the demonstration that tau polymorphisms are 
genetic risk factors for sporadic tauopathies, directly implicate tau 
abnormalities in the onset/progression of neurodegenerative disease. Different 
tau gene mutations may be pathogenic by impairing the functions of tau or by 
perturbing the splicing of the tau gene, thereby resulting in biochemically and 
structurally distinct tau aggregates. However, since specific polymorphisms and 
mutations in the tau gene lead to diverse phenotypes, it is plausible that 
additional genetic or epigenetic factors influence the clinical and pathological 
manifestations of both familial and sporadic tauopathies. Thus, efforts to 
develop animal models of tau-mediated neurodegeneration should provide further 
insights into the onset and progression of tauopathies as well as Alzheimer's 
disease, and they could accelerate research to discover more effective therapies 
for these disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0891-0618(00)00100-9
PMID: 11207421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


710. J Chem Neuroanat. 2000 Dec;20(3-4):281-98. doi: 10.1016/s0891-0618(00)00110-1.

Nicotinic receptors in human brain: topography and pathology.

Court JA(1), Martin-Ruiz C, Graham A, Perry E.

Author information:
(1)Joint MRC-Newcastle University, Development in Clinical Brain Ageing, MRC 
Building, Newcastle General Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 
6BE, UK. j.a.court@ncl.ac.uk

Brain nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChR) are a class of ligand-gated 
channels composed of alpha and beta subunits with specific structural, 
functional and pharmacological properties. They participate in the physiological 
and behavioural effects of acetylcholine and mediate responses to nicotine. They 
are associated with numerous transmitter systems and their expression is altered 
during development and ageing as well as in diseases such as autism, 
schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia. 
Nicotinic receptors containing a number of different subunits are highly 
expressed during early human development. Disorders believed to be associated 
with abnormal brain maturation involve deficits in both alpha4beta2, in the case 
of autism, and alpha7 possibly in addition to alpha4beta2 nAChRs in the case of 
schizophrenia. In ageing and age-related neurodegenerative disorders nAChR 
deficits are predominantly associated with alpha4-containing receptors, although 
some studies also indicate the involvement of alpha3 and alpha7 subunits. Whilst 
ageing appears to be associated with reductions in subunit mRNA as well as 
protein expression, in Alzheimer's disease only protein loss is apparent. 
Nicotinic therapy may be of benefit in a number of neurological conditions, 
however studies evaluating further both the distribution of specific subunit 
involvement and the correlation of nAChR deficits with clinical symptoms are 
required to inform therapeutic strategy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0891-0618(00)00110-1
PMID: 11207426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


711. Lancet. 2001 Jan 20;357(9251):169-75. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)03589-3.

Pathological correlates of late-onset dementia in a multicentre, community-based 
population in England and Wales. Neuropathology Group of the Medical Research 
Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (MRC CFAS).

Neuropathology Group. Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Aging 
Study.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2002 Feb 16;359(9306):624-5.

BACKGROUND: We have undertaken a large unselected, community-based 
neuropathology study in an elderly (70-103 years) UK population in relation to 
prospectively evaluated dementia status. The study tests the assumption that 
dementing disorders as defined by current diagnostic protocols underlie this 
syndrome in the community at large.
METHODS: Respondents in the Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and 
Ageing Study were approached for consent to examine the brain at necropsy. 
Dementia status was assigned by use of the automated geriatric examination for 
computer-assisted taxonomy algorithm. Neuropathological features were 
standardised by use of the protocol of the Consortium to Establish a Registry of 
Alzheimer's Disease, which assesses the severity and distribution of 
Alzheimer-type pathology, vascular lesions, and other potential causes of 
dementia. A statistical model of dementia risk related predominantly to 
Alzheimer-type and vascular pathology was developed by multivariate logistic 
regression.
FINDINGS: We report on the first 209 individuals who have come to necropsy. The 
median age at death was 85 years for men, and 86 years for women. 
Cerebrovascular (78%) and Alzheimer-type (70%) pathology were common. Dementia 
was present in 100 (48%), of whom 64% had features indicating probable or 
definite Alzheimer's disease. However, 33% of the 109 non-demented people had 
equivalent densities of neocortical neuritic plaques. Some degree of neocortical 
neurofibrillary pathology was found in 61% of demented and 34% of non-demented 
individuals. Vascular lesions were equally common in both groups, although the 
proportion with multiple vascular pathology was higher in the demented group 
(46% vs 33%).
INTERPRETATION: Alzheimer-type and vascular pathology were the major 
pathological correlates of cognitive decline in this elderly sample, as 
expected, but most patients had mixed disease. There were no clear thresholds of 
these features that predicted dementia status. The findings therefore challenge 
conventional dementia diagnostic criteria in this setting. Additional factors 
must determine whether moderate burdens of cerebral Alzheimer-type pathology and 
vascular lesions are associated with cognitive failure.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(00)03589-3
PMID: 11213093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


712. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2000 Oct;37(10):772-6. doi: 
10.3143/geriatrics.37.772.

[Dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Mori E.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), the second most frequent cause of primary 
degenerative dementias following Alzheimer's disease, has been increasingly 
recognized since the proposal of the consensus name and clinical diagnostic 
criteria. Although DLB overlaps in clinical, pathological, and genetic features 
with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, DLB should be understood as an 
entity with the essential feature of the presence of Lewy bodies in the brain 
stem and cerebral cortex. From the clinical point of view, DLB is characterized 
by the presence of progressive dementia without severe memory disorders at the 
early stage, with significant cognitive fluctuations, well-formed recurrent 
visual hallucinations, and spontaneous Parkinsonism. This article reviews recent 
clinical and research findings, including our own, to facilitate clinical 
recognition of DLB. In addition to the supportive features described in the 
consortium clinical diagnostic criteria for DLB such as falls and great 
sensitivity to neuroleptic drugs, our studies found other frequent disorders 
including disproportionately severe visuoconstructive and visuoperceptual 
disturbances, transitory alterations in consciousness with reduplication 
phenomena, misidentification delusions, and non-aphasic misnamings. Neuroimaging 
features include relatively preserved hippocampal volume on MRI and occipital 
involvement on metabolic and blood flow imagings. The correct diagnosis of DLB 
is important to administer adequate treatment, to avoid adverse effects with 
neuroleptic drugs, and to establish precise prognosis. The present summary of 
the clinical features is hopefully helpful for clinical diagnosis of DLB. From a 
therapeutic point of view, cholinesterase inhibitors seemingly show some 
efficacy in the treatment of cognitive alterations. Further research would 
result in advances in diagnostic methods and therapeutic approaches in the near 
future.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.37.772
PMID: 11215212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


713. Mov Disord. 2001 Jan;16(1):23-32. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200101)16:1<23::aid-mds1003>3.0.co;2-2.

Neuroimaging in basal ganglia disorders: perspectives for transcranial 
ultrasound.

Becker G(1), Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Würzburg, Germany.

Transcranial sonography is a new diagnostic tool, allowing not only the 
evaluation of cerebral arteries but also the two-dimensional display of the 
brain parenchyma. In this review we will summarize basics of the application, 
the ultrasound anatomy of the brain and sonographic findings in some movement 
disorders. While in normal adults basal ganglia nuclei are hypoechogenic, they 
are hyperechogenic in certain basal ganglia disorders. In Parkinson's disease, 
for example, the substantia nigra can be depicted as a distinctly echogenic 
area. An elevated echogenicity of the lentiform nuclei was noticed in patients 
with primary adult-onset dystonia. In both disorders the altered echogenicity 
may arise from higher heavy metal tissue content (i.e. iron in Parkinson's 
disease and copper in primary dystonia). Our findings converge to the hypothesis 
that transcranial ultrasound sensitively detects pathological metal accumulation 
not identified by other neuroimaging techniques (CT and MRI) and therefore 
provides new insights in the diagnosis of basal ganglia disorders. The 
implications of these findings for the understanding of the pathogenesis and its 
usefulness for the early diagnosis of movement disorders are outlined.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200101)16:1<23::aid-mds1003>3.0.co;2-2
PMID: 11215589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


714. Ann Pharmacother. 2001 Feb;35(2):202-5. doi: 10.1345/aph.10192.

Successful use of donepezil for the treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Rojas-Fernandez CH(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Department of Pharmacy Practice, Texas Tech 
University--Health Sciences Center--Amarillo, 79106-1712, USA. 
carlosr@cortex.ama.ttuhsc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To report a case of the successful use of donepezil for treatment of 
cognitive and noncognitive symptoms in a patient with dementia with Lewy bodies. 
CASE SUMARY: An 86-year-old white woman with dementia was experiencing 
early-onset significant fluctuation of her cognitive status, functional 
impairment, visual hallucinations, aggression, and parkinsonism. She was 
intially diagnosed with Alzheimer disease and Parkinsons disease and prescribed 
donepezil 5 mg/d and benztropine 1 mg twice daily. On reexamination of the case 
by a neurologist, the diagnoses were revised to dementia with Lewy bodies. The 
benztropine was discontinued, and donepezil was increased to 10 mg/d. The 
patient's cognitive and functional status significantly improved, as did her 
visual hallucinations.
DISCUSSION: This case supports previous reports of the marked responsiveness of 
patients with dementia with Lewy bodies to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. This 
may be explained by the marked cholinergic deficit observed in patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies and the evidence linking cognitive as well as 
noncognitive symptoms to this deficit.
CONCLUSIONS: The present case suggests that patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies respond well to acetylcholinesterase inhibitors. Controlled trials are 
necessary to further define the role of these drugs for this disease.

DOI: 10.1345/aph.10192
PMID: 11215841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


715. Biofactors. 2000;12(1-4):243-50. doi: 10.1002/biof.5520120137.

Attenuation of neurodegeneration-relevant modifications of brain proteins by 
dietary soy.

Kim H(1), Xia H, Li L, Gewin J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Toxicology and the UAB Center for Aging, 
University of Alabama at Birmingham, 35294-0019, USA. helenkim@uab.edu

Epidemiological studies show that postmenopausal women who undertake 
estrogen-replacement therapy have significantly lower risk for the onset of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) than women who do not. Animal behavior studies have 
shown that ovariectomy results in the development of cognitive dysfunction that 
is prevented by estrogen-replacement, suggesting that normal mammalian cognitive 
function is impaired by estrogen reduction. Soy isoflavones in particular 
genistein have been demonstrated to have weak and selective estrogenic actions 
in various models of human chronic diseases. A hallmark of several human 
dementias including AD and fronto temporal dementia with Parkinsonism on 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) is the hyperphosphorylation of the 
microtubule-associated protein tau. Preliminary experiments are discussed here 
which show that isoflavones delivered in a soy protein matrix attenuated 
selected AD-relevant tau phosphorylations in a primate model of menopause. The 
rationale is discussed for the use of soy-based foods for protection against 
postmenopausal neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1002/biof.5520120137
PMID: 11216492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


716. Clin Neuropathol. 2001 Jan-Feb;20(1):8-12.

A case of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism of early onset with 
progressive supranuclear palsy-like features.

Miyamoto K(1), Ikemoto A, Akiguchi I, Kohno R, Imura T, Fujita Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University, Japan. miyamo@ncnp.go.jp

We report a patient with frontotemporal degeneration and parkinsonism with 
mental retardation. The patient was a 54-year-old man who had parkinsonism that 
resembled progressive supranuclear palsy, frontotemporal degeneration and 
myoclonus. His family included many affected members. Neuropathologically, there 
was degeneration of the frontal and temporal cortices, the basal ganglia, the 
brainstem and the cerebellum. Microscopically, neuronal loss was severe in the 
frontal and temporal cortex, the globus pallidus, substantia nigra, red nucleus 
and dentate nucleus. Fibrillary changes were found in neurons and glia that were 
immunostained for tau. Although we could not define the genetic abnormalities, 
we thought that this case might have involved frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17.

PMID: 11220696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


717. Drugs Aging. 2001;18(1):45-61. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200118010-00004.

Antipsychotic medications and the elderly: effects on cognition and implications 
for use.

Byerly MJ(1), Weber MT, Brooks DL, Snow LR, Worley MA, Lescouflair E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at 
Dallas, 75390-9101, USA. matt.byerly@utsouthwestern.edu

Despite being frequently prescribed in the elderly, antipsychotic medications 
are commonly associated with adverse effects in this population, including 
sedative, orthostatic and extrapyramidal adverse effects. Growing evidence 
suggests that antipsychotics can also cause deleterious cognitive effects in 
some elderly patients. Preclinical and growing clinical evidence indicates that 
inhibitory effects on dopaminergic, cholinergic and histaminergic neurochemical 
systems may account for antipsychotic-associated cognitive impairment in the 
elderly. A review of published reports of the cognitive effects of 
antipsychotics in the elderly suggests that newer antipsychotic medications may 
possess a more favourable cognitive profile than that of traditional agents in 
this population. The cognitive effect that a specific antipsychotic will have in 
the elderly, however, is likely better predicted by considering the 
pharmacodynamic action of an individual agent in combination with the 
pathophysiology of the condition being treated. Agents with relatively weak 
dopamine inhibiting effects (e.g. clozapine and quetiapine), for example, would 
theoretically have a cognitive profile superior to that of agents with higher 
degrees of dopaminergic inhibition (all traditional agents, risperidone, 
olanzapine and ziprasidone) when used for conditions associated with diminished 
dopamine function (e.g. idiopathic Parkinson's disease). Drugs with weak 
anticholinergic effects (high-potency traditional agents, risperidone, 
quetiapine and ziprasidone) would theoretically be less likely to cause 
cognitive impairment than agents with high degrees of cholinergic receptor 
blocking actions (clozapine and olanzapine) when treating patients with impaired 
cholinergic function (e.g. Alzheimer's disease). Cholinergic agonist effects of 
clozapine and olanzapine may, however, mitigate potential adverse cognitive 
effects associated with the cholinergic blocking actions of these agents. Large, 
rigorous trials comparing the cognitive effects of antipsychotics with diverse 
pharmacodynamic actions are lacking in the elderly and are needed.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200118010-00004
PMID: 11232738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


718. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2001 Jan-Mar;15(1):31-44. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-200101000-00005.

Clinical and pathologic features of two groups of patients with dementia with 
Lewy bodies: effect of coexisting Alzheimer-type lesion load.

Del Ser T(1), Hachinski V, Merskey H, Munoz DG.

Author information:
(1)Sección de Neurología, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.

The objectives of this study were to examine the clinical and pathologic 
features of two subgroups of patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
differing in Alzheimer disease (AD)-type pathology load and to identify clinical 
variables useful in the differential diagnosis from AD. The records of 64 
consecutive demented patients were reviewed. Pathologic diagnoses were 
independently established [35 AD cases, 11 cases of pure dementia with Lewy 
bodies (pDLB), and 18 cases of combined AD plus Lewy bodies (AD+LB)], and 
several neurodegenerative lesions were quantified. Clinical and pathologic data 
were compared between groups with univariate and multivariate analyses. Compared 
with the other groups, pDLB cases had more frequent acute-subacute onset of 
dementia [45% vs. AD (3%) and AD+LB (16%)], early parkinsonism [45% vs. AD (0%) 
and AD+LB (0%)], early [27% vs. AD (0%) and AD+LB (0%)] and late [73% vs. AD 
(11%) and AD+LB (16%)] hallucinations, fluctuating course [46% vs. AD (9%) and 
AD+LB (22%)], delusions [45% vs. AD (11%) and AD+LB (6%)], spontaneous 
parkinsonism [63% vs. AD (8%) and AD+LB (16%)], less frequent ideomotor apraxia 
and loss of insight, earlier urinary incontinence [3.2 +/- 1.4 years after onset 
vs. AD (6.3 years) and AD+LB (5.8 years)], shorter duration of dementia [7.7 +/- 
2.4 years vs. AD (9.6 years) and AD+LB (11 years)], milder atrophy in computed 
tomography scans, greater brain weight, more transcortical spongiosis, wider 
cortex and subcortex, and less amyloid angiopathy. All pDLB cases but no AD 
cases had abnormal CA2 neurites. The clinical features of AD+LB patients were 
similar to those of AD patients other than more frequent acute-subacute onset 
and fluctuating evolution. Discriminant analyses selected four clinical 
variables differentiating pDLB from the other two groups as a whole: 
acute-subacute onset, early parkinsonism, early hallucinations, and early onset 
of urinary incontinence. Two or more of these features identified pDLB with a 
sensitivity of 81.8% and a specificity of 95.9%. Differentiation between the 
three groups (pDLB, AD+LB, and AD) or between both groups with LB (DLB) from AD 
could be only attained in 70% of cases. We conclude that early symptomatology is 
the main clue for the diagnosis of pDLB. We identified by discriminant analysis 
a set of clinical diagnostic criteria similar to those proposed by the 
Consortium on Dementia With Lewy Bodies. Accuracy was excellent for the 
diagnosis of pDLB but only mediocre for separating AD+LB as well as the entire 
DLB group from AD.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-200101000-00005
PMID: 11236823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


719. Am Fam Physician. 2001 Feb 15;63(4):703-13, 717-8.

Early diagnosis of dementia.

Santacruz KS(1), Swagerty D.

Author information:
(1)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, USA.

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2001 Feb 15;63(4):620, 622, 625-6.

Until recently, the most significant issue facing a family physician regarding 
the diagnosis and treatment of dementia was ruling out delirium and potentially 
treatable etiologies. However, as more treatment options become available, it 
will become increasingly important to diagnose dementia early. Dementia may be 
suspected if memory deficits are exhibited during the medical history and 
physical examination. Information from the patient's family members, friends and 
caregivers may also point to signs of dementia. Distinguishing among age-related 
cognitive decline, mild cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease may be 
difficult and requires evaluation of cognitive and functional status. Careful 
medical evaluation to exclude treatable causes of cognitive impairment is 
important. Patients with early dementia may benefit from formal neuropsychologic 
testing to aid in medical and social decision-making. Follow-up by the patient's 
family physician is appropriate in most patients. However, a subspecialist may 
be helpful in the diagnosis and management of patients with dementia with an 
unusual presentation or following an atypical course.

PMID: 11237085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


720. Can J Neurol Sci. 2001 Feb;28 Suppl 1:S17-27. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100001177.

Diagnosis, classification and natural history of degenerative dementias.

Feldman H(1), Kertesz A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, UBC Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

The release of the first approved medications for the treatment of Alzheimer's 
disease in Canada has highlighted the renewed need and importance of diagnostic 
accuracy and understanding of the spectrum of the dementias. The epidemiological 
scope of the problem of dementia in Canada including risk factors, caregiving 
patterns and costs of care have been well-characterized through the Canadian 
Study of Health and Aging (CSHA 1991-1996) with some of the key findings 
reviewed here. Beyond Alzheimer's disease the phenotypes and genotypes of the 
other degenerative dementias have been emerging with proposed operational 
diagnostic criteria that should facilitate their recognition in clinical 
practice. This paper reviews the clinical phenotypes of the most common causes 
of dementia with a proposed classification scheme and with discussion of their 
relevance from a differential treatment standpoint. This paper served as a 
background document for the working group of the Consensus Conference on 
Dementia (C3D) in February 1998 and has been revised subsequently for this 
publication.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100001177
PMID: 11237307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


721. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2001 Apr;7(2):81-88. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00026-2.

Positron emission tomography in pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration (PPND) family 
(frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 and point 
mutation in tau gene).

Pal PK(1), Wszolek ZK, Kishore A, de la Fuente-Fernandez R, Sossi V, Uitti RJ, 
Dobko T, Stoessl AJ.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Disorders Centre, Vancouver Hospital and Health Sciences 
Centre, V6T 2B5, Vancouver, BC, Canada

Pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration (PPND) is a rapidly progressive disorder 
characterized by frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism unresponsive to 
levodopa therapy. In this study, we have further characterized the regional 
abnormalities of cerebral function using PET with 6-[18F]fluoro-L-dopa (FD), 
[11C] raclopride (RAC), and 2-deoxy-2-fluoro-[18F]-D-glucose (FDG). FD and RAC 
scans were performed in 3 patients-2 new patients and a previously reported 
asymptomatic at-risk individual who became symptomatic 2years after the first FD 
scan. Cerebral glucose metabolism was studied by FDG in 2 other patients. In 
keeping with previous reports, there was a severe reduction of FD uptake, which 
affected both caudate and putamen to a similar degree in all 3 patients. RAC 
scans showed normal to elevated striatal D2-receptor binding in all patients. 
Cerebral glucose metabolism was globally reduced (>2 SD below control mean) in 
one patient, with maximal involvement of frontal regions, and to a lesser degree 
in the other patient. Our study showed severe presynaptic dopaminergic 
dysfunction with intact striatal D2 receptors in PPND patients, implying that 
the dopa unresponsiveness is probably a result of pathology downstream to the 
striatum. The pattern of presynaptic dysfunction contrasts with that seen in 
idiopathic parkinsonism, where the putamen is affected more than the caudate 
nucleus. The pattern of glucose hypometabolism correlates well with the presence 
of frontotemporal dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00026-2
PMID: 11248587


722. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Apr;70(4):483-8. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.70.4.483.

Pentagon copying is more impaired in dementia with Lewy bodies than in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Ala TA(1), Hughes LF, Kyrouac GA, Ghobrial MW, Elble RJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders, Department of Neurology, 
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, Springfield, Illinois, USA. 
tala@siumed.edu

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2002 Jan;72(1):129-30.

OBJECTIVES: In many cases the clinical differentiation of patients with dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) from those with Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been 
difficult. Because many neuropsychological studies have reported greater 
visuospatial/constructional impairment in DLB than in AD, it was determined 
whether accuracy in copying the interlocking pentagons item on the mini mental 
state examination (MMSE) may be helpful in distinguishing patients with DLB from 
those with AD relatively early in the course of the dementia.
METHODS: All cases of neuropathologically proved DLB and AD in the Center for 
Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders brain bank were retrospectively 
reviewed, and the first available MMSE for each was retrieved. Only patients 
with MMSE scores > or = 13 were included, indicating mild to moderate dementia. 
The patients' copies of the interlocking pentagons were analyzed and graded as 
acceptable or unacceptable according to the original instructions for grading 
the MMSE.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients with DLB and 27 patients with AD were identified for 
whom MMSE with copies of the interlocking pentagons were available. Two patients 
with DLB (MMSEs 22 and 27) drew the pentagons acceptably, by contrast with 16 of 
the patients with AD (MMSEs 13-28). An unacceptable copy was associated with DLB 
with a sensitivity of 88% and a specificity of 59% (p = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: For patients with MMSE scores > or = 13, an inability to accurately 
copy the pentagons suggests that the diagnosis is more likely DLB than AD. The 
results confirm the work of others on visuospatial/constructional impairment in 
DLB and indicate that this feature may be helpful in its diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.70.4.483
PMCID: PMC1737321
PMID: 11254771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


723. Arch Neurol. 2001 Mar;58(3):373-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.3.373.

Evaluation of CSF-tau and CSF-Abeta42 as diagnostic markers for Alzheimer 
disease in clinical practice.

Andreasen N(1), Minthon L, Davidsson P, Vanmechelen E, Vanderstichele H, Winblad 
B, Blennow K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation, Piteå River Valley Hospital, PO Box 715, SE-941 
28 Piteå, Sweden. Niels.Andreasen@nll.se

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2001 Mar;58(3):349-50.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the diagnostic potential of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
levels of tau and beta-amyloid protein ending at amino acid 42 (Abeta42) as 
biomarkers for Alzheimer disease (AD) in clinical practice.
DESIGN: A 1-year prospective study.
SETTING: Community population-based sample of all consecutive patients admitted 
for investigation of cognitive symptoms to the Piteå River Valley Hospital, 
Piteå, Sweden.
PATIENTS: A total of 241 patients with probable AD (n = 105), possible AD (n = 
58), vascular dementia (n = 23), mild cognitive impairment (n = 20), Lewy body 
dementia (n = 9), other neurological disorders (n = 3), and psychiatric 
disorders (n = 5) and nondemented individuals (n = 18).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Cerebrospinal fluid tau and CSF-Abeta42 were assayed each 
week as routine clinical neurochemical analyses. Sensitivity and specificity 
were defined using the regression line from 100 control subjects from a 
multicenter study. Positive and negative predictive values were calculated for 
different prevalence rates of AD.
RESULTS: We found increased CSF-tau and decreased CSF-Abeta42 levels in probable 
and possible AD. Sensitivity was 94% for probable AD, 88% for possible AD, and 
75% for mild cognitive impairment, whereas specificity was 100% for psychiatric 
disorders and 89% for nondemented. Specificity was lower in Lewy body dementia 
(67%) mainly because of low CSF-Abeta42 levels and in vascular dementia (48%) 
mainly because of high CSF-tau levels. Sensitivity for CSF-tau and CSF-Abeta42 
increased in patients with AD possessing the ApoE epsilon4 allele, approaching 
100%. At a prevalence of AD of 45%, the positive predictive value was 90% and 
the negative predictive value was 95%.
CONCLUSIONS: Cerebrospinal fluid tau and CSF-Abeta42 have so far been studied in 
research settings, under conditions providing data on the optimal performance. 
We examined a prospective patient sample, with assays run in clinical routine, 
giving figures closer to the true performance of CSF-tau and CSF-Abeta42. The 
predictive value for AD was greater than 90%. Therefore, these biomarkers may 
have a role in the clinical workup of patients with cognitive impairment, 
especially to differentiate early AD from normal aging and psychiatric 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.58.3.373
PMID: 11255440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


724. Arch Neurol. 2001 Mar;58(3):460-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.3.460.

An investigation of clinical correlates of Lewy bodies in autopsy-proven 
Alzheimer disease.

Stern Y(1), Jacobs D, Goldman J, Gomez-Tortosa E, Hyman BT, Liu Y, Troncoso J, 
Marder K, Tang MX, Brandt J, Albert M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia 
University College of Physicians and Surgeons, 630 W 168th St., New York, NY 
10032, USA. ys11@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Studies of patients meeting clinical and pathologic criteria for 
Alzheimer disease (AD) have not consistently found associations between the 
presence of Lewy bodies (LBs) at postmortem examination and a higher frequency 
during life of the clinical features of dementia with LBs.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical correlates of LBs in patients with AD.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Fifty-one patients were diagnosed as having probable AD 
during life and met pathologic criteria for AD. Semiquantitative ratings for LBs 
were obtained in 4 brain regions: substantia nigra, cingulate, insular cortex, 
and hippocampus. The patients had been followed up semiannually for up to 9.9 
years before death, and clinical features associated with dementia with LBs, 
including extrapyramidal signs and visual hallucinations, were assessed at each 
study visit. Logistic regression analyses determined whether patients who had 
LBs were more likely than those without LBs to express specific clinical signs 
during follow-up. Cox analyses determined whether patients with LBs developed 
clinical signs or died earlier. Generalized estimating equations were used to 
compare rates of cognitive or functional change.
RESULTS: Nineteen of the 51 patients had at least 1 LB in one of the studied 
regions. In no case was a significant relation noted between LBs and the 
presence of a measured clinical sign. No LB measure was associated with an 
increased risk of developing any of the evaluated clinical signs earlier in the 
disease. There was no association between the presence of LBs and more rapid 
mortality or more rapid disease progression.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients diagnosed as having AD during life, we did not observe 
a relation of LBs noted during postmortem examination with the presence of any 
clinical feature that we assessed or with the rapidity of disease progression. 
The relation between LBs and specific clinical manifestations may be tenuous in 
these patients.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.58.3.460
PMID: 11255450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


725. Arch Neurol. 2001 Mar;58(3):466-72. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.3.466.

Alterations of striatal dopamine receptor binding in Alzheimer disease are 
associated with Lewy body pathology and antemortem psychosis.

Sweet RA(1), Hamilton RL, Healy MT, Wisniewski SR, Henteleff R, Pollock BG, 
Lewis DA, DeKosky ST.

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh, Division of Geriatrics and Neuropsychiatry, Western 
Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 3811 O'Hara St., Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
Sweetra@msx.upmc.edu

BACKGROUND: Lewy bodies (LB) are present in at least 20% to 30% of persons with 
Alzheimer disease (AD) and contribute to the risk of psychosis and to excess 
cognitive burden.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether altered striatal dopamine receptor binding is 
associated with LB and psychosis in AD.
DESIGN: Postmortem case control.
SETTING: Alzheimer's Disease Research Center at the University of Pittsburgh 
(Pa).
PARTICIPANTS: Consecutive cases from the Alzheimer's Disease Research Center 
brain bank, neuroleptic free for at least 1 month prior to death, with 
neuropathologic diagnoses of AD with LB (AD + LB, n = 14), AD without LB (AD, n 
= 13), or normal brains (n = 8).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Dopamine D1, D2, and D3 receptor densities, and 
affinities as determined by selective saturation binding studies in striatal 
tissue.
RESULTS: Subjects with AD + LB, compared with those with AD, demonstrated 
increased D1 receptor density and decreased D2 and D3 receptor density. D3 
receptor density was selectively increased, however, in AD subjects with a 
history of psychosis, independent of the presence or absence of LB. The effect 
of neuroleptic treatment on D3 binding was further examined in an additional 
group of subjects who had received neuroleptics near the time of death. 
Neuroleptic treatment reduced D3 affinity with no effect on D3 density.
CONCLUSIONS: Alzheimer disease with LB is associated with selective alterations 
in dopamine receptor density, which may contribute to the distinct clinical 
profile of this group. The D3 receptor may be an important target of neuroleptic 
treatment of psychosis in AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.58.3.466
PMID: 11255451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


726. Int Psychogeriatr. 2000 Dec;12(4):547-58. doi: 10.1017/s1041610200006657.

Psychotic symptoms in Alzheimer's disease are not associated with more severe 
neuropathologic features.

Sweet RA(1), Hamilton RL, Lopez OL, Klunk WE, Wisniewski SR, Kaufer DI, Healy 
MT, DeKosky ST.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pennsylvania, USA. Sweetra@msx.upmc.edu

Psychotic symptoms in Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been associated with 
increased rates of cognitive impairment and functional decline. Prior studies 
have been conflicting with regard to whether AD patients with psychosis (AD+P) 
have evidence of more severe neuropathologic findings at postmortem exam. We 
examined the severity of neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in six 
brain regions--middle frontal cortex, hippocampus, inferior parietal cortex, 
superior temporal cortex, occipital cortex, and transentorhinal cortex-in 24 
AD+P subjects and 25 matched AD subjects without psychosis (AD-P). All analyses 
controlled for the presence of cortical Lewy bodies, and corrected for multiple 
comparisons. We found no significant associations between neuritic plaque and 
neurofibrillary tangle severity and AD+P, and no significant associations with 
any individual psychotic symptom. The association of AD+P with a more rapidly 
progressive course of AD appears to be mediated by a neuropathologic process 
other than increased severity of plaque and tangle formation.

DOI: 10.1017/s1041610200006657
PMID: 11263720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


727. Neurology. 2001 Mar 27;56(6):730-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.6.730.

Risk of dementia in Parkinson's disease: a community-based, prospective study.

Aarsland D(1), Andersen K, Larsen JP, Lolk A, Nielsen H, Kragh-Sørensen P.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Rogaland Psychiatric Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway. aarsland@netpower.no

OBJECTIVE: To calculate the incidence of and determine possible risk factors for 
dementia in PD.
BACKGROUND: Dementia has important clinical consequences for patients with PD 
and their caregivers, but the incidence is unknown.
METHODS: A population-based cohort of nondemented patients with PD (n = 171) 
from the county of Rogaland, Norway, was assessed at baseline and 4.2 years 
later with a comprehensive evaluation of motor, cognitive, and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms. The diagnosis of dementia was made according to the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 3rd edition, revised (DSM-III-R) 
criteria, based on interview of the patient and a caregiver, cognitive rating 
scales, and neuropsychologic tests. A representative sample of 3,062 nondemented 
elderly subjects without PD served as control group.
RESULTS: Forty-three patients with PD were demented at follow-up evaluation, 
equivalent to an incidence rate of 95.3 per 1,000 person-years (95% CI, 68.2 to 
122.0). The risk for the development of dementia in patients with PD relative to 
the control subjects after adjusting for age, sex, and education was 5.9 (95% 
CI, 3.9 to 9.1). Predictive factors at baseline for dementia in PD in addition 
to age were Hoehn & Yahr score >2 (OR, 3.4; 95% CI, 1.3 to 8.6) and Mini-Mental 
State Examination score < 29 (OR, 3.3; 95% CI, 1.3 to 8.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with PD have an almost sixfold increased risk for becoming 
demented compared with subjects without PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.6.730
PMID: 11274306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


728. Novartis Found Symp. 2001;235:49-60; discussion 60-5. doi: 
10.1002/0470868694.ch6.

Multiple substrates of late-onset dementia: implications for brain protection.

Kalaria RN(1), Ballard CG, Ince PG, Kenny RA, McKeith IG, Morris CM, O'Brien JT, 
Perry EK, Perry RH, Edwardson JA.

Author information:
(1)MRC-Newcastle University Centre Development in Clinical Brian Ageing, Wolfson 
Research Centre, Institute for Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 6BE, UK.

Age is the single most important risk factor for progressive dementia in 
populations worldwide. In developed countries the prevalence of dementia is 
estimated to be 3-5% at age 65 years and expected to double every decade 
thereafter. Although there is ageing-related attrition of neural tissue 
accompanied by profound changes in brain glia, marked neuronal loss and severe 
cognitive impairment are associated with pathological changes. Accelerated 
somatic ageing of the vasculature comprising endothelial and smooth muscle cells 
and slowed glial replacement are also likely to pre-dispose to degenerative 
processes. Approximately 90% of patients with late-onset dementia have 
neuropathological features of Alzheimer's disease (AD), dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB), or vascular dementia (VaD), alone or in combination. Both AD and 
DLB reveal extensive amyloid beta deposition within senile plaques. 
Neurofibrillary tangles evident as tau pathology are much reduced in DLB where 
symptoms may be more related to cholinergic transmitter abnormalities than 
structural pathology. Depletion of brain acetylcholine is also encountered in 
VaD, which like AD and DLB may respond to cholinergic therapy. Cerebrovascular 
pathology, ischaemic brain damage and neurovascular instability resulting in 
cerebral hypoperfusion appears fundamental in the pathogenesis of late-onset 
dementia. The apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele, a major genetic susceptibility 
factor for AD also associated with cardiovascular pathology, may contribute to 
neurodegenerative changes through vascular mechanisms. The interrelationships of 
these multiple substrates of late-onset dementia have major implications for 
neuroprotective and disease slowing therapies. Measures that improve 
cardiovascular function and increase brain perfusion would be useful to 
attenuate cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1002/0470868694.ch6
PMID: 11280033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


729. Eur J Neurol. 2001 Mar;8(2):179-83. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2001.00198.x.

Interest in genetic testing in pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration (PPND): a 
family with frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17.

McRae CA(1), Diem G, Yamazaki TG, Mitek A, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)University of Denver, Denver, Colorado, USA.

The specific mutation on the tau gene responsible for a neurodegenerative 
disease known as pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration (PPND) was recently located. 
PPND family members are at risk for an autosomal dominant form of frontotemporal 
dementia with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). This study 
investigated whether individuals in this family would consider presymptomatic 
genetic testing. Surveys were sent to 66 at-risk individuals in the family; 
replies were received from 20 (30%). Family members were asked if they would 
consider having testing now or in the future, and to indicate their reasons for 
and against proceeding with testing. Fifty per cent (n=10) of those who were at 
risk and who responded indicated they would consider testing now, and 55% (n=11) 
would think about it in the future. The most frequently cited reasons to proceed 
with testing were to 'collaborate with research' (70%) and to 'know if my 
children are at risk' (45%). The most frequently cited reason not to pursue 
testing was 'I can enjoy my life more fully by not knowing' (50%). Results 
suggest that interest in determining whether they will manifest PPND is 
generally low among at-risk members of this family, despite wide support and 
participation in other research studies.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2001.00198.x
PMID: 11284997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


730. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2001 Feb;25(2):447-56. doi: 
10.1016/s0278-5846(01)80005-1.

[18F]FDG-PET study in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Okamura N(1), Arai H, Higuchi M, Tashiro M, Matsui T, Hu XS, Takeda A, Itoh M, 
Sasaki H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.

1. The authors report two siblings with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Both 
the older brother and the younger sister underwent positron emission tomography 
(PET) studies with [18F]-2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) during life. The FDG-PET 
study demonstrated unique and pronounced metabolic impairment in the occipital 
cortex in both patients. The clinical diagnosis of DLB in the sister was 
confirmed by autopsy. 2. FDG-PET images from 11 patients with Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), 7 patients with DLB and 10 age-matched normal subjects were 
obtained and analyzed by the statistical parametric mapping (SPM) method. The 
SPM demonstrated a widespread metabolic reduction in the DLB group. The 
reduction was particularly pronounced in the visual association cortex in the 
DLB group compared to the AD group irrespective of clinical severity of the 
disease. 3. These findings suggest that functional neuroimaging techniques, 
including FDG-PET, will provide a valuable diagnostic aid to differentiate DLB 
from AD, and this will help detect DLB patients in the early stage of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0278-5846(01)80005-1
PMID: 11294488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


731. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2000 Oct;40(10):986-92.

[Clinical features of late onset dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Maeda A(1), Yamada M, Yoshida R, Itoh Y, Sugai Y, Suematsu N, Otomo E, Mizusawa 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yokufukai Geriatric Hospital.

We conducted a retrospective study to elucidate clinical features of late onset 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Nineteen patients with DLB of neocortical 
category were neuropathologically diagnosed out of 500 consecutive autopsies at 
Yokufukai Hospital by using the pathological criteria of the consortium on DLB 
International Workshop. Medical history and clinical signs and symptoms were 
reviewed from the medical records. The age at onset was 55-88 years (mean 75.9 
years), the age at death was 62-91 years, and duration of illness was 1-14 
years. The initial symptoms were memory disturbance (10 cases), delirium (6 
cases), gait disturbance (3 cases), visual hallucination (3 cases). We divided 
nineteen cases of DLB into two group: the age of onset was under 75 years (9 
cases) and over 76 years (10 cases). The early onset group showed parkinsonism 
(67%), and visual hallucination (55%). The sensitivity of the clinical diagnosis 
of probable DLB based on DLB international workshop consensus criteria was 67%. 
On the other hand, the late onset group (10cases) presented with delirium (70%), 
parkinsonism (20%), and visual hallucination (30%). The sensitivity of a 
clinical diagnosis of probable DLB was 30%. Our results indicated considerable 
difficulty of the diagnosis of late onset DLB cases by the consensus criteria, 
requiring more sensitive criteria and diagnostic tests for DLB.

PMID: 11296375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


732. J Am Pharm Assoc (Wash). 2001 Mar-Apr;41(2):221-8. doi: 
10.1016/s1086-5802(16)31233-5.

Effects of estrogen on congnition mood, and degenerative brain diseases.

Shepherd JE(1).

Author information:
(1)janshep@pol.net

OBJECTIVE: To review research findings on the effects of estrogen on cognition, 
mood, memory, and degenerative brain disease in women.
DATA SOURCES: English-language journal articles published primarily since 1995, 
retrieved from a MEDLINE search and from bibliographies of selected reviews.
STUDY SELECTION: Investigational studies, clinical trials, and review articles 
examining the effects of estrogen on the central nervous system.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Although scientific study of the brain is in its infancy, 
numerous studies indicate that estrogen is essential to optimal brain function. 
Estrogen has been shown to increase cerebral blood flow, act as an 
antiinflammatory agent, enhance activity at neuronal synapses, and exert direct 
neuroprotective and neurotrophic effects on brain tissue. Through these varied 
mechanisms, estrogen strongly influences mood and cognition, and the decline of 
this hormone at menopause can produce significant emotional and cognitive 
problems in women.
CONCLUSION: Pharmacists can educate women about the various mood and memory 
changes that can occur during perimenopause and how estrogen replacement therapy 
may lead to improvements in brain function. The potential use of estrogen 
replacement therapy to reduce the risk of Alzheimer's disease and ease the 
symptoms of Parkinson's disease could have a profound effect on women, their 
families, and society as a whole.

DOI: 10.1016/s1086-5802(16)31233-5
PMID: 11297335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


733. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Apr 27;303(1):33-6. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)01694-9.

Nitric oxide synthase gene polymorphisms in Alzheimer's disease and dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Singleton AB(1), Gibson AM, McKeith IG, Ballard CG, Edwardson JA, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)CAMRC Building, Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Evidence suggests that vascular and inflammatory components may be important in 
the aetiology of dementia and genetic risk factors affecting these processes may 
therefore influence disease development. Recently, polymorphisms in the 
endothelial constitutive nitric oxide synthase 3 (NOS3) and also the inducible 
nitric oxide synthase gene (NOS2A) have been suggested to lead to increased risk 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) or dementia with Lewy bodies. We have studied the 
relationship of both these NOS gene polymorphisms to development of AD and 
dementia with Lewy bodies and find no evidence for association with either 
condition. We conclude that NOS gene polymorphisms do not alter disease risk in 
the majority of late-onset dementia cases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)01694-9
PMID: 11297817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


734. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jan 16-31;32(2):107-11.

[Variables associated with cognitive deterioration in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Sánchez Rodríguez JL(1), Sayago Arenas AM.

Author information:
(1)Depart. Psicología Básica. Psicobiología; Universidad de Salamanca. Facultad 
de Psicología, Salamanca, 37005, España. jlsanch@gugu.usal.es

INTRODUCTION: The relation between Parkinson s disease (EP) and dementia is both 
complex and controversial in definition, epidemiology and pathology. Data on the 
prevalence of dementia in EP vary widely owing to the different populations 
studied and differences in the definitions used. However, the large population 
studies (> 200,000 persons), with details of the clinical features of the cases 
reviewed, show a prevalence of nearly 30%.
OBJECTIVES: We wished to investigate whether certain clinical variables in 
patients with Parkinson s disease, with or without cognitive deterioration might 
affect the development of neurodegenerative conditions in these patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: The 23 patients with Parkinson s disease included in this 
study were selected on the clinico-diagnostic criteria of idiopathic Parkinson s 
disease, namely on the following clinical characteristics: resting tremor, 
bradykinesia, rigidity and postural instability; we considered that the patients 
had cognitive deterioration when they obtained scores below 28 points on the 
cognitive mini-examination, a Spanish adaptation of the Mini Mental State 
Examination, which has a maximum possible score of 35 points.
RESULTS: The results show significant differences in some of the variables 
studied.
CONCLUSION: We wished to show which variables, such as the age of onset of 
symptoms and degree of severity of the extrapyramidal disorder in patients with 
EP, are risk factors for development of neurodegenerative conditions in these 
patients.

PMID: 11299471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


735. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jan 16-31;32(2):172-5.

[Controversies about new drugs for the treatment of dementia. An unfavourable 
view].

[Article in Spanish]

Guardado-Santervás P(1).

Author information:
(1)Sección de Neurología. Hospital Torrecárdena de Almería, Almería, 04009, 
España. pguardados@meditex.es

Currently, the important part played by the senile plaque and neurofibrillary 
tangles puts amyloid protein and tau hyperphosphorylation at the centre of a new 
direction in the investigation of the molecular biology and treatment of 
Alzheimer s disease. OBJECTIVE. To consider the scientific evidence regarding 
the limitations of anticholinesterase treatment. DEVELOPMENT. Most of the 
clinical trials with anticholinesterase inhibitor drugs have been too short (3-6 
months in a disease lasting an average of 8.5 years). There is slight clinical 
improvement with a definite therapeutic ceiling. A small proportion of patients 
respond, but there is no way of knowing who these will be. Improvement occurs 
during the early stages of the illness. This means that when the illness is 
advanced or does not respond initially, treatment should be reconsidered. It is 
necessary for consensus to be reached to obtain uniformity of objectives and 
methodology in clinical trials, which have been heterogeneous until now, 
incorporating the results of epidemiological studies. CONCLUSION. Initial 
expectations of an analogy between the cholinergic deficit of Alzheimer s 
disease and the dopaminergic deficit of Parkinson s disease, with the effects on 
treatment implied by this, has been proved false with the passage of time and 
clinical, therapeutic and scientific experience.

PMID: 11299482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


736. Neuroreport. 2001 Apr 17;12(5):905-9. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200104170-00008.

Increased risk for frontotemporal dementia through interaction between tau 
polymorphisms and apolipoprotein E epsilon4.

Ingelson M(1), Fabre SF, Lilius L, Andersen C, Viitanen M, Almkvist O, Wahlund 
LO, Lannfelt L.

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institutet, NEUROTEC, Novum, KFC, Huddinge, Sweden.

The tau gene has an important role in frontotemporal dementia (FTD) as 
pathogenic mutations have been found in hereditary forms of the disease. 
Furthermore, a certain extended tau haplotype has been shown to increase the 
risk for progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, Parkinson's 
disease and, in interaction with the apolipoprotein E (apoE) epsilon4 allele, 
Alzheimer's disease. By microsatellite analysis we investigated an intronic tau 
polymorphism, in linkage disequilibrium with the extended tau haplotype, in FTD 
patients (n = 36) and healthy controls (n = 39). No association between any of 
the tau alleles/genotypes and FTD was seen, but certain tau alleles and apoE 
epsilon4 interactively increased the risk of FTD (p = 0.006). We thus propose 
that this extended tau haplotype in combination with apoE epsilon4 is a genetic 
risk factor for FTD.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-200104170-00008
PMID: 11303757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


737. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 2001 May;56(3):P152-9. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/56.3.p152.

Dementia is not inevitable: a population-based study of Danish centenarians.

Andersen-Ranberg K(1), Vasegaard L, Jeune B.

Author information:
(1)Aging Research Centre, University of Southern Denmark, Odense University, 
Odense, Denmark. karanberg@health.sdu.dk

The authors evaluated the prevalence of dementia in centenarians. In this 
population-based survey, persons living in Denmark who turned 100 during the 
period April 1, 1995--May 31, 1996 (N = 276) were interviewed and examined at 
their residences. Additional health information was retrieved from medical 
files, including the National Discharge Registry. A participation rate was 75%, 
and no differences were found between participants and nonparticipants regarding 
sex and type of housing. The prevalence of mild to severe dementia in 
centenarians was 51%; 37% had no signs of dementia. Among the 105 demented 
centenarians, 13 (12%) had diseases (vitamin B12 and folic acid deficiencies, 
hypothyroidism, Parkinson's disease) that could contribute to a dementia 
diagnosis. Of the remaining 92 demented participants, 46 (50%) had 1 one or more 
cerebro- or cardiovascular diseases known to be risk factors in the development 
of dementia. The prevalence of these risk factors was the same in demented and 
nondemented participants, whereas hypertension was significantly more frequent 
in nondemented than demented participants. Dementia is common but not inevitable 
in centenarians. Cerebro- and cardiovascular diseases are equally common in 
demented and nondemented persons.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/56.3.p152
PMID: 11316833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


738. Lakartidningen. 2001 Mar 28;98(13):1515-23.

[Drug treatment is beneficial also for elderly patients with Parkinson disease. 
Important to consider also other co-existing diseases].

[Article in Swedish]

Granérus AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Avdelningen för geriatrik, institutionen för nervsystem och rörelseorgan, 
Hälsouniversitetet, Linköping. anngr@ger.liu.se

Parkinson's disease is a relatively common disorder in elderly patients. With 
carefully performed treatment a considerable improvement can be seen also in 
patients of high age. L-dopa as well as other antiparkinsonian drugs should be 
used in lower doses than those subscribed for younger patients. Cognitive 
decline implies a certain risk for mental confusion, in which case the dose of 
the causing agent has to be lowered or the treatment interrupted.

PMID: 11330147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


739. Med Clin North Am. 2001 May;85(3):803-17. doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(05)70341-2.

Alzheimer's disease and related disorders.

Raskind MA(1), Peskind ER.

Author information:
(1)Northwest Network Veterans Affairs Mental Illness Research, Education and 
Clinical Center (MIRECC), Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.

The cholinesterase inhibitors provide the first clearly effective treatments for 
the cognitive deficits of AD and appear to have a beneficial effect on 
activities of daily living function and noncognitive behavior. There is 
increasing support for starting donepezil, rivastigmine, or galantamine early in 
the disease course and maintaining treatment at least during the early and 
middle stages of AD. Depressive signs and symptoms complicating AD are treated 
best with SSRIs. Placebo-controlled trials support the use of citalopram and 
sertraline in AD complicated by depression. The atypical antipsychotics are the 
first choice for managing psychosis and disruptive agitation in AD and 
particularly in the Lewy body variant of AD. Studies suggest that low-dose 
treatment with risperidone, 1 mg/d, or olanzapine, 5 mg/d, offers the optimal 
ratio of therapeutic to adverse effects.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-7125(05)70341-2
PMID: 11349485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


740. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Jun 1;305(1):70-2. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)01770-0.

Alcohol dehydrogenase polymorphism and Parkinson's disease.

Tan EK(1), Nagamitsu S, Matsuura T, Khajavi M, Jankovic J, Ondo W, Ashizawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, VA Medical Center, Baylor College of Medicine, 
Houston, TX, USA.

A particular alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) polymorphism (allele A1) in the 
promoter region of the gene has been recently demonstrated to be associated with 
increased risk of Parkinson's disease (PD). In a case control study, we examine 
frequencies of ADH A1 allele in 100 PD patients (i.e. 200 alleles), 100 diseased 
controls (i.e. 200 alleles), and 194 healthy controls (i.e. 388 alleles). In 
addition, we study possible association of a combined non-amyloid component of 
plaque (NACP-Rep 1) allele and ADH A1 allele with risk of PD. There was no 
statistical significance of the frequencies of ADH A1 allele between PD patients 
12/200 (6%), diseased controls 13/200 (6.5%), and healthy controls 20/388 
(5.2%). No strong evidence of an association was found between ADH A1 allele and 
PD susceptibility in our study patients. There was also no suggestion of linkage 
disequilibrium between NACP-Rep 1 and ADH A1 alleles.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)01770-0
PMID: 11356310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


741. Curr Med Chem. 2001 Jun;8(7):721-38. doi: 10.2174/0929867013372922.

Chemistry and biochemistry of oxidative stress in neurodegenerative disease.

Sayre LM(1), Smith MA, Perry G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 
44106, USA.

The age-related neurodegenerative diseases exemplified by Alzheimer&hyp;s 
disease (AD), Lewy body diseases such as Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS), and Huntington&hyp;s disease are characterized by the 
deposition of abnormal forms of specific proteins in the brain. Although several 
factors appear to underlie the pathological depositions, the cause of neuronal 
death in each disease appears to be multifactorial. In this regard, evidence in 
each case for a role of oxidative stress is provided by the finding that the 
pathological deposits are immunoreactive to antibodies recognizing protein 
side-chains modified either directly by reactive oxygen or nitrogen species, or 
by products of lipid peroxidation or glycoxidation. Although the source(s) of 
increased oxidative damage are not entirely clear, the findings of increased 
localization of redox-active transition metals in the brain regions most 
affected is consistent with their contribution to oxidative stress. It is 
tempting to speculate that free radical oxygen chemistry plays a pathogenetic 
role in all these neurodegenerative conditions, though it is as yet undetermined 
what types of oxidative damage occur early in pathogenesis, and what types are 
secondary manifestations of dying neurons. Delineation of the profile of 
oxidative damage in each disease will provide clues to how the specific neuronal 
populations are differentially affected by the individual disease conditions.

DOI: 10.2174/0929867013372922
PMID: 11375746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


742. Neurology. 2001 May 22;56(10):1386-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.10.1386.

Progressive brain atrophy on serial MRI in dementia with Lewy bodies, AD, and 
vascular dementia.

O'Brien JT(1), Paling S, Barber R, Williams ED, Ballard C, McKeith IG, Gholkar 
A, Crum WR, Rossor MN, Fox NC.

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. j.t.o'brien@ncl.ac.uk

The authors determined rates of brain atrophy, as assessed by the boundary shift 
integral on serial MRI, in patients with dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB, n = 
10), AD (n = 9), vascular dementia (VaD, n = 9), and age-matched controls (n = 
20). Mean % +/- SD atrophy rates per year were as follows: DLB, 1.4 +/- 1.1; AD, 
2.0 +/- 0.9; VaD, 1.9 +/- 1.1; and controls, 0.5 +/- 0.7. Dementia subjects had 
higher rates than controls (p < 0.001), but there were no significant 
differences between the three dementia groups. The authors found accelerating 
atrophy with increasing severity of cognitive impairment, further emphasizing 
the need for early diagnosis and intervention in dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.10.1386
PMID: 11376193 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


743. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2001 May;16(5):499-503. doi: 10.1002/gps.381.

The progression of cognitive impairment in dementia with Lewy bodies, vascular 
dementia and Alzheimer's disease.

Ballard C(1), O'Brien J, Morris CM, Barber R, Swann A, Neill D, McKeith I.

Author information:
(1)Reader in Old Age Psychiatry, University of Newcastle, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. c.g.ballard@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the rate of progression or associations of 
cognitive impairment in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), or the associations of 
accelerated decline.
METHOD: Dementia patients from a case register were evaluated at baseline and 1 
year follow-up using the Cambridge Assessment for Mental Disorders in the 
Elderly, section B (CAMCOG) and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) to 
determine the rate of cognitive decline. Operationalized clinical diagnoses were 
applied (NINCDS ADRDA for Alzheimer's disease (AD), NINCDS AIRENS for vascular 
dementia (VaD) and consensus criteria for DLB).
RESULTS: One hundred and ninety-three patients completed annual MMSE schedules 
(AD, 101; DLB, 64; VaD, 38), of whom 154 completed the CAMCOG. The magnitude of 
cognitive decline (MMSE, 4-5 points; CAMCOG, 12-14 points) was similar in each 
of the dementias. The strongest predictor of accelerated cognitive decline in 
DLB was the apolipoprotein E4 allele (17.5 vs 8.3 points decline on the CAMCOG).
CONCLUSION: Over 1 year, DLB, VaD and AD patients had similar rates of cognitive 
decline overall. Apolipoprotein E4 may be an important predictor of more rapid 
decline in DLB.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd

DOI: 10.1002/gps.381
PMID: 11376466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


744. Neurobiol Aging. 2001 May-Jun;22(3):435-8. doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(01)00210-x.

Depressed baroreflex sensitivity in patients with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
disease.

Szili-Török T(1), Kálmán J, Paprika D, Dibó G, Rózsa Z, Rudas L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Intensive Care Unit, Albert Szent-Györgyi Medical 
University, Szeged, Hungary. szili@card.azr.nl

Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's dementia (AD) are often associated with 
an autonomic neuropathy. The extent of autonomic involvement, however is poorly 
defined and unpredictable. In order to assess the autonomic cardiovascular 
regulation baroreflex sensitivity (BRS) was determined non-invasively in 23 
patients (age: 65 +/- 9.3 years) with PD and 24 patients with AD (age: 72.3 +/- 
7.2 years). The results were compared with those on 22 healthy age- and 
sex-matched volunteers. Patients with PD and AD exhibited marked abnormalities 
in cardiovascular autonomic reflex regulation showed by markedly depressed BRS. 
The possible predictive value of centrally based depression of baroreflex 
sensitivity necessitates further studies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(01)00210-x
PMID: 11378250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


745. Mov Disord. 2001 May;16(3):407-23. doi: 10.1002/mds.1096.

Open interconnected model of basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuitry and its 
relevance to the clinical syndrome of Huntington's disease.

Joel D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Tel Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Tel Aviv 69978, 
Israel. djoel@post.tau.ac.il

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2001 May;16(3):405-6.
    Mov Disord. 2002 Mar;17(2):429-30; author reply 431-2.

The early stages of Huntington's disease (HD) present with motor, cognitive, and 
emotional symptoms. Correspondingly, current models implicate dysfunction of the 
motor, associative, and limbic basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits. Available 
data, however, indicate that in the early stages of the disease, striatal damage 
is mainly restricted to the associative striatum. Based on an open 
interconnected model of basal ganglia-thalamocortical organization, we provide a 
detailed account of the mechanisms by which associative striatal pathology may 
lead to the complex pattern of motor, cognitive, and emotional symptoms of early 
HD. According to this account, the degeneration of a direct and several indirect 
pathways arising from the associative striatum leads to impaired functioning of: 
(1) the motor circuit, resulting in chorea and bradykinesia, (2) the associative 
circuit, resulting in abnormal eye movements, "frontal-like" cognitive deficits 
and "cognitive disinhibition," and (3) the limbic circuit, resulting in 
affective and psychiatric symptoms. When relevant, this analysis is aided by 
comparing the symptomatology of HD patients to that of patients with mild to 
moderate Parkinson's disease, since in the latter there is similar dysfunction 
of direct pathways but opposite dysfunction of indirect pathways. Finally, we 
suggest a potential novel treatment of HD and provide supportive evidence from a 
rat model of the disease.

Copyright 2001 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.1096
PMID: 11391734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


746. Neurology. 2001 Jun 12;56(11):1528-33. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.11.1528.

CSF detection of the 14-3-3 protein in unselected patients with dementia.

Burkhard PR(1), Sanchez JC, Landis T, Hochstrasser DF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Piere.Burkhard@hcuge.ch

Comment in
    Neurology. 2002 Feb 12;58(3):509-10.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the usefulness of the 14-3-3 test in patients with 
dementia of various causes.
BACKGROUND: Recent reports have suggested that the detection of the 14-3-3 
protein in the CSF of patients with Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease is a highly 
sensitive and specific marker of the disease that might be used as a diagnostic 
criterion. We examined the validity of this test when applied to a cohort of 
unselected patients prospectively examined for an ongoing dementing process.
METHODS: One hundred patients underwent an extensive neurologic examination for 
dementia, including a CSF 14-3-3 protein immunoblotting assay. Final clinical 
diagnoses were compared with the qualitative results of the test, and 
statistical measures of test validity were carried out.
RESULTS: We found a positive test in 14 of 100 patients, only two of whom had 
definite Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease. Positive results were found in patients 
with various degenerative dementias, including AD (4), frontotemporal dementia 
(2), and dementia with Lewy body (1), and in patients with vascular dementia 
(1), carcinomatous meningitis (1), and anoxic encephalopathy (1). In two other 
positive patients, the dementia could not be confidently classified. 
Sensitivity, specificity, and negative predictive value were fairly good, but 
positive predictive value was poor. Similar results were found independently of 
the disease duration. There was no correlation between intensity nor pattern of 
the 14-3-3 protein expression and diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: The 14-3-3 test is not valid for discriminating between 
Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease and non-Creutzfeldt--Jakob disease in unselected 
patients with dementia. Positive results are found in various degenerative and 
secondary, prion-unrelated dementias.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.11.1528
PMID: 11402110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


747. Aging (Milano). 2001 Apr;13(2):64-7. doi: 10.1007/BF03351527.

Age-associated diseases and conditions: implications for decreasing late life 
morbidity.

Brody JA(1), Grant MD.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology and Biostatistics Division, School of Public Health, University 
of Illinois at Chicago, 60612-7299, USA. Brodyj@uic.edu

We discuss two types of age-associated diseases; aging-dependent such as 
Alzheimer's disease and congestive heart failure which increase logarithmically 
with age, versus age-dependent such as multiple sclerosis and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis which occur at proscribed ages, and then occurrence of new 
cases ceases or diminishes with further aging. Prevention strategies with both 
types emphasize postponement or delay of onset. The non-fatal aging-dependent 
diseases and conditions are an accumulating burden as we age, and increase 
overall morbidity in late years. These include Alzheimer's disease and other 
dementias, Parkinson's disease, loss of vision and hearing, incontinence, 
osteoporosis and hip fracture, osteoarthritis and depression. With mortality 
postponed, we will be living for many years at old and vulnerable ages. Life's 
quality will be reasonable for most. Still, increasing the chance that all will 
experience this desirable outcome requires pursuing the means to delay the onset 
of the physical and social events which we categorize as the non-fatal 
aging-dependent diseases and conditions. We must recognize that each added year 
occurs at the tip of an exponential curve where risk is maximal.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03351527
PMID: 11405387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


748. Arch Neurol. 2001 Jun;58(6):953-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.6.953.

Autopsy-confirmed familial early-onset Alzheimer disease caused by the l153V 
presenilin 1 mutation.

Janssen JC(1), Lantos PL, Fox NC, Harvey RJ, Beck J, Dickinson A, Campbell TA, 
Collinge J, Hanger DP, Cipolotti L, Stevens JM, Rossor MN.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Group, Institute of Neurology, National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, England.

BACKGROUND: Three affected individuals are described from a small English 
kindred with early-onset autosomal dominant familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) 
caused by a leucine-to-valine change at codon 153 (L153V) of the presenilin 1 
(PSEN1) gene.
METHODS: Clinical information on the pedigree was collected directly from family 
members and from hospital records. Samples of DNA were screened by means of 
direct sequencing of all coding exons of PSEN1. One patient underwent 
neuropathological examination.
RESULTS: Mean age at onset of symptoms was 35.3 years (95% confidence interval 
[CI], 34.6-36.0 years); at death, 44.0 years (95% CI, 39.1-48.9 years). Mean 
duration of illness was 8.3 years (95% CI, 4.7-11.9 years). Myoclonus was a late 
feature in 1 patient; seizures were not reported in any subjects. Spastic 
paraparesis and extrapyramidal signs were absent. The neuropsychometric profile 
of 1 patient showed relatively preserved naming skills in the setting of global 
cognitive deficits. Results of neuropathological examination demonstrated the 
signature lesions of Alzheimer disease and the presence of occasional cortical 
Lewy bodies.
CONCLUSIONS: The PSEN1 L153V mutation lies in the main mutation cluster of PSEN1 
in the second transmembrane domain. It causes early-onset FAD with clinical 
features similar to those of other reported FAD pedigrees.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.58.6.953
PMID: 11405810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


749. J Neurol Sci. 2001 May 1;186(1-2):7-11. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00480-4.

REM sleep behavior disorder in sleep-disordered patients with versus without 
Parkinson's disease: is there a need for polysomnography?

Eisensehr I(1), v Lindeiner H, Jäger M, Noachtar S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-University 
of Munich, Marchioninistrasse 15, 81377 Munich, Germany. 
eisen@nefo.med.uni-muenchen.de

We reviewed the polysomnograms (PSGs) of 292 consecutive patients with sleep 
disorders (Parkinson's disease (PD), n=19, other sleep disorders, n=273) to 
investigate the sensitivity and specificity of the clinical diagnosis of rapid 
eye movement behavior disorder (RBD) compared with polysomnographic diagnosis. 
Patients with dementia, multiple system atrophy, or any other neurodegenerative 
disease were excluded. RBD was diagnosed clinically if the minimal criteria, 
according to the guidelines given in the International Sleep Disorders 
Classification, were fulfilled. The following PSG criteria were required for 
diagnosis of RBD: REM sleep without muscle atonia seen in PSG associated with 
motor behavior visible in the PSG-synchronized videotape. Nine of nineteen PD 
patients (47%) had RBD. RBD occurred in only four patients without PD (1.8%). 
The sensitivity of specialized interviews for identifying RBD clinically was 
good in non-PD patients (sensitivity: 100%, specificity: 99.6%). However, the 
sensitivity was poor (33%) with a specificity of 90%, in patients with PD. We 
conclude that the diagnosis of RBD in patients with PD requires PSG, whereas 
interviews are sufficient for diagnosing RBD in non-PD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00480-4
PMID: 11412865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


750. Isr Med Assoc J. 2001 Jun;3(6):435-8.

Heredity in Parkinson's disease: new findings.

Lev N(1), Melamed E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center (Beilinson Campus), Petah 
Tiqva, Israel. niril@hotmail.com

Multiple factors have been hypothesized over the last century to be causative or 
contributory for Parkinson's disease. Hereditary factors have recently emerged 
as a major focus of Parkinson's disease research. Until recently most of the 
research on the etiology of Parkinson's disease concentrated on environmental 
factors, and the possibility that genetic factors contribute significantly to 
the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease has been neglected. However, it has 
become increasingly apparent that even in sporadic cases, the disease most 
likely reflects a combination of genetic susceptibility and an unknown 
environmental insult. Moreover, the identification of genes and proteins that 
may cause hereditary parkinsonism substantially contributes to our ability to 
understand the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease and may help in the early 
identification of the disease and its treatment. The discovery of 
alpha-synuclein mutations in families with autosomal dominant Parkinson's 
disease sheds light on its role in sporadic Parkinson's disease. It seems that 
this protein tends to aggregate when the cellular milieu is altered [14-16]. The 
question as to the exact changes that cause its deposition remains open. One of 
the major possibilities is oxidative stress [16]. The role of these aggregates 
in neuronal cell death is also still unclear. Transgenic mice expressing 
wild-type human alpha-synuclein developed progressive accumulation of 
alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin-immunoreactive inclusions in neurons in the 
neocortex, hippocampus and the substantia nigra. These alterations were 
associated with loss of dopaminergic terminals and motor impairments [24]. This 
finding suggests that accumulation of alpha-synuclein may play a causal role in 
sporadic Parkinson's disease as well. The parkin protein seems to be a crucial 
survival factor for nigral neurons [15]. The parkin protein is related to the 
ubiquitin pathway, which is important in the elimination of damaged proteins. 
Ubiquitin-mediated degradation of proteins plays a central role in the control 
of numerous processes, including signal transduction, receptor and 
transcriptional regulations, programmed cell death, and breakdown of abnormal 
proteins that may interfere with normal cell functions. Further studies on the 
function of Parkin protein and its relation to the ubiquitin pathway could 
elucidate at least one of the molecular mechanisms of nigral neuronal death. A 
mutation in the ubiquitin carboxy-teminal hydrolase L1 gene also implies the 
importance of the ubiquitin pathway in Parkinson's disease. Abnormal tau protein 
was found to be the cause of familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism. 
It tends to form filamentous structures, which may lead to neuronal death. 
Elucidation of the molecular mechanism of neuronal death in this disease may 
contribute to our understanding of sporadic diseases with tau accumulation, such 
as corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, Pick's disease, 
Alzheimer's disease and possibly also the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. 
Other genetic loci have been identified by linkage analysis of patients with 
familial parkinsonism. These loci conceal other genes and proteins that may be 
pivotal factors in the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. The discovery of 
genetic mutations in patients with parkinsonism may offer us new insights into 
the understanding of the pathways leading to neuronal death and development of 
Parkinson's disease. It may also help in the early identification of susceptible 
people to this disease and possibly in developing new treatment strategies.

PMID: 11433638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


751. Am J Pathol. 2001 Jul;159(1):339-44. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9440(10)61700-2.

A close association of torsinA and alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies: a 
fluorescence resonance energy transfer study.

Sharma N(1), Hewett J, Ozelius LJ, Ramesh V, McLean PJ, Breakefield XO, Hyman 
BT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, and the 
Department of Neurology, Molecular Neurogenetics Unit, Massachusetts General 
Hospital East, Charlestown, Massachusetts. Albert Einstein College of Medicine, 
Bronx, New York.

TorsinA, a novel protein in which a mutation causes dominant, early onset 
torsion dystonia, may serve as a chaperone for misfolded proteins that require 
refolding or degradation. It has been hypothesized that misfolded 
alpha-synuclein, a protein in which two mutations cause autosomal dominantly 
inherited Parkinson's disease, serves as a nidus for the development of a Lewy 
body. We hypothesized that torsinA plays a role in the cellular processing of 
alpha-synuclein. We demonstrate that anti-torsin antibodies stain Lewy bodies 
and Lewy neurites in the substantia nigra and cortex. Using sensitive 
fluorescent resonance energy transfer (FRET) techniques, we find evidence of a 
close association between torsinA and alpha-synuclein in Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9440(10)61700-2
PMCID: PMC1850427
PMID: 11438481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


752. Aging (Milano). 2001 Jun;13(3):171-82. doi: 10.1007/BF03351476.

Natural history of Alzheimer's disease.

Honig LS(1), Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, and Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032-3795, USA. 
lh456@columbia.edu

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the principal cause of dementia in the elderly, and 
affects about 15 million people worldwide. The earliest symptom is usually an 
insidious impairment of memory. As the disease progresses, there is increasing 
impairment of language and other cognitive functions. Problems occur with naming 
and word-finding, and later with verbal and written comprehension and 
expression. Visuospatial, analytic and abstract reasoning abilities, judgment, 
and insight become affected. Behavioral changes may include delusions, 
hallucinations, irritability, agitation, verbal or physical aggression, 
wandering, and disinhibition. Ultimately, there is loss of self-hygiene, eating, 
dressing, and ambulatory abilities, and incontinence and motor dysfunction. 
Before diagnosis of AD, individuals may have memory complaints, which represent 
a period of mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Before MCI, there is a prodromal, 
ill-defined presymptomatic period of disease ('pre-MCI"). In this review, we 
particularly focus on these earliest stages. We also discuss the more advanced 
stages of AD, and address factors that may influence disease course. 
Understanding the natural history of AD will allow better targeting of the 
disease-modifying treatments that are on the horizon.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03351476
PMID: 11442300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


753. Semin Neurol. 2001 Jun;21(2):177-87. doi: 10.1055/s-2001-15263.

Atypical motor neuron disease and related motor syndromes.

Verma A(1), Bradley WG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami School of Medicine, FL 33136, 
USA.

There is an imperative need for the early diagnosis of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/motor neuron disease (ALS/MND) in the current era of emerging 
treatments. When evaluating the patient with ALS/MND, the neurologist must 
consider a number of other motor neuron disorders and related motor syndromes 
that may have clinical features resembling ALS/MND. The revised Airlie House-El 
Escorial diagnostic criteria have been established through the consensus of 
experts meeting at workshops. However, by definition, using these criteria a 
patient is likely to have fairly advanced disease at the time of a definitive 
ALS/MND diagnosis. The reasons for the difficulty in making an early ALS/MND 
diagnosis are several. No surrogate diagnostic marker currently exists for 
ALS/MND. ALS/MND at its onset is heterogeneous in clinical presentation, its 
clinical course is variable, and several clinical variants are recognized. In 
addition, certain motor syndromes, such as monomelic amyotrophy, postpolio 
muscular atrophy, and multifocal motor neuropathy, can clinically mimic ALS/MND. 
Therefore, not only may the diagnosis of ALS/MND be clinically missed in the 
early stages, but worse, the patient may be wrongly labeled as having ALS/MND. 
The diagnosis of ALS/MND requires a combination of upper motor neuron (UMN) and 
lower motor neuron (LMN) involvement. Motor syndromes in which the deficit is 
restricted to the UMN or LMN through the entire course of the disease are 
described as atypical MND in this review. Approximately 5% of patients with 
ALS/MND have overt dementia with a characteristic frontal affect. ALS/MND with 
parkinsonism and dementia is rare outside the western Pacific region. The 
clinical course of motor disorder in these overlap syndromes does not differ 
from that in typical ALS/MND.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2001-15263
PMID: 11442326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


754. Neuroreport. 2001 Jul 20;12(10):2085-90. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200107200-00009.

Ubiquitin-binding protein p62 is present in neuronal and glial inclusions in 
human tauopathies and synucleinopathies.

Kuusisto E(1), Salminen A, Alafuzoff I.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neuroscience and Neurology, Section of Neuropathology, 
University of Kuopio, P.O. Box 1627, FIN-70211 Kuopio, Finland.

We examined the immunoreactivity of ubiquitin-binding protein p62 and its 
association with ubiquitin (Ub), alpha-synuclein, and paired helical filament 
(PHF)-tau in the affected brain areas of human tauopathies and 
synucleinopathies. Ubiquitin-binding protein p62 is a widely expressed protein 
that can bind to Ub noncovalently and is involved in several signalling 
pathways, making p62 a candidate regulator of Ub-mediated proteolysis. We show 
that p62 immunoreactivity co-localizes with neuronal and glial Ub-containing 
inclusions in Alzheimer's disease, Pick's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, 
Parkinson's disease, and multiple system atrophy. This is the first 
demonstration of a common protein component, apart from Ub, that is present in 
both PHF-tau and alpha-synuclein inclusions. In both tauo- and 
synucleinopathies, the staining patterns for p62 and Ub were markedly similar, 
suggesting that a common mechanism which requires interaction of p62 and Ub 
contributes to the formation of PHF-tau and alpha-synuclein inclusions.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-200107200-00009
PMID: 11447312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


755. Ann Neurol. 2001 Jul;50(1):117-20. doi: 10.1002/ana.1083.

Familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism with a novel mutation at an 
intron 10+11-splice site in the tau gene.

Miyamoto K(1), Kowalska A, Hasegawa M, Tabira T, Takahashi K, Araki W, Akiguchi 
I, Ikemoto A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University, Japan. miyamo@ncnp.go.jp

We report a case of familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism 
characterized by early onset with mental retardation. The patient died at the 
age of 54; neuronal loss was severe in the frontal and temporal cortices, globus 
pallidus, substantia nigra, red nucleus and dentate nucleus. Anti-tau-positive 
fibrillary changes were observed in neurons and glia in these regions. Although 
the patient had 2 novel point mutations of the tau gene, P301P (CCG to CCA) and 
an intron 10+11-splice site (T to C), exon trapping analysis indicated that the 
latter was pathogenic.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.1083
PMID: 11456301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


756. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2001 Jul;157(6-7):633-7.

Genetic epidemiology of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in Europe.

EUROCJD Group.

The prion protein gene was studied in patients with definite or probable 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) registered by national CJD units of 6 European 
countries. The role of genetic factors in CJD was also investigated by comparing 
the frequencies of a family history of dementia and Parkinson's disease in CJD 
cases and matched controls. Codon 129 genotype was examined in 337 CJD cases of 
whom 73.2 p. 100 were homozygous for methionine, 10.9 p. 100 were homozygous for 
valine and 15.7 p. 100 were heterozygous. The genotype frequencies were not 
statistically different across countries. Future differences, if any, would 
constitute a meaningful signal for the surveillance of CJD in Europe. A prion 
protein gene mutation was found in 14.5 p. 100 of CJD cases; only 40 p. 100 of 
them had a known family history of CJD. The case-control study showed that 
positive family histories of dementia and Parkinson's disease were both 
associated with CJD. Although recall bias is the most likely explanation for 
this finding, the hypothesis that neurodegenerative diseases might share unknown 
genetic risk factors can also be considered.

PMID: 11458182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


757. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2001;108(5):571-80. doi: 10.1007/s007020170057.

Correlating rates of cerebral atrophy in Parkinson's disease with measures of 
cognitive decline.

Hu MT(1), White SJ, Chaudhuri KR, Morris RG, Bydder GM, Brooks DJ.

Author information:
(1)Robert Steiner MR Unit, Imperial College School of Medicine, Hammersmith 
Hospital, London, United Kingdom. michele.hu@csc.mrc.ac.uk

We studied eight clinically non-demented PD patients and ten age-matched 
controls with serial volumetric T1-weighted MRI. All PD patients underwent full 
neuropsychological testing at baseline and follow up scans. Sub-voxel 
coregistration of the serial MRI scans with quantification of changes in total 
brain substance and ventricular size per year was performed. The PD patients had 
significant reductions in both percentage and absolute annual brain volume loss 
when compared to age-matched controls (p < 0.001). There were significant 
correlations between reductions in percentage brain volume loss and estimated 
reductions in performance IQ (r = 0.841, p = 0.004) and full scale IQ (r = 0.63, 
p = 0.049), measured by subtracting IQ measures at time of follow up scan from 
premorbid estimates. In conclusion, PD patients have a significant rate of 
median brain volume loss [10.35 (range) 6.69-16.90 ml/year] with no significant 
loss seen in age-matched controls, and these changes correlate with global 
measures of cognitive decline. Further longitudinal studies could evaluate 
whether serial volumetric MRI is a useful technique in predicting the 
preclinical onset of dementia in Parkinson's disease patients, and its role in 
the assessment of putative treatments for slowing disease progression.

DOI: 10.1007/s007020170057
PMID: 11459077 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


758. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2001 Jul;7(5):535-43. doi: 10.1017/s1355617701755014.

Detection of mild cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease patients with the 
WAIS-R NI.

Peavy GM(1), Salmon D, Bear PI, Paulsen JS, Cahn DA, Hofstetter CR, Kaplan EF, 
Delis DC, Shult CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, USA. 
gpeavy@ucsd.edu

The relative insensitivity of traditional IQ tests to mild cognitive deficits 
has led investigators to develop a version of the widely used Wechsler 
intelligence scales that allows quantitative analysis of underlying qualitative 
responses. This instrument, the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised as a 
Neuropsychological Instrument (WAIS-R NI) was administered to 16 Parkinson's 
disease (PD) patients and 30 normal controls (NC). The 2 groups did not differ 
significantly in mean age or education, or on their mean Mattis Dementia Rating 
Scale score. Relative to NC participants, PD patients showed decreased visual 
attention span, longer response latencies, slower visuomotor processing, and 
more stimulus-bound errors. Many of the WAIS-R NI measures were able to detect 
cognitive impairment in a greater percentage of patients than the traditional 
WAIS-R measures, making it easier to identify deficits that could affect quality 
of life early in the course of the disease.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355617701755014
PMID: 11459105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


759. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2001 Jul;16(7):667-79. doi: 10.1002/gps.403.

Neuropathological correlates to clinically defined dementia with Lewy bodies.

Londos E(1), Passant U, Gustafson L, Brun A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychogeriatrics, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden. 
elisabet.londos@psychistr.lu.se

OBJECTIVES: To analyse the neuropathological changes behind clinically defined 
dementia with Lewy bodies (clinDLB) compared with clinically diagnosed 
Alzheimer's disease (clinAD).
METHODS: The prevalence of neuropathological findings in 48 clinDLB and 45 
clinAD cases was compared. Sixteen clinDLB and 10 clinAD cases were reassessed 
with alpha-synuclein staining for Lewy bodies (LB).
RESULTS: Alzheimer pathology was found in 81% of the clinDLB and 93% of the 
clinAD cases. The clinDLB group had a higher prevalence of frontal white matter 
pathology, mostly of ischemic type, and a more severe degeneration of the 
substantia nigra compared with the clinAD group. In hematoxylin-eosin staining, 
LBs were identified in seven (15%) of the clinDLB and in four (9%) of the clinAD 
group. In alpha-synuclein staining, 38% of the clinDLB and 40% of the clinAD 
cases exhibited LBs. The cases without LBs, in the clinDLB group, had AD 
pathology in combination with frontal white matter disease. Vascular pathology 
of significant degree was prevalent in more than 40% of all the cases with 
verified LBs regardless of clinical diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: Consecutive dementia cases, fulfilling the clinical consensus 
criteria for DLB, may exhibit combinations of neuropathological changes which in 
themselves can explain the clinical picture of DLB even when LBs are absent.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.403
PMID: 11466745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


760. Curr Opin Neurol. 2001 Aug;14(4):491-7. doi: 10.1097/00019052-200108000-00010.

Recent advances in the understanding of tau protein and movement disorders.

Arvanitakis Z(1), Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Tau plays an important role in movement disorders. The accumulation of 
pathological tau is a major substrate of frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, progressive supranuclear palsy, and 
corticobasal degeneration. Over the past year, several new mutations on the tau 
gene have been found. These mutations have been classified into three groups: 
(i) mutations in constitutively spliced exons; (ii) mutations in the 
alternatively spliced exon 10; and (iii) mutations of the exon 10 5' splice 
site. Some patients presenting with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17 transiently respond to levodopa therapy. The 
significance of Pick bodies was recognized by a recent study on kindred with the 
Glu342Val tau mutation. In sporadic cases of progressive supranuclear palsy, the 
presence of the H1 haplotype was found to be a risk factor. Corticobasal 
degeneration shares a common genetic background with progressive supranuclear 
palsy. This opens the question of whether corticobasal degeneration represents a 
separate disorder or a spectrum of disease with progressive supranuclear palsy. 
However, distinguishing features are observed, and include oculomotor 
abnormalities, which may help to differentiate these two disorders on clinical 
grounds. Despite recent advances in the understanding of the tauopathies, there 
are still no curative therapies available. It is hoped that studies in 
transgenic tau animal models will lead to the development of successful 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200108000-00010
PMID: 11470966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


761. Curr Opin Neurol. 2001 Aug;14(4):499-504. doi: 10.1097/00019052-200108000-00011.

Management of psychosis in Parkinson's disease.

Wolters EC(1), Berendse HW.

Author information:
(1)Vrije Universiteit Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 
E.Wolters@VUmc.nl

Psychosis is quite common in Parkinson's disease (approximately 25% of patients) 
and therefore constitutes a serious public health problem. All patients 
suffering from idiopathic Parkinson's disease, and especially elderly and 
demented patients, are at risk of developing delusions or hallucinations. The 
most prominent psychotogenic factors are dopaminomimetic agents, which may 
induce dopamine hypersensitivity in the frontal and limbic dopamine projection 
regions, and consequently, either directly or indirectly, elicit psychotic signs 
and symptoms. A Parkinson's disease-related cholinergic deficit in combination 
with an age-related further loss of cholinergic integrity also plays a prominent 
role. Psychosis in Parkinson's disease patients appears to be a more important 
contributor to caregiver distress than motor parkinsonism. Psychosis therefore 
probably represents the single greatest risk factor for nursing home placement. 
Typical antipsychotic drugs, because of their selective dopamine receptor 
antagonistic effects, can reduce psychotic signs but at the cost of an increase 
in parkinsonism. As a consequence of a non-selective antagonism at both 
serotonergic and dopaminergic receptors, atypical antipsychotic drugs are 
associated with fewer extrapyramidal side-effects. On the other hand, 
hypersensitivity to these agents may induce delirium or a malignant neuroleptic 
syndrome. Atypical antipsychotic agents such as clozapine, quetiapine and 
olanzapine should therefore be started at very low doses that are increased 
gradually. Cholinomimetic therapy may prove to be helpful in the prevention and 
treatment of psychotic manifestations in Parkinson's disease patients, given the 
effects observed in patients suffering from dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200108000-00011
PMID: 11470967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


762. Mov Disord. 2001 Jul;16(4):622-30. doi: 10.1002/mds.1120.

Association of REM sleep behavior disorder and neurodegenerative disease may 
reflect an underlying synucleinopathy.

Boeve BF(1), Silber MH, Ferman TJ, Lucas JA, Parisi JE.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center and Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, 
Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. bboeve@mayo.edu

Our objective was to examine whether rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior 
disorder occurs in disproportionally greater frequency in multiple system 
atrophy (MSA), Parkinson's disease (PD), and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 
collectively known as the synucleinopathies, compared to other 
nonsynucleinopathy neurodegenerative disorders. In study 1, we reviewed the 
clinical records of 398 consecutive patients evaluated at Mayo Clinic Rochester 
for parkinsonism and/or cognitive impairment. The frequency of suspected and 
polysomnogram (PSG)-confirmed REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) among subjects 
with the synucleinopathies MSA, PD, or DLB was compared to the frequency among 
subjects with the nonsynucleinopathies Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP), mild cognitive impairment (MCI), primary progressive aphasia (PPA), and 
posterior cortical atrophy (PCA). In study 2, we reviewed the clinical records 
of 360 consecutive patients evaluated at Mayo Clinic Jacksonville for 
parkinsonism and/or cognitive impairment. The frequency of probable RBD among 
patients with PD and DLB was compared to the frequency among patients with AD 
and MCI. In study 3, we reviewed the brain biopsy or postmortem autopsy 
diagnoses of 23 Mayo Clinic Rochester patients who had been clinically examined 
for possible RBD and a neurodegenerative disorder. In study 1, patients with 
MSA, PD, or DLB were more likely to have probable and PSG-confirmed RBD compared 
to subjects with the nonsynucleinopathies (probable RBD 77/120=64% vs. 7/278=3%, 
p < 0.01; PSG-confirmed RBD 47/120=39% vs. 1/278=0%, p < 0.01). In study 2, 
patients with PD and DLB were more likely to have probable RBD compared to those 
with AD and MCI (56% vs. 2%, p < 0.01). In study 3, of the 23 autopsied patients 
who had been questioned about possible RBD, 10 were clinically diagnosed with 
RBD. The neuropathologic diagnoses in these 10 included Lewy body disease in 
nine, and MSA in one. Of the other 13 cases, 12 did not have a history 
suggesting RBD, and the one case who did had normal electromyographic atonia 
during REM sleep on PSG and autopsy findings of PSP. Only one of these 13 had a 
synucleinopathy. The positive predictive values for RBD indicating a 
synucleinopathy for studies 1-3 were 91.7%, 94.3%, and 100.0%, respectively. 
Clinically suspected and PSG-proven RBD occurs with disproportionally greater 
frequency in MSA, PD, and DLB compared to other neurodegenerative disorders. In 
the setting of degenerative dementia and/or parkinsonism, we hypothesize that 
RBD is a manifestation of an evolving synucleinopathy.

Copyright 2001 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.1120
PMID: 11481685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


763. Drugs Aging. 2001;18(7):527-50. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200118070-00006.

Clinical and economic factors in the treatment of behavioural and psychological 
symptoms of dementia.

Hemels ME(1), Lanctôt KL, Iskedjian M, Einarson TR.

Author information:
(1)Graduate Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.

The prevalence of behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) 
exceeds 50%. They cause distress to patients and caregivers, increase resource 
utilisation of various kinds, and form a high risk for accelerated psychiatric 
care through institutionalisation. Although evidence for current pharmacological 
treatment is not strong and the construct of BPSD is still not very clear, 
future aspects of treatment of BPSD may be positive. If we look at overall 
success rates of the antipsychotics, the traditional antipsychotics have the 
highest combined success rate of 63.1%, whereas the novel antipsychotics have an 
overall success rate of 56.1%. Haloperidol is the drug with the highest success 
rate of 65.4%, although this drug is associated with parkinsonian adverse drug 
reactions. Newer antipsychotics show promise in treating BPSD, but more 
convincing evidence (e.g. from randomised clinical trials) is required. We 
provide an overview of the clinical, epidemiological and economic aspects of 
BPSD and a review of the available literature on their pharmacological 
treatment. Although only 1 pharmacoeconomic study has been conducted on BPSD, it 
seems likely that these manifestations drastically increase the burden of 
dementia.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200118070-00006
PMID: 11482746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


764. Neurol Sci. 2001 Feb;22(1):77-8. doi: 10.1007/s100720170055.

CSF phosphorylated tau is a possible marker for discriminating Alzheimer's 
disease from dementia with Lewy bodies. Phospho-Tau International Study Group.

Parnetti L(1), Lanari A, Amici S, Gallai V, Vanmechelen E, Hulstaert F; 
Phospho-Tau International Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Department, University of Perugia, Italy.

Tau and beta-amyloid (1-42) (Abeta42) are two independent markers for the early 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). In the present study, biochemical markers 
were validated as tools for differential diagnosis between AD and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB). Tau, Abeta42 and phospho-tau (181P) were measured in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from controls (n=40) and from patients with AD (n=80) 
or DLB (n=43) using the HT7-AT270 assay (prototype version). In comparison with 
AD, in DLB no differences were found for Abeta42 and lower phospho-tau. ROC 
analysis was used to compare the discriminatory power of total tau with that of 
phospho-tau. The area under the curve (AUC) amounted to 0.782 +/- 0.048 (mean 
+/- SE) for tau and to 0.839 +/- 0.042 for phospho-tau (p = 0.039) for 
differentiation of AD from DLB. The present results indicate that CSF 
phospho-tau may be a good marker for differentiation between AD and DLB.

DOI: 10.1007/s100720170055
PMID: 11487210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


765. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2001;101(5):39-42.

[Permeability of hemato-encephalic barrier in Alzheimer's disease and 
parkinsonism with cognitive disorders].

[Article in Russian]

Preobrazhenskaia IS, Chekhonin VP, Iakhno NN.

The study was made of 17 patients with expected Alzheimer's disease (AD), 29 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and 7 with a expected dementia with Levy 
bodies (DLB). The severity of cognitive disorders was determined according to 
the following scales: Global Deterioration Rating Scale, Mini-mental State 
Examination, Mattis Dementia Rating Scale. Besides, the patients state was 
evaluated, in the whole, according to some scales. Permeability of 
hemato-encephalic barrier was evaluated according to the blood serum levels of 3 
neurospecific proteins--neuron specific enolase, glial fibrillary protein and 
alpha-glycoprotein. Their determination was performed by ELISA method. The 
significant elevation of the levels of the proteins studied was found already on 
the early stages of the disease. Their levels were higher in the patients with 
the dementia as compared with the individuals without it. There were no 
differences in cortical, subcortical and combined types of dementia. The authors 
believe, that some of the proteins studied (neuron specific enolase, for 
example) may serve as non specific markers of cerebral degeneration.

PMID: 11505913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


766. Probl Tuberk. 2001;(3):29-32.

[Clinical aspects, diagnosis and treatment of neurological complications of 
tuberculosis].

[Article in Russian]

Kornilova ZKh, Khokhlov IuK, Savin AA, Batyrov FA.

Data on 1112 tuberculosis patients with various neurological complications who 
were treated at Moscow Tuberculosis Clinical Hospital No. 7 during 1997-1999 are 
analyzed. A working classification of neurological complications in 
tuberculosis, which may be recommended to therapeutists, phthisiologists, and 
neurologists, is proposed. The leading neurological complications in nonspecific 
tuberculosis are described. The acute toxic encephalopathy syndrome that is 
characterized by a combination of impaired consciousness, meningeal syndrome 
without spinal fluid changes, epileptic seizures, disseminated neurological 
symptoms, disseminated intravascular coagulation syndrome, and high death rates 
holds the lead. Mono- and polyneuropathies of predominantly the lower 
extremities are frequently detectable in tuberculosis. Concomitant alcoholism, 
diabetes mellitus, and isoniazid treatment make their course poorer. Vascular 
abnormalities of the nervous system in patients with tuberculosis run much more 
favourably that in those without it. Mild forms of parkinsonism were observed in 
3% of patients with tuberculosis, vascular dementia is detectable rarely (0.2%), 
strokes run without severe overall cerebral symptoms. The high incidence of 
neurological diseases in patients with tuberculosis requires that specialized 
departments of neurology should be set up at the institutes of tuberculosis and 
at multidisciplinary related hospitals. The tuberculosis curricula for students 
and postgraduate physicians should envisage additional sections to study 
diseases of the nervous system in tuberculosis.

PMID: 11508228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


767. Age Ageing. 2001 Jul;30(4):279-87. doi: 10.1093/ageing/30.4.279.

Neuroendocrinology of ageing.

Rehman HU(1), Masson EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Hull Royal Infirmary, Anlaby Road, Hull HU3 2JZ, UK. 
habib786@aol.com

Many common problems encountered in the ageing patient can be related to 
neuroendocrine phenomena. These include Alzheimer's disease, dementia and 
cognitive dysfunction, depression, Parkinson's disease, hyponatraemia and the 
postmenopausal increase in both vascular risk and osteoporosis. This review 
concentrates on the hypothalamic neuroendocrine system, including the 
dopaminergic, noradrenergic, serotoninergic, cholinergic and neurohypophyseal 
systems and the roles of the anterior pituitary and monoamine oxidases, 
luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone, corticotrophin-releasing factor, the 
pro-opiomelanocortin-derived and opioid peptides, peptides involved in growth 
hormone and thyrotropin regulation, and amino acid transmitters.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/30.4.279
PMID: 11509304 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


768. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;71(3):296-302. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.71.3.296.

Preclinical syndromes predict dementia: the Sydney older persons study.

Waite LM(1), Broe GA, Grayson DA, Creasey H.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Education and Research on Ageing, Concord Hospital C25, University 
of Sydney, NSW 2139, Australia. lwaite@medicine.usyd.edu.au

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;71(3):289-90.

OBJECTIVES: To identify if preclinical syndromes for Alzheimer's disease, 
vascular dementia, and Parkinson's disease and related dementias exist. 
Identification of dementia at early or even preclinical stages has important 
implications for treatment.
METHODS: A community dwelling sample of 647 subjects aged 75 and over at 
recruitment were followed up for a mean period of 3.19 years (range 2.61 to 4.51 
years). Each subject was asked to participate in a medical assessment which 
included a standardised medical history examining both past and current health 
and medication usage; a neuropsychological battery (mini mental state 
examination, Reid memory test, verbal fluency, subsets of the Boston naming test 
and similarities, clock drawing and copied drawings) and physical examination. 
Preclinical syndromes for the three predominant dementias (Alzheimer's disease, 
vascular dementia and Parkinson's disease, and related dementias) and their 
combinations were defined using cognitive, motor, and vascular features. Their 
longitudinal outcome as defined by death and dementia incidence was examined.
RESULTS: Preclinical syndromes affected 55.7% (n=299) of subjects. Preclinical 
syndromes showed a trend for an increased odds of death (odds ratio 1.72, 
p=0.056) and a significantly increased odds of developing dementia (odds ratio 
4.81, p<0.001). Preclinical syndromes were highly sensitive, detecting 52 of 58 
(89.7%) incident dementias. Two hundred and sixteen of 268 (80.6%) preclinical 
subjects did not show dementia over the 3 year period (positive predictive value 
19.4%). Subjects defined as having a combination of cognitive, extrapyramidal, 
and vascular features were at greatest risk of progressing to dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Preclinical syndromes were sensitive and significant predictors of 
dementia. In view of their poor positive predictive value, the preclinical 
syndromes as defined in this study remain a research tool needing both 
definitional refinement and greater periods of observation. Multiple coexistent 
preclinical disorders resulted in a greater incidence of dementia, providing 
evidence for an additive role between multiple disorders.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.71.3.296
PMCID: PMC1737538
PMID: 11511700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


769. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;71(3):303-9. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.71.3.303.

Occupation during life and risk of dementia in French elderly community 
residents.

Helmer C(1), Letenneur L, Rouch I, Richard-Harston S, Barberger-Gateau P, 
Fabrigoule C, Orgogozo JM, Dartigues JF.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 330, Université de Bordeaux II, 146 Rue Léo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux 
cedex, France. Catherine.Helmer@isped.u-bordeaux2.fr

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Sep;71(3):289-90.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether principal occupation during life is a risk 
factor for incident Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, or dementia with 
parkinsonism.
METHODS: This study was carried out from the PAQUID (Personnes Agées QUID) 
cohort, an epidemiological study on normal and pathological aging after 65 years 
in the south west of France. At baseline, 2950 non-demented people living at 
home were identified and re-examined 1, 3, 5, 8, and 10 years later with 
identical standardised neurological and neuropsychological measures. Cox 
proportional hazards models with delayed entry were used, taking age as the time 
scale and adjusting for sex, education, tobacco, and wine consumption to 
estimate the risk ratio (RR) of incident dementia, Alzheimer's disease, vascular 
dementia, and dementia with parkinsonism associated with occupational category.
RESULTS: Of the 2950 subjects, 393 became demented, of whom 251 had Alzheimer's 
disease, 112 had vascular dementia, and 27 had dementia with parkinsonism. The 
risk of Alzheimer's disease was not related to a given occupation. However the 
risk of dementia with parkinsonism seemed to be increased in farmers in 
comparison with professionals and managerials, particularly among women (RR 
7.47; 95%CI, 1.80-31.07).
CONCLUSION: The data suggest that occupation does not change the risk of 
Alzheimer's disease, which seems to be more influenced by cognitive abilities in 
childhood and adolescence than by occupation in adult life. However, being a 
farmer may increase the risk of dementia with parkinsonism among women; 
occupation could act by the way of differences in health behaviour or in 
exposure to environmental factors.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.71.3.303
PMCID: PMC1737542
PMID: 11511701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


770. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2001 Summer;13(3):347-56. doi: 
10.1176/jnp.13.3.347.

Emergent neuroleptic hypersensitivity as a herald of presenile dementia.

Mendez MF(1), Lipton A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at Los Angeles School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles 90073, USA. mmendez@ucla.edu

Neuroleptic hypersensitivity is characteristic of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) but not of other dementias. The authors report 5 patients with psychotic 
mood disorders and long-standing antipsychotic drug therapy. As they reached 50 
to 60 years of age, they unexpectedly developed hypersensitivity to these 
medications, with rigidity, muteness, or the neuroleptic malignant syndrome. 
Nearly coincident with this reaction, they developed progressive cognitive 
deficits consistent with frontotemporal dementia. These patients illustrate 
emergent neuroleptic hypersensitivity as an early manifestation of other 
dementias. The predisposition to neuroleptic hypersensitivity could result from 
depleted nigral dopaminergic neurons suggested by "smudging" of the substantia 
nigra pars compacta on magnetic resonance imaging.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.13.3.347
PMID: 11514641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


771. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2001;24:1121-59. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.1121.

Neurodegenerative tauopathies.

Lee VM(1), Goedert M, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. vmylee@mail.med.upenn.edu

The defining neuropathological characteristics of Alzheimer's disease are 
abundant filamentous tau lesions and deposits of fibrillar amyloid beta 
peptides. Prominent filamentous tau inclusions and brain degeneration in the 
absence of beta-amyloid deposits are also hallmarks of neurodegenerative 
tauopathies exemplified by sporadic corticobasal degeneration, progressive 
supranuclear palsy, and Pick's disease, as well as by hereditary frontotemporal 
dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). Because multiple 
tau gene mutations are pathogenic for FTDP-17 and tau polymorphisms appear to be 
genetic risk factors for sporadic progressive supranuclear palsy and 
corticobasal degeneration, tau abnormalities are linked directly to the etiology 
and pathogenesis of neurodegenerative disease. Indeed, emerging data support the 
hypothesis that different tau gene mutations are pathogenic because they impair 
tau functions, promote tau fibrillization, or perturb tau gene splicing, thereby 
leading to formation of biochemically and structurally distinct aggregates of 
tau. Nonetheless, different members of the same kindred often exhibit diverse 
FTDP-17 syndromes, which suggests that additional genetic or epigenetic factors 
influence the phenotypic manifestations of neurodegenerative tauopathies. 
Although these and other hypothetical mechanisms of neurodegenerative 
tauopathies remain to be tested and validated, transgenic models are 
increasingly available for this purpose, and they will accelerate discovery of 
more effective therapies for neurodegenerative tauopathies and related 
disorders, including Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.24.1.1121
PMID: 11520930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


772. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2001 Aug;27(4):314-25. doi: 
10.1046/j.0305-1846.2001.00342.x.

Alpha-synuclein pathology is highly dependent on the case selection.

Parkkinen L(1), Soininen H, Laakso M, Alafuzoff I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Neurology, Kuopio University, Kuopio, Finland. 
Laura.Parkkinen@uku.fi

Lewy bodies and dystrophic neurites have been considered a common substrate for 
dementia, but they are also frequently found in the normal elderly population. 
The primary component of this pathology involves alpha-synuclein. The main 
objective of the present study was to estimate the prevalence of alpha-synuclein 
pathology in aged population, and to assess its relative significance in 
relation to dementia. The study also investigated whether differences could be 
detected in alpha-synuclein pathology in relation to age, gender or concomitant 
Alzheimer's pathology. Furthermore, the influence of sampling strategies was 
analysed. Alpha-synuclein pathology was assessed using immunohistochemistry in 
well-characterized post-mortem material. The investigation included patients 
from a longitudinal study of dementia of Alzheimer's type (n = 103, 85% 
demented), subjects from a prospective longitudinal clinical study of ageing (n 
= 69, 29% demented), a cohort of consecutive clinical post-mortem cases 
collected for 1 year (n = 262, 12% demented), a sample of forensic post-mortem 
cases collected for 6 months (n = 121, 15% demented) and a sample of Brain Bank 
material (n = 234, 26% demented). Overall, alpha-synuclein pathology was found 
in 14% of all 774 subjects over 40 years of age, and this percentage varied from 
8% to 27% according to sampling strategies. These results indicate that the 
prevalence of alpha-synuclein pathology clearly depends on the selection of 
material. Furthermore alpha-synuclein pathology was found in 23% of clinically 
demented patients and in 11% of non-demented subjects. The load of 
alpha-synuclein pathology was significantly greater in the demented patients 
versus non-demented subjects indicating that alpha-synuclein pathology is indeed 
of importance in the pathogenesis of dementia.

DOI: 10.1046/j.0305-1846.2001.00342.x
PMID: 11532162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


773. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2001 Aug;16(8):762-7. doi: 10.1002/gps.407.

Risk factors for falling in a psychogeriatric unit.

de Carle AJ(1), Kohn R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, Brown University, 345 Blackstone 
Boulevard, Providence, RI 02906, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To identify risk factors associated with falls in a psychogeriatric 
inpatient population.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study.
SETTING: A psychogeriatric inpatient unit in a Brown University affiliated 
psychiatric hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 1834 men and women who represented all admissions to 
the psychogeriatric inpatient unit between January 1992 and December 1995.
RESULTS: Over the study period a total of 175 falls were recorded, giving a fall 
rate of 9.5%. Using a logistic regression model, six variables were found to be 
independently associated with an increased risk of falling: female gender, 
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT), mood stabilizers, cardiac arrhythmias, 
Parkinson's syndrome and dementias. Falls and ECT were associated with longer 
hospital stay, when adjusted for confounders including ECT.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings support previous results and identify ECT as a 
possible risk factor for falling in a hospital setting.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.407
PMID: 11536342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


774. Curr Drug Targets. 2001 Sep;2(3):241-71. doi: 10.2174/1389450013348335.

Neuroprotection by NMDA receptor antagonists in a variety of neuropathologies.

Palmer GC(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Advisory, Worcester 01604-3563, USA. eugene.palmer@earthlink.net

Because of adverse reactions, early efforts to introduce high affinity 
competitive or use-dependent NMDA receptor antagonists into patients suffering 
from stroke, head trauma or epilepsy met with failure. Later it was discovered 
that both low affinity use-dependent NMDA receptor antagonists and compounds 
with selective affinity for the NR2B receptor subunit met the criteria for safe 
administration into patients. Furthermore, these low affinity antagonists 
exhibit significant mechanistic differences from their higher affinity 
counterparts. Success of the latter is attested to the ability of the following 
low affinity compounds to be marketed: 1) Cough suppressant-dextromethorphan 
(available for decades); 2) Parkinson's disease--amantadine, memantine and 
budipine; 3) Dementia--memantine; and 4) Epilepsy--felbamate. Moreover, Phase 
III clinical trials are ongoing with remacemide for epilepsy and Huntington's 
disease and head trauma for HU-211. A host of compounds are or were under 
evaluation for the possible treatment of stroke, head trauma, hyperalgesia and 
various neurodegenerative disorders. Despite the fact that other drugs with 
associated NMDA receptor mechanisms have reached clinical status, this review 
focuses only on those competitive and use-dependent NMDA receptor antagonists 
that reached clinical trails. The ensuing discussions link the in vivo 
pharmacological investigations that led to the success/mistakes/ failures for 
eventual testing of promising compounds in the clinic.

DOI: 10.2174/1389450013348335
PMID: 11554551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


775. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jun 1-15;32(11):1071-3.

[Dementia in progressive supranuclear paralysis patients].

[Article in Spanish]

Barquero-Jiménez MS(1), Domínguez-Salgado M.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología; Hospital Clínico Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, 
28040, España. mbarquero@hcsc.insalud.es

INTRODUCTION: Progressive supranuclear paralysis is difficult to detect in its 
initial stages. Its symptoms are not specific and often the patients are 
mistaken as Parkinson s disease patients, or even Alzheimer s ones.
DEVELOPMENT: Initial features in progressive supranuclear paralysis are 
typically a gait disorder with frequent falls, behavioral disorder and often 
dysarthria. The gaze disorder, showing voluntary conjugate gase paralysis is 
characteristic, but it can appear late in the course of disease. Other motor 
signs are axial rigidity, bradykinesia, stiffness, and rarely chorea, ataxia, 
muscle weakness or myoclonus. Pseudobulbar paralysis is the more remarkable 
clinical finding. These motor symptoms are accompanied by cognitive 
disturbances, the typical ones of subcortical dementia, with mind slowness, 
apathy, depression, and, more often that in other primary dementias, psychotic 
features and relatively early behavioral disorders. A useful feature to 
distinguish the mental changes of progressive supranuclear paralysis with other 
primary subcortical dementias is a more remarkable impairment in visuospatial 
function, because of the need of a good gaze function to accomplish it. 
Progressive supranuclear paralysis patients work better in verbal tests that in 
visuospatial test. We try to describe clinical data and evolutive profile of 
this entity, whose cognitive disturbances as described by Albert in 1974 
strongly stabilized the concept of subcortical dementia.

PMID: 11562833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


776. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jun 1-15;32(11):1085-7.

[Dopaminomimetic psychosis in Parkinson's disease: first symptom of early 
dementia?].

[Article in Spanish]

Catalan-Alonso MJ(1), Del Val J.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología; Hospital Clínico Universitario San Carlos, Madrid, 
28040, España. mcatalan@hcsc.es

INTRODUCTION: Parkinson s disease (PD) is caused by an abnormal degeneration of 
the dopamine producing cells in the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental area. 
When PD advances, degeneration of the nigroestriatal tracts may expand and 
involve other pathways (mesolimbic and frontal), and also serotonergic and 
cholinergic systems. This degeneration leads to a multitude of motor and non 
motor behavioral disturbances.
DEVELOPMENT: On the background of progressive degeneration, chronic levodopa and 
dopaminergic agonist administration may cause pulsatile non physiologic 
overstimulation of dopaminergic receptors. This may induce perturbations in 
limbic and frontal cortex structures and overstimulation of serotonergic, 
cholinergic and other neurotransmitter systems. These events are the basis of 
parkinsonian psychosis, perhaps in the setting of early dementia. The treatment 
of this psychosis is difficult. The reduction or withdrawal of dopaminomimetic 
agents may improve psychosis with worsening of parkinsonian disability. The 
recommended order to discontinue antiparkinsonian drugs, when is required, is 
anticholinergic, selegiline, amantadine and dopamine agonist. Levodopa should be 
reduced to a tolerable minimum to compensate the motor disturbances. At this 
point, it may be necessary to add an atypical neuroleptic such as clozapine, 
quetirapine or olanzapine to improve the symptomatology.
CONCLUSIONS: More studies are needed to asses the relationship between 
parkinsonian psychosis and early dementia. Additional, the development of new 
drugs could be helpful to control these psychotic symptoms in PD without serious 
secondary effects.

PMID: 11562835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


777. Rev Neurol. 2001 Jun 16-30;32(12):1182-7.

[Cognitive deterioration in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Perea-Bartolomé MV(1).

Author information:
(1)Dpto. Psicología Básica, Psicobiología y Metodolog; Universidad de Salamanca. 
Facultad de Psicología, Salamanca, 37005, España. vperea@gugu.usal.es

INTRODUCTION: Whether there are mental changes in Parkinson s disease (EP) or 
not, has been a confused and contradictory subject since the earliest studies 
and semiological definition of the disorder. James Parkinson himself, in his 
study An essay on the shaking palsy (1817), stated that in the condition he 
described, the sense and intellect were not damaged.
DEVELOPMENT: Thanks to the development of cognitive neuropsychology, at the 
present time there are rather more precise concepts regarding this fascinating 
area of neurology. We give a summary, as schematic as possible, of theory 
relating to the known data. 1. The presence or absence of cognitive 
deterioration in EP 2. The neuropsychological characteristics of cognitive 
involvement in EP, cognitive defects in incipient EP and in established EP. 3. 
The risk factor involved in the occurrence of cognitive deterioration.
CONCLUSIONS: This knowledge should be used for better understanding of the 
patient s mental state at every stage of the disease, during follow up studies 
and for the neuro conductual therapeutic and socio familial approach in each 
case.

PMID: 11562851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


778. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2001 Fall;14(3):145-66. doi: 
10.1177/089198870101400308.

Magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic resonance spectroscopy in dementias.

Hsu YY(1), Du AT, Schuff N, Weiner MW.

Author information:
(1)Magnetic Resonance Unit, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San 
Francisco 94121, USA.

This article reviews recent studies of magnetic resonance imaging and magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy in dementia, including Alzheimer's disease, 
frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease, Huntington's disease, and vascular dementia. Magnetic resonance imaging 
and magnetic resonance spectroscopy can detect structural alteration and 
biochemical abnormalities in the brain of demented subjects and may help in the 
differential diagnosis and early detection of affected individuals, monitoring 
disease progression, and evaluation of therapeutic effect.

DOI: 10.1177/089198870101400308
PMCID: PMC1857299
PMID: 11563438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


779. Behav Neurol. 1998;11(3):173-183.

Intellectual, mnemonic, and frontal functions in dementia with Lewy bodies: A 
comparison with early and advanced Parkinson's disease.

Downes JJ(1), Priestley NM, Doran M, Ferran J, Ghadiali E, Cooper P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Liverpool, UK.

Both Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) share a common 
neuropathological marker, the presence of Lewy bodies in brain stem and basal 
forebrain nuclei. DLB, in addition, is associated with Lewy bodies in the 
neocortex, and, in it's more common form, with Alzheimer-type pathological 
markers, particularly amyloid plaques. Published neuropsychological studies have 
focused on the differential profiles of DLB and Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
However, it is presently unclear whether DLB should be classified as a variant 
of AD or PD. In the present study we compare a healthy age-matched control group 
with three groups of patients, one with DLB, and two with PD. One of the PD 
groups was early in the course (PD-E) and the second, more advanced group 
(PD-A), was matched on severity of cognitive impairment with the DLB group. The 
results show that DLB was associated with a different pattern of 
neuropsychological impairment than the PD-A group, particularly in tests 
believed to be mediated by prefrontal cortical regions.

PMID: 11568418


780. Geriatrics. 2001 Sep;56(9):56-7.

Cholinesterase inhibitors. Comparing the options for mild-to-moderate dementia.

Conn DK(1); American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cholinesterase inhibitors can be used as one element of a comprehensive approach 
to management of mild-to-moderate AD. Benefits include modest cognitive 
improvement, increased activation, and improved mood and behavior. Patients with 
other disorders, such as Lewy-body dementia, may also improve. The most common 
side effects include GI disturbances, insomnia, dizziness, fatigue, and muscle 
cramps. Adverse effects can be significantly reduced by waiting 4 to 6 weeks 
before increasing doses. Insomnia may be alleviated by having the patient take 
the medication early in the day.

PMID: 11582975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


781. J Clin Psychiatry. 2001;62 Suppl 21:15-8.

Movement disorders associated with neuroleptic treatment.

Wirshing WC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral Science, University of California 
at Los Angeles School of Medicine, USA.

Neuroleptic-induced movement disorders, or extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 
can be classified into acute and tardive syndromes. Among the former are 
parkinsonism, dystonia, and akathisia. Conventional neuroleptics that have 
traditionally been used to treat psychiatric disorders are often associated with 
EPS. The newer atypical antipsychotics provide a more promising treatment 
strategy for psychiatric disorders and have a lower potential for producing EPS 
than conventional neuroleptics.

PMID: 11584982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


782. Ann Readapt Med Phys. 2001 Feb;44(1):4-12. doi: 10.1016/s0168-6054(00)00057-x.

[Dementia and falls].

[Article in French]

Strubel D(1), Jacquot JM, Martin-Hunyadi C.

Author information:
(1)Service de gérontologie et prévention du vieillissement, CHU, 5, rue Hoche, 
30029 cedex 4, Nîmes, France.

INTRODUCTION: Dementia is now a frequent disease in elderly and may be a major 
risk of falling. Usually these falls are multiple and serious, but their 
consequences are not specific. All types of dementia (Alzheimer's disease, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, dementia in Parkinson's disease, fronto-temporal 
dementia, vascular dementiaellipsis) and all stages of evolution are concerned.
DISCUSSION: These falls result from cognitive and behavioural disorders, visual 
and motor problems, gait and balance disturbances, malnutrition, adverse effects 
of medication and fear of falling.
CONCLUSION: Prevention is possible. Attention must be given on the patient 
himself (keeping in good health, limitation in sedative treatment and mechanical 
restraintsellipsis) and on his environment (lighting, obstacles on the ground, 
stress levelellipsis). After a fall, especially after a complicated fall, 
rehabilitation modalities and aims must be adapted but caring must not be 
defeatist. Randomized studies need to be realized.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-6054(00)00057-x
PMID: 11587649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


783. Mech Ageing Dev. 2001 Nov;122(16):2005-11. doi: 10.1016/s0047-6374(01)00304-9.

Cerebrospinal fluid tau and beta-amyloid(1-42) in dementia disorders.

Vanmechelen E(1), Vanderstichele H, Hulstaert F, Andreasen N, Minthon L, Winblad 
B, Davidsson P, Blennow K.

Author information:
(1)Innogenetics NV, Industriepark Zwijnaarde 7, Box 4, B-9052, Ghent, Belgium. 
eugeevme@innogenetics.com

The reliability of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)-tau and CSF-beta-amyloid assays for 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and other dementing disorders such as 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is reviewed. CSF assessment of the two proteins 
is useful in early diagnosis of AD and to differentiate it from FTD and DLB. 
Extremely high CSF-tau levels can discriminate CJD from AD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0047-6374(01)00304-9
PMID: 11589918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


784. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 23;276(47):43495-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C100551200.

Stabilization of partially folded conformation during alpha-synuclein 
oligomerization in both purified and cytosolic preparations.

Uversky VN(1), Lee HJ, Li J, Fink AL, Lee SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Santa 
Cruz, California 95064, USA.

Aggregation of alpha-synuclein is tightly associated with many neurodegenerative 
diseases, such as Parkinson's disease, dementia with Lewy body, Lewy body 
variant of Alzheimer's disease, multiple system atrophy, and Hallervorden-Spatz 
disease, implicating a crucial role of aggregated forms of alpha-synuclein in 
the pathogenesis. Here, we examined the effect of elevated temperature on the 
oligomerization and structural changes of alpha-synuclein in the early stage of 
aggregation and show that self-assembly is crucial for the stabilization of a 
partially folded conformation. The efficiency of alpha-synuclein oligomerization 
increased proportional to the temperature increase, both in purified form and in 
crude cytosolic preparation. This oligomerization coincided with a small but 
reproducible change in the circular dichroism spectrum and an increase in the 
1-anilinonaphthalene-8-sulfonic acid binding. The hydrodynamic dimensions of the 
dimer measured by size exclusion chromatography suggest a pre-molten 
globule-like structure. These data suggest that partially folded 
alpha-synuclein, which is unstable in the monomeric form, is stabilized by 
self-assembly and that these oligomers may evolve into the fibril nucleus.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C100551200
PMID: 11590163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


785. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Nov;71(5):583-8. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.71.5.583.

A clinical role for [(123)I]MIBG myocardial scintigraphy in the distinction 
between dementia of the Alzheimer's-type and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Yoshita M(1), Taki J, Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, 13-1 Takara-machi, Kanazawa, 920-8641, 
Japan. yoshita@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2001 Nov;71(5):574-5.

OBJECTIVE: Scintigraphy with [(123)I]metaiodobenzyl guanidine ([(123)I]MIBG) 
enables the quantification of postganglionic sympathetic cardiac innervation. 
Recently, myocardial [(123)I]MIBG scintigraphy has been found to be useful in 
distinguishing Parkinson's disease, a Lewy body disease, from other akinetic 
rigid syndromes. Some patients initially diagnosed with dementia of the 
Alzheimer's type (DAT) are discovered to have an alternative disease such as 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), despite the application of stringent diagnostic 
criteria. In the present study, examinations were performed to clarify the 
usefulness of myocardial [(123)I]MIBG scintigraphy in improving the differential 
diagnosis between patients with DLB and DAT.
METHODS: Fourteen patients with DLB and 14 patients with DAT underwent 
scintigraphy with [(123)I]MIBG, combined with orthostatic tests and cardiac 
examinations.
RESULTS: In all patients with DLB, the heart to mediastinum (H/M) ratio of MIBG 
uptake was pathologically impaired in both early and delayed images, 
independently of the duration of disease and autonomic failure. All patients 
with DAT had successful MIBG uptake in the heart regardless of duration of 
disease and autonomic failure. Orthostatic hypotension was seen in four patients 
with DAT and 13 patients with DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: [(123)I]MIBG myocardial scintigraphy might detect early 
disturbances of the sympathetic nervous system in DLB and might provide useful 
diagnostic information to discriminate DLB from DAT. The distinction between DLB 
and DAT may be improved by greater emphasis on cardiac sympathetic disturbances.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.71.5.583
PMCID: PMC1737586
PMID: 11606666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


786. Neuropsychologia. 2002;40(4):435-45. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3932(01)00125-7.

Capacity to maintain mental set in dementia.

Lamar M(1), Price CC, Davis KL, Kaplan E, Libon DJ.

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Aging, Gerontology Research Center, National Institutes 
of Health, Baltimore, MD, USA.

Two experiments investigating the capacity to sustain mental set in dementia 
were conducted. Experiment 1 analyzed performance of a non-demented control 
group (NC), participants with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and participants with 
ischemic vascular dementia (IVD) on the Boston Revision of the Wechsler Memory 
Scale Mental Control subtest (MC). On simple tasks there were no between-group 
differences after controlling for time to completion. On complex tasks, NC 
participants outperformed both dementia groups and AD participants obtained 
higher accuracy indices than IVD participants. The IVD group produced a 
disproportionate number of commission errors regardless of task complexity. The 
AD group tended to produce more omission errors on more difficult measures of 
mental set. Individual task performance was divided into three sections-first, 
middle, and last. IVD participants made fewer and fewer correct responses over 
all three sections, whereas performance of AD participants leveled off by the 
middle section with no further decline. Experiment 2 compared letter fluency 
performance among NC, AD and IVD groups, and participants with dementia 
secondary to idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). For all letter cues, IVD and 
PD participants generated fewer responses than NC and AD participants. However, 
IVD and PD participants generated a larger proportion of words than AD and NC 
participants within the first 15 s. As the task progressed, the output of IVD 
and PD participants dropped precipitously. These findings indicate that failure 
to maintain mental set is not a diffuse or general cognitive disability. Rather, 
failure to maintain mental set in dementia may be best understood within the 
context of predictable and specific within-task time epochs.

DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3932(01)00125-7
PMID: 11684176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


787. Neurosci Lett. 2001 Nov 2;313(1-2):93-5. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02254-6.

A novel presenilin mutation (M233V) causing very early onset Alzheimer's disease 
with Lewy bodies.

Houlden H(1), Crook R, Dolan RJ, McLaughlin J, Revesz T, Hardy J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

Presenilin 1 mutations are the major cause of autosomal dominant Alzheimer's 
disease: here we identify a new missense mutation causing a methionine to valine 
change at codon 233. This codon is homologous to a pathogenic presenilin 2 
mutation with the same base change (ATG to GTG) and amino acid change (M239V). 
This mutation causes disease with an exceptionally early onset age 
(approximately 30 years) in which pathological examination shows extensive Lewy 
bodies as well as plaques and tangles.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02254-6
PMID: 11684347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


788. Med J Aust. 2001 Oct 15;175(8):433-9. doi: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143658.x.

11: disorders of memory and intellect.

Watson JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Royal Prince Alfred Hospital, Sydney, NSW. jwatson@mail.usyd.edu.au

The clinical approach to the patient with a suspected disorder of memory and 
intellect is to establish whether it is dementia, which parts of the brain are 
affected, what is the cause, what is the prognosis, and what can be done about 
it. The diagnosis of dementia usually requires the involvement of memory and at 
least one other cognitive system. Delirium and depression are important 
differential diagnoses. Patients with dementia should usually have some simple 
investigations after a careful history-taking and examination to identify 
"reversible" causes. The commonest cause of dementia is Alzheimer's disease, in 
which short-term memory disturbance is usually prominent. Other causes of 
dementia include cerebrovascular disease, Lewy-body disease and Pick's disease. 
There is now hope for patients with Alzheimer's disease (which can be treated 
with some success with cholinesterase inhibitors) and patients with vascular 
dementia, in whom aggressive control of causal risk factors may retard 
progression.

DOI: 10.5694/j.1326-5377.2001.tb143658.x
PMID: 11700839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


789. Arch Neurol. 2001 Nov;58(11):1828-31. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.11.1828.

Impact of DNA testing for early-onset familial Alzheimer disease and 
frontotemporal dementia.

Steinbart EJ(1), Smith CO, Poorkaj P, Bird TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Washington Medical School, VA Puget 
Sound Health Care System, Seattle, USA.

BACKGROUND: DNA testing of persons at risk for hereditary, degenerative 
neurologic diseases is relatively new. Only anecdotal reports of such testing in 
familial Alzheimer disease (FAD) exist, and little is know about the personal 
and social impact of such testing.
METHODS: In a descriptive, observational study, individuals at 50% risk for 
autosomal dominant, early-onset FAD or frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17 underwent DNA testing for the genetic mutations 
previously identified in affected family members. Individuals were followed up 
for (1/2) to 3 years and were interviewed regarding attitudes toward the testing 
process and the impact of the results.
RESULTS: Twenty-one (8.4%) of 251 persons at risk for FAD or frontotemporal 
dementia requested genetic testing. The most common reasons for requesting 
testing were concern about early symptoms of dementia, financial or family 
planning, and relief from anxiety. Twelve individuals had positive DNA test 
results, and 6 of these had early symptoms of dementia; 8 had negative results; 
and 1 has not yet received results. Of 14 asymptomatic individuals completing 
testing, 13 believed the testing was beneficial. Two persons reported moderate 
anxiety and 1 reported moderate depression. As expected, persons with negative 
test results had happier experiences overall, but even they had to deal with 
ongoing anxiety and depression. Thus far, there have been no psychiatric 
hospitalizations, suicide attempts, or denials of insurance.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic testing in early-onset FAD and frontotemporal dementia can 
be completed successfully. Most individuals demonstrate effective coping skills 
and find the testing to be beneficial, but long-term effects remain unknown.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.58.11.1828
PMID: 11708991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


790. Arch Neurol. 2001 Nov;58(11):1871-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.58.11.1871.

TAU as a susceptibility gene for amyotropic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism 
dementia complex of Guam.

Poorkaj P(1), Tsuang D, Wijsman E, Steinbart E, Garruto RM, Craig UK, Chapman 
NH, Anderson L, Bird TD, Plato CC, Perl DP, Weiderholt W, Galasko D, 
Schellenberg GD.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research Education Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget Sound 
Health Care System, Seattle, Washington 98108, USA.

BACKGROUND: A Guam variant of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS-G) and 
parkinsonism dementia complex (PDC-G) are found in the Chamorro people of Guam. 
Both disorders have overlapping neuropathologic findings, with neurofibrillary 
tangles in spinal cord and brain. The cause of ALS-G-PDC-G is unknown, although 
inheritance and environment appear important. Because neurofibrillary tangles 
containing tau protein are present in ALS-G-PDC-G, and because mutations in the 
tau gene (TAU) cause autosomal dominant frontotemporal dementia, TAU was 
examined as a candidate gene for ALS-G-PDC-G.
METHODS: TAU was evaluated by DNA sequence analysis in subjects with 
ALS-G-PDC-G, by linkage analysis of TAU polymorphisms in an extended pedigree 
from the village of Umatac, and by evaluation of linkage disequilibrium with 
polymorphic markers flanking and within TAU.
RESULTS: Linkage disequilibrium between ALS-G-PDC-G and the TAU polymorphism 
CA3662 was observed. For this 2-allele system, PDC and ALS cases were 
significantly less likely than Guamanian controls to have the 1 allele (4.9% and 
2% vs 11.5%, respectively; Fisher exact P =.007). DNA sequence analysis of TAU 
coding regions did not demonstrate a mutation responsible for ALS-G-PDC-G. 
Analysis of TAU genotypes in an extended pedigree of subjects from Umatac showed 
obligate recombinants between TAU and ALS-G-PDC-G. Linkage analysis of the 
Umatac pedigree indicates that TAU is not the major gene for ALS-G-PDC-G.
CONCLUSIONS: The genetic association between ALS-G-PDC-G implicates TAU in the 
genetic susceptibility to ALS-G-PDC-G. TAU may be a modifying gene increasing 
risk for ALS-G-PDC-G in the presence of another, as yet, unidentified gene.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.58.11.1871
PMID: 11708997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


791. Can Fam Physician. 2001 Oct;47:2018-23.

Standardized Mini-Mental State Examination. Use and interpretation.

Vertesi A(1), Lever JA, Molloy DW, Sanderson B, Tuttle I, Pokoradi L, Principi 
E.

Author information:
(1)Care-Plus, Hamilton, Ont.

OBJECTIVE: To review administration of the Standardized Mini-Mental State 
Examination (SMMSE) for dementia and depression and to evaluate how well it 
interprets older people's cognitive function.
QUALITY OF EVIDENCE: Literature from January 1990 to December 1999 was searched 
via MEDLINE using the MeSH headings Alzheimer Disease, Vascular Dementia, Lewy 
Bodies, and Depression. Several studies have described the reliability and 
validity of the SMMSE.
MAIN MESSAGE: The SMMSE, a standardized approach to scoring and interpreting 
older people's cognitive function, provides a global score of cognitive ability 
that correlates with daily function. Careful interpretation of results of the 
SMMSE, together with history and physical assessment, can assist in differential 
diagnosis of cognitive impairment resulting from Alzheimer's disease, vascular 
dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, or depression. Repeated measurements can be 
used to assess change over time and response to treatment.
CONCLUSION: The SMMSE is a valuable tool for family doctors who are often the 
first medical professionals to identify changes in patients' cognitive function. 
The SMMSE requires little time to complete and is a key component of a 
comprehensive dementia workup. Determining whether a patient has dementia is 
important because there are now effective medications that are most beneficial 
if started early.

PMCID: PMC2018449
PMID: 11723596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


792. Neurology. 2001 Dec 11;57(11):2078-82. doi: 10.1212/wnl.57.11.2078.

Prospective longitudinal assessment of hallucinations in Parkinson's disease.

Goetz CG(1), Leurgans S, Pappert EJ, Raman R, Stemer AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University, Chicago, IL, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To monitor the evolution of hallucinations over 4 years in a 
stratified sample of patients with PD.
METHODS: Using a modified version of the Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS) Thought 
Disorder question, the authors stratified patients into five baseline behavioral 
groups. They recruited up to 20 patients for each group to participate in 
sequential interviews (Rush Hallucination Inventory) at baseline and 6, 18, and 
48 months. UPDRS motor examinations and Mini Mental State Examinations (MMSE) 
were obtained at baseline and 48 months. Data were analyzed with Wilcoxon rank 
sum tests, Mantel-Haenszel tests, and Spearman correlations. To determine 
features that influenced the new development of hallucinations, a cumulative 
logit regression model of hallucination severity over time was fit using 
generalized estimating equations.
RESULTS: Based on the design stratification, 60 patients had no hallucinations 
at baseline (20 with no behavioral problems, 20 with sleep fragmentation, 20 
with altered dream phenomena). Twenty-nine patients had hallucinations (20 with 
retained insight and 9 with loss of insight). At 48 months, the authors could 
account for all but two subjects (98% retrieval). In 4 years, the presence of 
hallucinations increased (33% at baseline, 44% at 18 months, and 63% at 48 
months, p < 0.0001). The presence of frequent hallucinations (at least three 
times weekly) also increased (p = 0.0002). Having hallucinations at baseline or 
at any given assessment was a strong predictor at all follow-up evaluations of 
continued hallucinations (p < 0.0001). Hallucinations were not associated with 
increased mortality (chi(2) = 0.59, df (1), p = 0.47). Among the 60 subjects 
without hallucinations at baseline, time was the only significant factor 
influencing the development of hallucination over 48 months. Baseline age, PD 
duration, sex, medications, and UPDRS or MMSE scores did not influence the 
incidence of hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: This prospective, longitudinal study documents the persistent and 
progressive nature of hallucinations in PD patients on chronic dopaminergic 
therapy. The consistent association of hallucinations with combined 
levodopa/agonist therapy suggests that these drugs may play a role in the 
pathophysiology of hallucinations.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.57.11.2078
PMID: 11739829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


793. Mov Disord. 2001 Nov;16(6):1014-22. doi: 10.1002/mds.1212.

Resting regional cerebral glucose metabolism in advanced Parkinson's disease 
studied in the off and on conditions with [(18)F]FDG-PET.

Berding G(1), Odin P, Brooks DJ, Nikkhah G, Matthies C, Peschel T, Shing M, 
Kolbe H, van Den Hoff J, Fricke H, Dengler R, Samii M, Knapp WH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Medical School, Hannover, Germany. 
berding.georg@mh-hannover.de

Studies of resting regional cerebral glucose consumption (rCMRGlc) in 
nondemented patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) have produced conflicting 
results, reporting both reduced and normal metabolism in advanced disease and 
reduced or normal metabolism after dopaminergic therapy. To investigate these 
issues, [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) was 
performed in 11 nondemented PD patients with advanced disease and 10 age-matched 
controls. PD patients were studied after withdrawal of all dopaminergic 
medication to produce a practically defined off condition, and a second time 1 
hour after levodopa, resulting in a clinical on state. Dynamic PET scans and 
simultaneous arterialised venous blood samples of [(18)F] activity were 
obtained. A graphical approach was used to generate parametric images of rCMRGlc 
and statistical parametric mapping to localise significant metabolic changes in 
PD. Compared with controls, global rCMRGlc was reduced in the on but not in the 
off condition in PD. In both states, significant regional reductions of glucose 
uptake were found in the parietal, frontal, temporal cortex, and caudate 
nucleus. Reductions correlated with the severity of disability in frontal and 
temporal cortex. Direct comparison between on and off conditions revealed 
relatively greater reductions of uptake in the ventral/orbital frontal cortex 
and the thalamus during on. Results suggest that cortical and caudate 
hypometabolism are common in advanced PD and that caution is mandatory if 
[(18)F]FDG PET is being used to differentiate advanced PD from dementia and 
progressive supranuclear palsy where similar reductions are seen. Furthermore, 
in PD, administration of levodopa is associated with further hypometabolism in 
orbitofrontal cortex; an area known to be relevant for reversal learning where 
performance is typically impaired after dopaminergic treatment.

Copyright 2001 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.1212
PMID: 11748732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


794. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2001 Dec;16 Suppl 1:S19-23. doi: 
10.1002/1099-1166(200112)16:1+<::aid-gps563>3.0.co;2-0.

Tardive dyskinesias in the elderly.

Fabbrini G(1), Barbanti P, Aurilia C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy. 
Giovanni.Fabbrini@Uniroma1.it

The progressive ageing of the population will produce an increase of those 
neuropsychiatric disturbances (late onset psychosis, behavioural disturbances of 
dementia, psychosis in Parkinson's disease) which may require treatment with 
antipsychotics. However, aged individuals are at higher risk for the development 
of adverse events from these drugs, namely extrapyramidal disturbances and 
tardive dyskinesias (TD). TD are a complex disorder, and despite much work done 
both in basic science and in clinical studies, many issues are still unresolved, 
such as risk factors, natural history and response to treatment. Although TD may 
be a mild disorder, it may become debilitating in a proportion of patients. As 
treatment is often quite disappointing, efforts are directed to its prevention. 
In this respect, atypical antipsychotics, with their peculiar mixed 
dopamine-serotonin antagonism, present a clear advantage over classic 
neuroleptics in young schizophrenic patients, with a lower incidence of TD 
during chronic treatment. Data are accumulating to show that this is likely to 
be true also in older patients.

Copyright 2001 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1099-1166(200112)16:1+<::aid-gps563>3.0.co;2-0
PMID: 11748786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


795. J Clin Neurosci. 2002 Jan;9(1):4-8. doi: 10.1054/jocn.2001.1027.

Neuroprotection and neurodegenerative disease.

Vajda FJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Australian Centre for Clinical Neuropharmacology, St. Vincent's Hospital, 
Melbourne, Victoria, 3065, Australia. vajdafj@svhm.org.au

This paper will focus on commonalities in the aetiology and pathology in five 
areas of neurological disease with illustrative examples of therapy. 
Possibilities of multimodal and neuroprotective therapies in human disease, 
employing currently available drugs and showing evidence of neuroprotective 
potential in animal models, are discussed. By definition, neuroprotection is an 
effect that may result in salvage, recovery or regeneration of the nervous 
system, its cells, structure and function. It is thought that there are many 
neurochemical modulators of nervous system damage. In epilepsy, excessive 
glutamate-mediated neurotransmission, impaired voltage sensitive sodium and 
calcium channel functioning, impaired GABA-mediated inhibition and alterations 
in acid base balance, when set in motion, may trigger a cascade of events 
leading to neuronal damage and cell death. Acute and chronic nervous system 
damage in response to an insult may lead to acute or delayed neuronal death, 
apoptotic cell death, neuronal degeneration, injury and loss, and gliosis. Cell 
death in the CNS following injury can occur in the manner of apoptosis, necrosis 
or hybrid forms. In general, NMDA receptor and non-NMDA receptor mediated 
excitotoxic injury results in neurodegeneration along an apoptosis-necrosis 
continuum. The effects of neuronal injury depend on factors including the degree 
of brain maturity or site of the lesion. There is some evidence supporting the 
hypothesis that neuroprotection may be a practical and achievable target using 
drugs already available, at present employed only for limited indications. Using 
these drugs early in the disease, may save decades of development of new drugs, 
which would require evaluation in animal studies, and human clinical trials. New 
drugs would also need to be shown to be safe and acceptable, physiologically not 
detrimental to humans and free from idiosyncratic adverse effects.

Copyright 2002 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

DOI: 10.1054/jocn.2001.1027
PMID: 11749009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


796. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Jan 4;317(1):13-6. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02403-x.

Transferrin gene polymorphism in Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies in humans.

Hussain RI(1), Ballard CG, Edwardson JA, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)MRC Building, Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Genetic studies in Alzheimer's disease (AD), have indicated that the 
apolipoprotein E locus (APO E) is a major susceptibility factor, but that it can 
only account for approximately 50% of AD cases. Several other studies have 
attempted to identify additional genetic loci associated with disease 
development, often based on a candidate gene approach. As several lines of 
evidence indicate that oxidative stress and free radical damage occur in AD, the 
transferrin gene (TF) has been suggested as a candidate locus for AD since it is 
the major transport protein for iron, which itself is a major factor in free 
radical generation. Previous studies have shown elevated TF C2 allele 
frequencies in AD, this being specifically associated with carriers of the APO E 
varepsilon4 allele. We have therefore determined the influence of the common 
polymorphisms in TF, C1 and C2, in dementia. The frequency of the C2 allele was 
not significantly associated with AD. Stratification of cases according to the 
APO E varepsilon4 allele showed a highly significant excess of the C2 allele in 
AD cases without the varepsilon4 allele, contrasting with previous studies. 
Given the contrasting findings between reports of altered TF C2 allele 
frequencies, the TF locus would not appear to be a strong risk factor for AD in 
this population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(01)02403-x
PMID: 11750985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


797. Am J Ophthalmol. 2002 Jan;133(1):135-7. doi: 10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01196-5.

Association of glaucoma with neurodegenerative diseases with apoptotic cell 
death: Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

Bayer AU(1), Keller ON, Ferrari F, Maag KP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Hospital of Weilheim-Schongau, Weilheim, 
Germany. andreasubayer@yahoo.de

PURPOSE: To report a possible association of glaucoma with Parkinson's disease 
and Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: Retrospective chart review (observational case series). The 
ophthalmologic charts of 49 patients with Alzheimer's disease and of 38 patients 
with Parkinson's disease were reviewed to determine the occurrence rate of 
glaucoma among these patients.
RESULTS: Glaucomatous visual field defects or cup-to-disk ratios of 0.8 or 
greater were recorded in 12 patients with Alzheimer's disease (24.5%) and in 9 
patients with Parkinson's disease (23.7%).
CONCLUSION: Patients with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease may have 
an increased occurrence rate of glaucoma.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9394(01)01196-5
PMID: 11755850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


798. J Biol Chem. 2002 Mar 15;277(11):9199-205. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M107716200. Epub 
2001 Dec 26.

Functional characterization of FTDP-17 tau gene mutations through their effects 
on Xenopus oocyte maturation.

Delobel P(1), Flament S, Hamdane M, Jakes R, Rousseau A, Delacourte A, Vilain 
JP, Goedert M, Buée L.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U422, Institut de Médecine Prédictive et Recherche Thérapeutique, 
59045 Lille, France.

tau gene mutations cause frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). Here we have used Xenopus oocyte maturation as an 
indicator of microtubule function. We show that wild-type four-repeat Tau 
protein inhibits maturation in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas 
three-repeat Tau has no effect. Of the seven four-repeat Tau proteins with 
FTDP-17 mutations tested, five (G272V, DeltaK280, P301L, P301S, and V337M) 
failed to interfere significantly with oocyte maturation, demonstrating a 
greatly reduced ability to interact with microtubules. One mutant protein 
(R406W) almost behaved like wild-type Tau, and one (S305N) inhibited maturation 
more strongly than wild-type Tau. With the exception of R406W, wild-type Tau and 
all the mutants studied were similarly phosphorylated during the Xenopus oocyte 
maturation, and this was independent of their effects on this process. Data 
obtained with R406W and S305N may be related to charge changes (phosphorylation 
and basic amino acids). Our results demonstrate variable effects of FTDP-17 
mutations on microtubules in an intact cell situation. Those findings establish 
Xenopus oocyte maturation as a system allowing the study of the functional 
effects of tau gene mutations in a quantitative manner.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M107716200
PMID: 11756436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


799. Presse Med. 2001 Nov 10;30(33):1623-34.

[Deglutition disorders in the elderly. Epidemiological aspects].

[Article in French]

Finiels H(1), Strubel D, Jacquot JM.

Author information:
(1)Service de Gérontologie et Prévention du vieillissement, Centre Serre 
Cavalier, CHU de Nimes, Unité de Réadaptation gériatrique, Département de 
Médecíne Physique et Réadaptation, Nimes.

THE PREVALENCE: The exact prevalence of deglutition disorders in the elderly is 
not known. It appears frequent in very old patients and in those suffering from 
polypathological symptoms, affecting 50% of the populations in long-term care 
units. THE EFFECTS OF AGING: Physiological aging alters various parameters of 
swallowing, however it seems that these modifications related to age have little 
effect on healthy subjects. However, they may increase vulnerability in those 
presenting with intercurrent pathologies. CONCOMITANT DISORDERS: Other than the 
decrease in efficient mastication and the existence of xerostomia, frequently 
observed contributing factors, many diseases may be responsible for dysphagia in 
the elderly. Neurological disorders, particularly cerebral vascular diseases, 
central nervous system degenerative disorders and neuro-motor diseases 
predominate. In the aging, muscular disorders and after effects of various 
diseases can set-in. Modifications in oropharyngeal anatomy generally results 
from cancerous lesions of the aero-digestive junction, but also, occasionally 
from extrinsic compression that does not necessarily reflect a neoplastic 
etiology. Zenker's diverticulitis represents a cause of dysphagia specific to 
the elderly. Problems in swallowing of iatrogenic origin are also frequent, 
following cervical radiotherapy or after oropharyngeal surgery, during tracheal 
intubation or when using feeding tubes and also during various medical 
treatments. UNDERRATED CONSEQUENCES: Dysphagia leads to multiple morbid after 
effects, primarily alteration in quality of life, dehydration, undernutrition, 
asphyxia and congestion and recurrent infections of the respiratory tract. The 
responsibility of deglutition disorders in the occurrence of these complications 
is difficult to assess in weak elderly subjects because of the frequent 
concomitance with multiple deficiencies and incapacities.

PMID: 11759342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


800. Ann Neurol. 2001 Dec;50(6):741-6. doi: 10.1002/ana.10024.

Dementia and neurodevelopmental predisposition: cognitive dysfunction in 
presymptomatic subjects precedes dementia by decades in frontotemporal dementia.

Geschwind DH(1), Robidoux J, Alarcón M, Miller BL, Wilhelmsen KC, Cummings JL, 
Nasreddine ZS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California at Los Angeles School of 
Medicine, 90095-1769, USA. dhg@ucla.edu

Dementia is typically thought of as a disease caused by the process of aging. 
Few studies have addressed the premorbid neuropsychological alterations in 
subjects at risk for the disease--an issue of great importance for the 
understanding and treatment of degenerative dementias. We used knowledge of the 
mutation carrier status in a family with inherited dementia to address this 
issue more efficiently than is possible in the general population, or in cases 
of inherited dementia where the mutational basis is unknown. Standard 
neuropsychological tests were used to detect evidence of dysfunction in frontal 
executive systems in 10 presymptomatic subjects with known mutation carrier 
status in the highly penetrant condition, frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. Presymptomatic carriers demonstrated 
cognitive dysfunction that was not present in 6 nonmutation-carrying relatives. 
Strikingly, frontal-executive dysfunction was apparent in some of the youngest 
mutation carriers many decades prior to the predicted onset of dementia. Thus, 
this dysfunction may reflect the native cognitive capacities of affected 
subjects. These results suggest a potentially important neurodevelopmental 
component to a dementing condition that has been predominantly considered to be 
a disease of aging; accordingly, this issue warrants study in other families to 
assess the applicability of these findings.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10024
PMID: 11761471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


