1801. J Sex Marital Ther. 2008;34(2):115-32. doi: 10.1080/00926230701636189.

The impact of neurological illness on marital relationships.

O'connor EJ(1), McCabe MP, Firth L.

Author information:
(1)Deakin University, Victoria, Australia.

The current study investigated the impact of neurological illness on marital 
relationship satisfaction. Participants numbered 423 patients and 335 carers 
from motor neurone disease (MND), Huntington's disease (HD), Parkinson's, and 
multiple sclerosis (MS). The results demonstrated that patients and carers with 
HD had a significantly lower level of relationship satisfaction and sex life 
satisfaction than the other three illness groups. Further, patients with HD 
indicated a significantly higher level of relationship satisfaction than their 
carers. For MS and MND patients, social support predicted marital relationship 
satisfaction, and for Parkinson's patients, social support and sex life 
satisfaction predicted marital relationship satisfaction.

DOI: 10.1080/00926230701636189
PMID: 18224547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1802. Neurology. 2008 Jan 29;70(5):407-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000304033.82293.9a.

Re: In dementia with Lewy bodies, Braak stage determines phenotype, not Lewy 
body distribution.

Jellinger KA.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2007 Jul 24;69(4):356-9.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000304033.82293.9a
PMID: 18227426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1803. Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Apr;115(4):409-15. doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0344-8. Epub 
2008 Jan 30.

The progression of pathology in longitudinally followed patients with 
Parkinson's disease.

Halliday G(1), Hely M, Reid W, Morris J.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute and the University of New South 
Wales, Barker Street, Randwick, NSW, 2031, Australia. g.halliday@powmri.edu.au

The present study describes the pathological progression of longitudinally 
followed cases with levodopa-responsive Parkinson's disease who came to autopsy 
during the Sydney Multicenter Study of Parkinson's disease. Standardised 
clinical and neuropathological assessments over five epochs of time verified 
three different clinicopathological groups. A group of younger onset patients 
with a typical long duration clinical course of Parkinson's disease. This group 
of cases had Lewy body distributions consistent with the Braak staging of 
disease. In this group, brainstem Lewy bodies dominate in those surviving to 5 
years; by 13 years, 50% of cases have a limbic distribution of Lewy bodies; and 
by 18 years, all will have at least this pathological phenotype. Approximately 
25% of cases had an early malignant, dementia-dominant syndrome and severe 
neocortical disease consistent with dementia with Lewy bodies. The last group 
had an older onset, shorter survival, and a more complex disease course with 
higher Lewy body loads and a higher proportion with additional neuropathologies. 
These cases with higher loads of Lewy bodies and shorter survivals suggest that 
widespread Lewy body pathology either occurs at the onset of clinical disease or 
rapidly infiltrates the brain. In these cases with shorter survivals, there was 
more plaque pathology, supporting a more aggressive and linked phenotype. Our 
data suggest that the selection of similar study cohorts by pathology alone 
would not be able to differentiate the three different phenotypes identified. 
The data are also not consistent with a unitary concept of the pathogenesis of 
Lewy body disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0344-8
PMID: 18231798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1804. Clin Auton Res. 2008 Feb;18(1):13-9. doi: 10.1007/s10286-007-0447-7. Epub 2008 
Jan 30.

PRNP M129V homozygosity in multiple system atrophy vs. Parkinson's disease.

Shibao C(1), Garland EM, Gamboa A, Vnencak-Jones CL, Van Woeltz M, Haines JL, Yu 
C, Biaggioni I.

Author information:
(1)Autonomic Dysfunction Center, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, 
USA.

Multiple system atrophy (MSA) is a neurodegenerative disorder of unknown 
etiology characterized by extrapyramidal, pyramidal, cerebellar, and autonomic 
dysfunction in any combination. We report a patient with a 4-year history of MSA 
who developed dementia associated with sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). 
Our proband was MM homozygous for the M129V polymorphism within the prion 
protein gene (PRNP), a known risk factor for CJD. We conducted a case-control 
study to test the hypothesis that homozygosity for the M129V polymorphism of 
PRNP occurs more frequently in MSA in comparison to Parkinson's disease and 
healthy volunteers. A total of 63 patients with MSA, 54 age-, race- and 
gendermatched controls with Parkinson's disease, and 126 matched healthy 
volunteers were studied. The genotype analysis revealed no significant 
difference in the codon 129 genotype distribution in MSA as compared to 
controls. Nonetheless, the frequencies of the MM and VV genotypes were higher in 
MSA than in Parkinson's disease. Thus, homozygosity, particularly VV 
homozygosity, at codon 129 of PRNP is associated with MSA compared to a 
clinically related but pathophysiologically distinct alpha-synucleinopathy. 
Considering the possibility that the prion protein contributes to the 
pathogenesis of MSA would require confirmation of these findings in an 
independent patient population.

DOI: 10.1007/s10286-007-0447-7
PMID: 18236005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1805. Neurology. 2008 Feb 5;70(6):473-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000299085.18976.20.

Practice parameter: Assessing patients in a neurology practice for risk of falls 
(an evidence-based review): report of the Quality Standards Subcommittee of the 
American Academy of Neurology.

Thurman DJ(1), Stevens JA, Rao JK; Quality Standards Subcommittee of the 
American Academy of Neurology.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Jan 27;72(4):382; author reply 382-3.
    Neurology. 2009 Jan 27;72(4):382; author reply 382-3.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a practice parameter for screening methods and assessments 
of risk for falls pertaining to patients likely to be seen in neurology 
practices.
METHODS: Relevant literature was systematically reviewed and strength of 
evidence classified based on the American Academy of Neurology's criteria (Level 
A: established; Level B: probable; Level C: possible).
RESULTS: An increased risk of falls is established among persons with diagnoses 
of stroke, dementia, and disorders of gait and balance (Level A) and probable 
among patients with Parkinson disease, peripheral neuropathy, lower extremity 
weakness or sensory loss, and substantial vision loss (Level B). A history of 
falling in the past year strongly predicts the likelihood of future falls (Level 
A). Screening measures have been developed to further assess risks of falls, 
including functional assessments that may be useful (Levels B and C). Several of 
these assess overlapping neurologic functions--i.e., gait, mobility, and 
balance--and there is insufficient evidence to assess whether they offer benefit 
beyond that provided by a standard neurologic examination.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with neurologic or general conditions associated with an 
increased risk of falling should be asked about recent falls and further 
examined for the presence of specific neurologic deficits that predict falls, 
which include gait and balance disorders; deficits of lower extremity strength, 
sensation, and coordination; and cognitive impairments. If substantial risks of 
falls are identified, appropriate interventions that are described in other 
evidence-based guidelines may be considered.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000299085.18976.20
PMID: 18250292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1806. Neurobiol Aging. 2009 Sep;30(9):1420-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.12.001. Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Right prefrontal hypometabolism predicts delusions in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Perneczky R(1), Drzezga A, Boecker H, Wagenpfeil S, Förstl H, Kurz A, 
Häussermann P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Technical University Munich, 
München, Germany. robert.perneczky@lrz.tum.de

Delusions (DEL) are frequent in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB); however, the 
neural equivalent is poorly understood. The present study therefore aimed to 
identify the cerebral metabolic pattern of glucose of a DLB group suffering from 
DEL (DLB+DEL) as compared to a non-delusional group (DLB-DEL) and a control 
group (NL); and to determine the predictive value of the regional metabolic 
deficit for DEL symptomatology in comparison to other clinical variables 
significantly associated with DEL. Voxel-wise comparisons were conducted between 
the patient and control groups in SPM2. The most significant regional metabolic 
deficit of the DLB+DEL group was used a predictor for DEL symptomatology in a 
logistic regression analysis along with other variables significantly associated 
with DEL, such as visual hallucinations (VH), and overall cognitive impairment. 
A significant relative hypometabolism of the right prefrontal cortex was found 
in the DLB+DEL group, which predicted DEL symptomatology in the regression 
analysis. VH and overall cognitive dysfunction were no significant predictors. 
These results underline the significance of right prefrontal damage for DEL in 
DLB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.12.001
PMID: 18255191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1807. Neurology. 2008 Apr 15;70(16 Pt 2):1438-44. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000303818.38960.44. Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Use of antihypertensives and the risk of Parkinson disease.

Becker C(1), Jick SS, Meier CR.

Author information:
(1)Basel Pharmacoepidemiology Unit, Division of Clinical Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, University Hospital Basel, Hebelstrasse 2, CH-4031 Basel, 
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Feb 10;72(6):578-9.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies related angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) 
inhibitors and calcium channel blockers to possible neuroprotective effects. 
Little is known about neuroprotection of angiotensin II (AT II) antagonists or 
beta-blockers.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the association between antihypertensive drug use and the 
risk of developing a first-time diagnosis of Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: This was a case-control analysis within the UK-based General Practice 
Research Database. Cases were >or=40 years of age with an incident PD diagnosis 
between 1994 and 2005. We matched one control to each PD case on age, sex, 
general practice, index date, and duration of previous history in the database. 
We assessed antihypertensive drug use by timing and by exposure duration. We 
calculated ORs using conditional logistic regression, adjusted for body mass 
index, smoking, and various cardiovascular, metabolic, and psychiatric diseases 
and dementia.
RESULTS: We identified 3,637 cases with a first-time diagnosis of idiopathic PD 
and an equal number of matched controls. As compared to nonuse of 
antihypertensive drugs, the adjusted OR for current use of >or=30 prescriptions 
was 1.08 (95% CI 0.85 to 1.37) for ACE inhibitors, 0.91 (95% CI 0.41 to 2.00) 
for AT II antagonists, 1.16 (95% CI 0.95 to 1.41) for beta-blockers, and 0.77 
(95% CI 0.63 to 0.95) for calcium channel blockers.
CONCLUSIONS: Current long-term use of calcium channel blockers was associated 
with a significantly reduced risk of a Parkinson disease diagnosis, while the 
risk was not materially altered for users of angiotensin converting enzyme 
inhibitors or beta-blockers and, with less statistical precision, for users of 
angiotensin II antagonists.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000303818.38960.44
PMID: 18256367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1808. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2008 Jan 31;128(3):294-7.

[Cholinesterase inhibitors in the treatment of dementia--are they useful in 
clinical practice?].

[Article in Norwegian]

Landmark K(1), Reikvam A.

Author information:
(1)Institutt for farmakoterapi, Det medisinske fakultet, Universitetet i Oslo, 
Postboks 1065 Blindern, 0316 Oslo. k.h.landmark@labmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND: Some randomized studies, mostly of short duration, have indicated 
that cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine) may 
have a beneficial effect in Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia and in 
dementia caused by Lewy body disease. The benefit of these drugs in clinical 
practice has not been satisfactorily documented.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Literature collected regularly for many years supplemented 
by extensive non-systematic searches of Pubmed and Embase.
RESULTS: Only in a few placebo-controlled, double-blind, randomised studies were 
the patients followed for more than one year. Several clinical tests were 
performed, among them the Mini Mental Status (MMS)-test, which is the most 
commonly used test in clinical practice. The three cholinesterase inhibitors led 
to statistically significant results, although of limited clinical relevance, in 
various forms of dementia.
INTERPRETATION: Based on the results obtained it could be questioned whether the 
observed effects are of clinical significance. Only a small proportion of 
patients with Alzheimer's disease seem to benefit from the cholinesterase 
inhibitors tested, and it is difficult to predict who will in advance. Treatment 
should first be evaluated after 2-4 months and subsequently on a regular basis, 
and accepted clinical tests should be applied.

PMID: 18264153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1809. Neurology. 2008 Feb 12;70(7):566-73. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000286938.39473.0e.

J. Clifford Richardson and 50 years of progressive supranuclear palsy.

Williams DR(1), Lees AJ, Wherrett JR, Steele JC.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Monash University, Alfred Hospital Campus, Melbourne, 
Australia

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Jan 13;72(2):199; author reply 199-200.

OBJECTIVE: To trace the historical events leading to Richardson's clinical 
description of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) in the context of subsequent 
observations of its clinical heterogeneity and pathologic overlap with other 
tauopathies.
BACKGROUND: Fifty years ago, Canadian neurologist J. Clifford Richardson 
identified patients in Toronto with a syndrome of supranuclear vertical gaze 
palsy, pseudobulbar palsy, axial rigidity-in-extension, and cognitive 
impairment. In his seminal description, Richardson predicted that further 
clinicopathologic observations would broaden the clinical syndrome and that this 
was unlikely to be a disorder restricted to the Toronto region.
METHODS: The recollections of two of Richardson's contemporaries and archival 
material from his time were used as primary materials. Publications that follow 
the evolution of his observations were examined.
RESULTS: Recent factor analysis of pathologically verified PSP cases has 
confirmed the accuracy and uniformity of the original classic clinical 
description of PSP and vindicated Richardson's prediction of clinical variants. 
Most notably, a presentation with Parkinson syndrome and absent gaze palsy has 
been identified, with less severe PSP-tau pathology.
CONCLUSIONS: In recognition of his seminal observations, we propose that the 
classic clinical presentation of PSP-tau pathology be renamed Richardson's 
disease, and that the commonest clinical variant be termed PSP-parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000286938.39473.0e
PMID: 18268249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1810. Suicide Life Threat Behav. 2007 Dec;37(6):648-58. doi: 
10.1521/suli.2007.37.6.648.

Clinicopathological findings of suicide in the elderly: three cases.

Peisah C(1), Snowdon J, Kril J, Rodriguez M.

Author information:
(1)Academic Department for Old Age Psychiatry, Prince of Wales Hospital, 
Australia. cpeisah62@optusnet.com.au

The neuropathological correlates of suicide in older persons have received 
little research attention. Our recent study of elderly suicide victims from an 
Australian forensic medicine department (n = 143), unlike a previous 
case-control study, did not find an increased prevalence of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) in older persons who committed suicide despite a history of dementia in 
6.3%. Both studies were limited to the examination of AD-related pathology by 
the availability of tissue. We present clinicopathological data on three cases 
from our study for whom autopsy findings were available. These cases included: a 
community-dwelling male in his early eighties with dementia who was found to 
have multiple cortical and striatal lacunes and glial scars, small vessel 
cerebrovascular disease (SVD) and AD-related pathology; a community-dwelling 
male in his mid-seventies with depression and loss of concentration, with 
brainstem predominant Lewy body disease (LBD) and AD-related pathology; and a 
female nursing home resident in her nineties with a history of stroke and prior 
suicide attempts who was found to have infarcts and SVD in frontal regions. 
Neuropathological findings in elderly suicide victims may include multiple 
neurodegenerative pathologies. The burden and distribution of neurodegenerative 
diseases apart from AD, including SVD and LBD, should be assessed as possible 
pathophysiological factors contributing to late life suicide.

DOI: 10.1521/suli.2007.37.6.648
PMID: 18275371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1811. Acta Neurol Scand. 2008 Jul;118(1):1-11. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00985.x. 
Epub 2008 Feb 13.

Clinical proteomics in neurodegenerative disorders.

Zetterberg H(1), Rüetschi U, Portelius E, Brinkmalm G, Andreasson U, Blennow K, 
Brinkmalm A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, Sweden. 
henrik.zetterberg@clinchem.gu.se

Neurodegenerative disorders are characterized by neuronal impairment that 
eventually leads to neuronal death. In spite of the brain's known capacity for 
regeneration, lost neurons are difficult to replace. Therefore, drugs aimed at 
inhibiting neurodegenerative processes are likely to be most effective if the 
treatment is initiated as early as possible. However, clinical manifestations in 
early disease stages are often numerous, subtle and difficult to diagnose. This 
is where biomarkers that specifically reflect onset of pathology, directly or 
indirectly, may have a profound impact on diagnosis making in the future. A 
triplet of biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease (AD), total and 
hyperphosphorylated tau and the 42 amino acid isoform of beta-amyloid, has 
already been established for early detection of AD before the onset of dementia. 
However, more biomarkers are needed both for AD and for other neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as Parkinson's disease, frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. This review provides an update on recent advances in clinical 
neuroproteomics, a biomarker discovery field that has expanded immensely during 
the last decade, and gives an overview of the most commonly used techniques and 
the major clinically relevant findings these techniques have lead to.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00985.x
PMID: 18279484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1812. J Neurol. 2008 May;255(5):628-32. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0758-1. Epub 2008 Feb 
19.

The auditory startle response in parkinsonism may reveal the extent but not type 
of pathology.

Williams DR(1), Doyle LM, Lees AJ, Brown P.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine Neurosciences, Monash University Alfred Hospital Campus.

OBJECTIVES: We measured the acoustic startle response (ASR) and blink reflex 
(ABR) in patients with clinically diagnosed Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and determined the specificity of an 
abnormal result for the diagnosis of PSP.
METHODS: Thirty patients (11 PD, 19 PSP) and 12 age matched controls were 
studied. The PSP group was separated into clinical subgroups. Fourteen patients 
with early falls, cognitive dysfunction and eye movement abnormalities were 
classified as Richardson's disease (RD), 3 with parkinsonism in the absence of 
early falls, cognitive dysfunction or eye movement abnormalities were classified 
PSP-parkinsonism (PSP-P) and 2 who presented with gait unsteadiness and freezing 
without cognitive dysfunction or eye movement abnormalities were classified as 
pure akinesia with gait freezing (PAGF). Following an acoustic startle stimulus 
EMG activity was recorded in the orbicularis oculi and sternomastoid muscles. 
The likelihood ratio of an absent response being clinically diagnosed PSP was 
determined.
RESULTS: The ABR was present in 11/19 (58%) of patients with PSP, and 11/11 with 
PD and 12/12 controls (H2 p < 0.05). The ASR measured at the sternomastoid was 
present in only 2/19 (11%) of patients with PSP, but in 5/11 (45%) with PD and 
6/12 (50 %) controls (H2 p < 0.05). The ABR was present in only 6/14 (43%) of 
the RD group, but in 3/3 PSP-P and 2/2 PAGF. Loss of the ABR was 100% specific 
for PSP, but only 42 % sensitive. Loss of the sternomastoid ASR had a likelihood 
ratio of 1.9 for the clinical diagnosis of PSP.
CONCLUSIONS: The ASR and ABR appear unlikely to be useful in differentiating PSP 
from PD. Abnormalities in these responses are worse in RD where the pathology is 
known to be more widespread than in PSP-P and PAGF.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-008-0758-1
PMID: 18283396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1813. J Nucl Med. 2008 Mar;49(3):390-8. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.107.045385. Epub 2008 Feb 
20.

Multicenter standardized 18F-FDG PET diagnosis of mild cognitive impairment, 
Alzheimer's disease, and other dementias.

Mosconi L(1), Tsui WH, Herholz K, Pupi A, Drzezga A, Lucignani G, Reiman EM, 
Holthoff V, Kalbe E, Sorbi S, Diehl-Schmid J, Perneczky R, Clerici F, Caselli R, 
Beuthien-Baumann B, Kurz A, Minoshima S, de Leon MJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Brain Health, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016, USA. lisa.mosconi@med.nyu.edu

This multicenter study examined (18)F-FDG PET measures in the differential 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from normal aging and from each other and the 
relation of disease-specific patterns to mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We examined the (18)F-FDG PET scans of 548 subjects, including 110 
healthy elderly individuals ("normals" or NLs), 114 MCI, 199 AD, 98 FTD, and 27 
DLB patients, collected at 7 participating centers. Individual PET scans were Z 
scored using automated voxel-based comparison with generation of 
disease-specific patterns of cortical and hippocampal (18)F-FDG uptake that were 
then applied to characterize MCI.
RESULTS: Standardized disease-specific PET patterns were developed that 
correctly classified 95% AD, 92% DLB, 94% FTD, and 94% NL. MCI patients showed 
primarily posterior cingulate cortex and hippocampal hypometabolism (81%), 
whereas neocortical abnormalities varied according to neuropsychological 
profiles. An AD PET pattern was observed in 79% MCI with deficits in multiple 
cognitive domains and 31% amnesic MCI. (18)F-FDG PET heterogeneity in MCI with 
nonmemory deficits ranged from absent hypometabolism to FTD and DLB PET 
patterns.
CONCLUSION: Standardized automated analysis of (18)F-FDG PET scans may provide 
an objective and sensitive support to the clinical diagnosis in early dementia.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.107.045385
PMCID: PMC3703818
PMID: 18287270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1814. Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Apr;115(4):399-407. doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0346-6. Epub 
2008 Feb 23.

Applicability of current staging/categorization of alpha-synuclein pathology and 
their clinical relevance.

Parkkinen L(1), Pirttilä T, Alafuzoff I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Unit of Neurology, Section of 
Neuropathology, Kuopio University, Yliopistonranta 1 C, P.O. Box 1627, 70211, 
Kuopio, Finland.

Comment in
    Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Jul;116(1):125-8; author reply 129-31.

In Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) alpha-synuclein 
(alphaS) pathology is seen that displays a predictable topographic distribution. 
There are two staging/categorization systems, i.e. Braak's and McKeith's, 
currently in use for the assessment of alphaS pathology. The aim of these 
diagnostic strategies in pathology is, in addition to assess the stage/severity 
of pathology, to assess the probabilities of the related clinical symptomatology 
i.e. dementia and extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS). Herein, we assessed the 
applicability of these two staging/categorization systems and the frequency of 
dementia and EPS in a cohort of 226 alphaS-positive-subjects. These subject were 
selected from a large autopsy sample (n = 1,720), irrespective of the clinical 
presentation, based on the detection of alphaS-immunoreactivity (IR) in one of 
the most vulnerable nuclei; in the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus, substantia 
nigra and basal forebrain. The frequency of alphaS-IR lesions in this large 
cohort was 14% (248 out of 1,720). If applicable, each of the 226 subjects with 
all required material available was assigned a neuropathological stage/category 
of PD/DLB and finally the neuropathological data was analyzed in relation to 
dementia and EPS. 83% of subjects showed a distribution pattern of alphaS-IR 
that was compatible with the current staging/categorization systems. Around 55% 
of subjects with widespread alphaS pathology (Braak's PD stages 5-6) lacked 
clinical signs of dementia or EPS. Similarly, in respect to those subjects that 
fulfilled the McKeith criteria for diffuse neocortical category and displaying 
only mild concomitant Alzheimer's disease-related pathology, only 48% were 
demented and 54% displayed EPS. It is noteworthy that some subjects (17%) 
deviated from the suggested caudo-rostral propagation suggesting alternative 
routes of progression, perhaps due to concomitant diseases and genetic 
predisposition. In conclusion, our results do indeed confirm that current 
staging/categorization systems can readily be applied to most of the subjects 
with alphaS pathology. However, finding that around half of the subjects with 
abundant alphaS pathology remain neurologically intact is intriguing and raises 
the question whether we do assess the actual disease process.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0346-6
PMCID: PMC2270355
PMID: 18297293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1815. Geriatrics. 2008 Feb;63(2):32-7.

When to consider normal pressure hydrocephalus in the patient with gait 
disturbance.

Factora R, Luciano M.

Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) is a chronic adult disorder of unknown 
cause. It is characterized by gradual onset of gait impairment, cognitive 
dysfunction, and urinary incontinence in the presence of enlarged ventricles. 
NPH is a relatively rare cause of these 3 common symptoms. Diagnosis is made 
based on suspicion of NPH symptoms, the additional finding of ventriculomegaly 
on imaging, and confirmatory testing with a trial of CSF drainage, which can 
predict improvement with CSF shunting. The differential diagnosis must consider 
common causes of each of the symptoms and include Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), vascular dementia, and spinal stenosis. Treatment 
involves CSF diversion, usually through implantation of a shunt from the 
ventricles to the peritoneal cavity. After surgery and in the absence of other 
contributing factors, the benefit of surgical intervention can be durable over 
years.

PMID: 18312021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1816. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008 Aug;14(6):457-64. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2007.11.009. Epub 2008 Mar 3.

Implicit and explicit aspects of sequence learning in pre-symptomatic 
Huntington's disease.

Ghilardi MF(1), Silvestri G, Feigin A, Mattis P, Zgaljardic D, Moisello C, Crupi 
D, Marinelli L, Dirocco A, Eidelberg D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, CUNY Medical School, New York, NY 
10031, USA. lice.mg79@gmail.com

Learning deficits may be part of the early symptoms of Huntington's disease 
(HD). Here we characterized implicit and explicit aspects of sequence learning 
in 11 pre-symptomatic HD gene carriers (pHD) and 11 normal controls. Subjects 
moved a cursor on a digitizing tablet and performed the following tasks: SEQ: 
learning to anticipate the appearance of a target sequence in two blocks; VSEQ: 
learning a sequence by attending to the display without moving for one block, 
and by moving to the sequence in a successive block (VSEQ test). Explicit 
learning was measured with declarative scores and number of anticipatory 
movements. Implicit learning was measured as a strategy change reflected in 
movement time. By the end of SEQ, pHD had a significantly lower number of 
correct anticipatory movements and lower declarative scores than controls, while 
in VSEQ and VSEQ test these indices improved. During all three tasks, movement 
time changed in controls, but not in pHD. These results suggest that both 
explicit and implicit aspects of sequence learning may be impaired before the 
onset of motor symptoms. However, when attentional demands decrease, explicit, 
but not implicit, learning may improve.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2007.11.009
PMCID: PMC2562166
PMID: 18316233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1817. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2008 Jan-Mar;22(1):54-60. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181611011.

Brain N-acetylaspartate is reduced in Parkinson disease with dementia.

Griffith HR(1), den Hollander JA, Okonkwo OC, O'Brien T, Watts RL, Marson DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. rlgriffith@uabmc.edu

Persons with Parkinson disease (PD) are at risk of developing dementia. Of the 
dementias affecting patients with PD, PD with dementia (PDD) is not well 
understood, although brain imaging studies to date have observed characteristic 
patterns of brain atrophy. Metabolic differences have been observed in magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (MRS) studies comparing patients with PDD to nondemented 
PD patients, although it is unclear whether PDD patients have abnormally low MRS 
ratios compared with healthy age-matched adults. In this study, 12 patients with 
PDD, 12 patients with PD and no dementia, and 12 age-matched healthy older 
adults underwent MRS of the posterior cingulate gyrus. Patients with PDD showed 
lower N-acetylaspartate/creatine (NAA/Cr) compared with controls (P=0.004) and 
compared with nondemented PD patients (P=0.003). No abnormalities were observed 
in choline/Cr or myo-Inositol/Cr. NAA/Cr was correlated with mental status in 
patients with PD and in patients with PDD (r=0.56; P=0.029). The findings 
suggest that reduced NAA/Cr of the posterior cingulate could be used as a marker 
for dementia in patients with PD. Future studies investigating the utility of 
brain MRS as a predictor of dementia in PD and comparing brain metabolism in PDD 
with other dementias seem warranted.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181611011
PMID: 18317247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1818. Neurodegener Dis. 2008;5(3-4):133-6. doi: 10.1159/000113682. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Biomarkers for the early detection of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease.

Berg D(1).

Author information:
(1)Center of Neurology, Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for 
Clinical Brain Research, University of Tubingen, Tubingen, Germany. 
daniela.berg@uni-tuebingen.de

In the aging population of many countries in the world, neurodegenerative 
diseases like Parkinson's disease (PD) are becoming an increasing burden. 
Therefore, early therapy and ultimately disease prevention is essential, which 
is only possible with an early diagnosis. Besides a genetic predisposition, a 
number of biomarkers are being discussed to indicate vulnerability to PD, some 
of them many years before disease manifestation. These include hyperechogenicity 
of the substantia nigra as well as premotor symptoms like olfactory and 
autonomic dysfunction, depression, REM sleep behavior disorder, and 
neuropsychological impairment. Moreover, first signs of affection of the 
substantia nigra like PET and SPECT abnormalities and slight motor signs can be 
included, as they may be detected before a definite diagnosis according to motor 
symptoms can be made. Interestingly, other frequent neurodegenerative disorders 
like Alzheimer's disease (AD) are also characterized by a long preclinical 
period, with several biomarkers discussed as indicative for disease 
vulnerability including cerebrospinal fluid, serum, and neuroimaging biomarkers, 
olfactory dysfunction as well as subtle neuropsychological deficits. However, 
future studies are necessary, which establish the predictive value of these 
markers singularly and in combination to detect a subgroup of the population at 
risk for PD and AD not only to accelerate research on etiology and 
pathophysiology but also to promote testing for neuroprotective strategies.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000113682
PMID: 18322370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1819. Neurodegener Dis. 2008;5(3-4):215-7. doi: 10.1159/000113706. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

In vivo and postmortem clinicoanatomical correlations in frontotemporal dementia 
and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17.

Ghetti B(1), Spina S, Murrell JR, Huey ED, Pietrini P, Sweeney B, Wassermann EM, 
Keohane C, Farlow MR, Grafman J.

Author information:
(1)Indiana Alzheimer Disease Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Ind. 46202, USA. bghetti@iupui.edu

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17) is associated with mutations in the Microtubule-Associated Protein 
Tau(MAPT) gene or the Progranulin(PGRN) gene. MAPT mutations lead to widespread 
deposition of hyperphosphorylated tau protein (FTDP-17T). PGRN mutations are 
associated with ubiquitin- and TDP-43-positive inclusions in the frontotemporal 
cortex, striatum and hippocampus (FTDP-17U). Despite the differences, FTDP-17T 
and FTDP-17U share a largely overlapping clinical phenotype.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether neuroimaging studies may allow an in vivo early 
differentiation between FTDP-17T and FTDP-17U.
METHODS: We studied 25 individuals affected with FTDP-17T associated with either 
the exon 10+3 (24 subjects) or the G335S (1 subject) MAPT mutation, as well as 3 
FTDP-17U individuals, who were carriers of the A9D, IVS6-2A>G or R493X PGRN 
mutation. Neuroimaging studies, obtained along the course of the disease, were 
compared to the neuropathologic findings.
RESULTS: FTDP-17T cases were associated with symmetric frontotemporal atrophy. 
Behavioral changes constituted the predominant clinical presentation. 
Conversely, an asymmetric degenerative process was seen in all 3 PGRN cases, who 
presented with either corticobasal syndrome (A9D) or frontotemporal dementia and 
language deterioration (IVS6-2A>G and R493X).
CONCLUSION: Neuroimaging data, in the early disease stage of FTDP-17, may offer 
the possibility of an early differentiation of FTDP-17T and FTDP-17U phenotypes, 
independent of the genetic analysis.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000113706
PMCID: PMC2826454
PMID: 18322394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1820. Neurodegener Dis. 2008;5(3-4):257-60. doi: 10.1159/000113718. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

The long-term effects of oophorectomy on cognitive and motor aging are age 
dependent.

Rocca WA(1), Grossardt BR, Maraganore DM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, Minn. 55905, USA. rocca@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: The evidence for a neuroprotective effect of estrogen in women 
remains controversial.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the long-term risk of parkinsonism and of cognitive 
impairment or dementia in women who underwent oophorectomy before menopause.
METHODS: We conducted a historical cohort study among all women residing in 
Olmsted County, Minn., USA, who underwent unilateral or bilateral oophorectomy 
before the onset of menopause for a noncancer indication from 1950 through 1987. 
Each member of the oophorectomy cohort was matched by age to a referent woman 
from the same population who had not undergone oophorectomy. In total, we 
studied 1,252 women with unilateral oophorectomy, 1,075 women with bilateral 
oophorectomy, and 2,368 referent women. Women were followed for a median of 
25-30 years. Parkinsonism was assessed using screening and examination, through 
a medical records-linkage system, and through death certificates. Cognitive 
status was assessed using a structured questionnaire via a direct or proxy 
telephone interview.
RESULTS: The risk of parkinsonism and of cognitive impairment or dementia 
increased following oophorectomy. In particular, we observed significant linear 
trends of increasing risk for either outcome with younger age at oophorectomy.
CONCLUSION: Our findings, combined with previous laboratory and epidemiologic 
findings, suggest that estrogen may have an age-dependent neuroprotective 
effect.

2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000113718
PMCID: PMC2768565
PMID: 18322406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1821. Neuropsychol Rev. 2008 Mar;18(1):103-19. doi: 10.1007/s11065-008-9055-0. Epub 
2008 Mar 6.

Neuropsychological characteristics of dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's 
disease with dementia: differentiation, early detection, and implications for 
"mild cognitive impairment" and biomarkers.

Tröster AI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (CB 7025), University of North Carolina at Chapel 
Hill, 3114 Bioinformatics Building, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7025, USA. 
trostera@neurology.unc.edu

Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are 
neurodegenerative conditions sharing a disorder of alpha-synuclein metabolism. 
Temporal differences in the emergence of symptoms and clinical features warrant 
the continued clinical distinction between DLB and PDD. While DLB and PDD 
groups' neuropsychological profiles often differ from those in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), the diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and predictive values of 
these profiles remain largely unknown. PDD and DLB neuropsychological profiles 
share sufficient similarity to resist accurate and reliable differentiation. 
Although heterogeneous cognitive changes (predominantly in memory and executive 
function) may manifest earlier and more frequently than previously appreciated 
in Parkinson's disease (PD), and executive deficits may be harbingers of 
dementia, the enthusiasm to uncritically extend the concept of mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) to PD should be tempered. Instead, future research might strive 
to identify the precise neuropsychological characteristics of the prodromal 
stages of PD, PDD, and DLB which, in conjunction with other potential 
biomarkers, facilitate early and accurate diagnosis, and the definition of 
neuroprotective, neurorestorative, and symptomatic treatment endpoints.

DOI: 10.1007/s11065-008-9055-0
PMID: 18322801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1822. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008 Nov;14(7):558-62. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.01.007. Epub 2008 Mar 6.

Early neuropsychological detection and the characteristics of Parkinson's 
disease associated with mild dementia.

Song IU(1), Kim JS, Jeong DS, Song HJ, Lee KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Parkinson's disease (PD) may exhibit patterns of cognitive deficits, yet 
physicians are currently lacking operational criteria to define the clinical 
boundaries between PD and PD dementia (PDD). Therefore, we investigated the 
characteristics of the cognitive impairments in mild PDD. We recruited 30 PDD, 
20 PD-MCI (PD with mild cognitive impairment without dementia) and 33 controls. 
All subjects were evaluated with detailed neuropsychological tests. Our results 
showed that visual memory, visuospatial functions, naming and calculation 
displayed more marked impairment than that of the other domains. Thus we suggest 
that adding cognitive dysfunctions of cortical type to the early cognitive 
deficits of PD-MCI can help predict the development of dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.01.007
PMID: 18328767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1823. Arch Neurol. 2008 Mar;65(3):379-82. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2007.68.

Glucocerebrosidase gene mutations: a risk factor for Lewy body disorders.

Mata IF(1), Samii A, Schneer SH, Roberts JW, Griffith A, Leis BC, Schellenberg 
GD, Sidransky E, Bird TD, Leverenz JB, Tsuang D, Zabetian CP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase (GBA) gene have been reported to 
modify risk for Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
However, these findings have not been consistently replicated, and most studies 
have had substantial methodological shortcomings.
OBJECTIVE: To better assess the role of GBA variants in altering risk for Lewy 
body disorders.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Four movement disorder clinics in the Seattle, Washington, area.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven hundred twenty-one patients with PD, 554 healthy control 
subjects, and 57 patients with DLB.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Disease status and presence or absence of the 2 most 
common GBA mutations (N370S and L444P).
RESULTS: We observed a significantly higher heterozygote frequency for the 2 
mutations in patients with PD (2.9%; P <.001) and those with DLB (3.5%; P = 
.045) compared with control subjects (0.4%).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that GBA mutations exert a large effect on 
susceptibility for Lewy body disorders at the individual level but are 
associated with a modest (approximately 3%) population-attributable risk in 
individuals of European ancestry.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2007.68
PMCID: PMC2826203
PMID: 18332251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1824. J Neuroimaging. 2008 Apr;18(2):137-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00203.x. 
Epub 2008 Feb 6.

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy detects a relative decrease of 
N-acetylaspartate in the hippocampus of patients with dementia with Lewy bodies.

Xuan X(1), Ding M, Gong X.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University 
College of Medicine, Hangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: To characterize the cerebral metabolic changes in 
dementia with Lewy bodies patients.
METHODS: The metabolic ratios of NAA/Cr and Cho/Cr in bilateral hippocampus were 
determined by proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in 8 patients and 8 
age-matched healthy controls.
RESULTS: Dementia with Lewy bodies patients showed significantly lower NAA/Cr 
ratios in bilateral hippocampus, while the Cho/Cr ratio did not differ from the 
control group.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show relatively decrease of N-acetylaspartate in the 
hippocampus of patients with early or intermediate stage DLB. Hence, damage of 
neurons seems to be an early alteration in DLB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2007.00203.x
PMID: 18333837 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1825. Exp Neurol. 2008 May;211(1):227-33. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.01.023. Epub 
2008 Feb 14.

Pallidal neuronal discharge in Huntington's disease: support for selective loss 
of striatal cells originating the indirect pathway.

Starr PA(1), Kang GA, Heath S, Shimamoto S, Turner RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of California, San Francisco, San 
Francisco CA 94143, USA. starrp@neurosurg.ucsf.edu

Chorea is the predominant motor manifestation in the early symptomatic phase of 
adult onset Huntington's disease (HD). Pathologically, this stage is marked by 
differential loss of striatal neurons contributing to the indirect pathway. This 
pattern of neuronal loss predicts decreased neuronal firing rates in GPi and 
increased firing rates in GPe, the opposite of the changes in firing rate known 
to occur in Parkinson's disease (PD). We present single-unit discharge 
characteristics (33 neurons) observed in an awake patient with HD (41 CAG 
repeats) undergoing microelectrode guided surgery for pallidal deep brain 
stimulation. Pallidal single-unit activity at "rest" and during voluntary 
movement was discriminated off line by principal component analysis and 
evaluated with respect to discharge rate, bursting, and oscillatory activity in 
the 0-200 Hz range. 24 GPi and 9 GPe units were studied, and compared with 132 
GPi and 50 GPe units from 14 patients with PD. The mean (+/-SEM) spontaneous 
discharge rate for HD was 58+/-4 for GPi and 73+/-5 for GPe. This contrasted 
with discharge rates in PD of 95+/-2 for GPi and 57+/-3 for GPe. HD GPi units 
showed more bursting than PD GPi units but much less oscillatory activity in the 
2-35 Hz frequency range at rest. These findings are consistent with selective 
early loss of striatal cells originating the indirect pathway.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2008.01.023
PMCID: PMC3673313
PMID: 18342309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1826. Neuroscience. 2008 Apr 9;152(4):913-23. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.01.030. 
Epub 2008 Feb 5.

Phosphorylation of tau and alpha-synuclein in synaptic-enriched fractions of the 
frontal cortex in Alzheimer's disease, and in Parkinson's disease and related 
alpha-synucleinopathies.

Muntané G(1), Dalfó E, Martinez A, Ferrer I.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Neuropatologia, Servei Anatomia Patològica, IDIBELL-Hospital 
Universitari de Bellvitge, Facultat de Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, 
CIBERNED, carrer Feixa Llarga sn, 08907 Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.

Phosphorylation of tau and phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein are crucial 
abnormalities in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and alpha-synucleinopathies 
(Parkinson's disease: PD, and dementia with Lewy bodies: DLB), respectively. The 
presence and distribution of phospho-tau were examined by sub-fractionation, gel 
electrophoresis and Western blotting in the frontal cortex of cases with AD at 
different stages of disease progression, PD, DLB pure form and common form, and 
in age-matched controls. Phospho-tauSer396 has been found in synaptic-enriched 
fractions in AD frontal cortex at entorhinal/transentorhinal, limbic and 
neocortical stages, thus indicating early tau phosphorylation at the synapses in 
AD before the occurrence of neurofibrillary tangles in the frontal cortex. 
Phospho-tauSer396 is also found in synaptic-enriched fractions in the frontal 
cortex in PD and DLB pure and common forms, thus indicating increased tau 
phosphorylation at the synapses in these alpha-synucleinopathies. Densitometric 
studies show between 20% and 40% phospho-tauSer396, in relation with tau-13, in 
synaptic-enriched fractions of the frontal cortex in AD stages I-III, and in PD 
and DLB. The percentage reaches about 95% in AD stage V and DLB common form. Yet 
tau phosphorylation characteristic of neurofibrillary tangles, as revealed with 
the AT8 antibody, is found in the synaptic fractions of the frontal cortex only 
at advanced stages of AD. Increased phosphorylated alpha-synucleinSer129 levels 
are observed in the synaptic-enriched fractions of the frontal cortex in PD and 
DLB pure and common forms, and in advanced stages of AD. Since 
tau-hyperphosphorylation has implications in microtubule assembly, and 
phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein at Ser129 favors alpha-synuclein aggregation, 
it can be suggested that synapses are targets of abnormal tau and 
alpha-synuclein phosphorylation in both groups of diseases. Tau phosphorylation 
at Ser396 has also been found in synaptic-enriched fractions in 12-month-old 
transgenic mice bearing the A53T alpha-synuclein mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2008.01.030
PMID: 18343584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1827. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Apr;79(4):368-76. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2007.131045.

Parkinson's disease: clinical features and diagnosis.

Jankovic J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders 
Clinic, Baylor College of Medicine, 6550 Fannin, Suite 1801, Houston, Texas 
77030-3498, USA. josephj@bcm.tmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder 
characterised by a large number of motor and non-motor features that can impact 
on function to a variable degree. This review describes the clinical 
characteristics of PD with emphasis on those features that differentiate the 
disease from other parkinsonian disorders.
METHODS: A MedLine search was performed to identify studies that assess the 
clinical characteristics of PD. Search terms included "Parkinson's disease", 
"diagnosis" and "signs and symptoms".
RESULTS: Because there is no definitive test for the diagnosis of PD, the 
disease must be diagnosed based on clinical criteria. Rest tremor, bradykinesia, 
rigidity and loss of postural reflexes are generally considered the cardinal 
signs of PD. The presence and specific presentation of these features are used 
to differentiate PD from related parkinsonian disorders. Other clinical features 
include secondary motor symptoms (eg, hypomimia, dysarthria, dysphagia, 
sialorrhoea, micrographia, shuffling gait, festination, freezing, dystonia, 
glabellar reflexes), non-motor symptoms (eg, autonomic dysfunction, 
cognitive/neurobehavioral abnormalities, sleep disorders and sensory 
abnormalities such as anosmia, paresthesias and pain). Absence of rest tremor, 
early occurrence of gait difficulty, postural instability, dementia, 
hallucinations, and the presence of dysautonomia, ophthalmoparesis, ataxia and 
other atypical features, coupled with poor or no response to levodopa, suggest 
diagnoses other than PD.
CONCLUSIONS: A thorough understanding of the broad spectrum of clinical 
manifestations of PD is essential to the proper diagnosis of the disease. 
Genetic mutations or variants, neuroimaging abnormalities and other tests are 
potential biomarkers that may improve diagnosis and allow the identification of 
persons at risk.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2007.131045
PMID: 18344392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1828. Bundesgesundheitsblatt Gesundheitsforschung Gesundheitsschutz. 2008 
Apr;51(4):406-10. doi: 10.1007/s00103-008-0508-7.

[Depression in old age].

[Article in German]

Stoppe G(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitäre Psychiatrische Kliniken, Wilheml Klein-Strasse 27, Basel, 
Switzerland. gabriela.stoppe@upkbs.ch

Depression is the most frequent psychiatric disorder in old age. Some patients 
have had depressive episodes or other psychological disorder in an earlier part 
of their life span. Older people show more somatic or cognitive complaints 
compared to younger depressives. Risk factors for depression in old age are 
(incident) physical disorders, sleep disorders or loss of spouse. Depression 
worsens course and prognosis of comorbid somatic disorders. A major consequence 
is the high suicide rate in the elderly. Depression is also a risk factor for 
other disorders like dementia or institutionalisation. The interplay between 
depression and dementia and other organic brain disorders is complex und still 
unresolved. Depression in the elderly is a challenge for our health system. 
Recognition and treatment rates are still too low. Integrative treatment plans 
for depression with comorbid physical disorders or in various settings should be 
developed. With the growing elderly population the available evidence for 
treatment urgently has to be increased. In current practice drug 
therapies--mostly inadequate--dominate. Psychotherapy should be promoted and the 
number of old age psychotherapists increased.

DOI: 10.1007/s00103-008-0508-7
PMID: 18345472 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1829. Neurodegener Dis. 2008;5(6):339-46. doi: 10.1159/000121388. Epub 2008 Mar 18.

Different tau pathology pattern in two clinical phenotypes of progressive 
supranuclear palsy.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

BACKGROUND: The clinical and pathological heterogeneity of progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) is well established. Recent clinicopathological studies 
showed much more severe and more widespread tau pathology in Richardson's 
syndrome (RS), clinically manifest by early onset, falls, supranuclear gaze 
palsy, dementia and shorter disease duration than in atypical PSP-parkinsonism 
(PSP-P) often mimicking Parkinson's disease, in which tau pathology is 
relatively restricted to substantia nigra, subthalamic nucleus and internal 
globus pallidus.
OBJECTIVE: To perform a comparative clinicopathological study of 30 
autopsy-proven cases of PSP.
METHODS: Retrospective assessment of major clinical signs in 18 patients 
referred to as RS and 12 PSP-P, and semiquantitative assessment of the severity 
and distribution pattern of tau pathology in both phenotypes using routine 
stains and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: RS (61% males) and PSP-P (33% males) showed significant differences in 
clinical symptomatology and course (RS mean duration 4.2 years, PSP-P 13.8 
years) and significant differences in histopathology: widespread tau pathology 
and related multisystem degeneration in RS and more restricted lesions in PSP-P, 
which, however, were not only involving predominantly the 
subthalamo-nigral-pallidal system. Cortical tau pathology in both groups was 
usually restricted to limbic areas, and neocortical Alzheimer-type pathology was 
only seen in very old or demented PSP patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study confirmed the recently reported existence of two 
distinct clinical phenotypes in patients with pathologically proven PSP-P and 
RS, showing significant differences in severity and distribution of tau 
pathology, the latter more severe and more widely distributed than in PSP-P.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000121388
PMID: 18349518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1830. Drugs Aging. 2008;25(4):269-80. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200825040-00001.

Use of transdermal drug formulations in the elderly.

Kaestli LZ(1), Wasilewski-Rasca AF, Bonnabry P, Vogt-Ferrier N.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacy, University Hospitals of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland. 
Laure.Z.Kaestli@hcuge.ch

Transdermal drug delivery systems are pharmaceutical forms designed to 
administer a drug through the skin to obtain a systemic effect. They ensure a 
constant rate of drug administration and a prolonged action. Several different 
types of transdermal delivery devices are available on the market. They are 
either matrix or reservoir systems and their main current uses are to treat 
neurological disorders, pain and coronary artery disease, and as hormone 
replacement therapy. Transdermal drug administration has a number of advantages 
compared with the oral route: it avoids gastrointestinal absorption and hepatic 
first-pass metabolism, minimizes adverse effects arising from peak plasma drug 
concentrations and improves patient compliance. Compared with the parenteral 
route, transdermal administration entails no risk of infection. For elderly 
people, who are often polymedicated, transdermal drug delivery can be a good 
alternative route of administration. Transdermal absorption depends on passive 
diffusion through the different layers of the skin. As skin undergoes many 
structural and functional changes with increasing age, it would be useful to 
know whether these alterations affect the transdermal diffusion of drugs. 
Studies have shown that age-related changes in hydration and lipidic structure 
result in an increased barrier function of the stratum corneum only for 
relatively hydrophilic compounds. In practice, no significant differences in 
absorption of drugs from transdermal delivery systems have been demonstrated 
between young and old individuals. The need for dose adaptation in elderly 
patients using transdermal drug delivery systems is therefore not related to 
differences in skin absorption but rather to age-related cardiovascular, 
cerebral, hepatic and/or renal compromise, and to ensuing geriatric 
pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic changes.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200825040-00001
PMID: 18361538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1831. Neurology. 2008 Mar 25;70(13):1017-22. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000306632.43729.24.

Dementia and survival in Parkinson disease: a 12-year population study.

Buter TC(1), van den Hout A, Matthews FE, Larsen JP, Brayne C, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Stavanger University Hospital, Arm Hansen v 
20, N-4095 Stavanger, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The risk for dementia in Parkinson disease (PD) is high, with 
important clinical consequences for patients with PD. However, the absolute risk 
of dementia and how it affects survival in PD are not known. Such questions are 
important for patients, their families, and service providers but require 
long-term studies.
METHODS: This study is a prospective longitudinal cohort study with patients 
from a prevalence study of PD in Norway. Patients were reassessed 4, 8, 9, 10, 
11, and 12 years after prevalence day. A dementia diagnosis according to 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised, 
criteria was based on a semistructured caregiver interview, cognitive rating 
scales, and neuropsychological tests. Progression from PD to PD with dementia 
and death was modeled using a continuous-time three-state irreversible Markov 
model.
RESULTS: A total of 233 PD patients were included, and 140 patients (60%, 95% CI 
54% to 66%) had developed dementia by the end of the study period. The 
cumulative incidence of dementia steadily increases with age and duration of PD 
and, conditional on survival, increases to 80% to 90% by age 90 years. Women 
live with PD longer than men and spend more years with dementia. At age 70 
years, a man with PD but no dementia has a life expectancy of 8 years, of which 
5 years would be expected to be dementia free and 3 years would be expected to 
be with dementia.
CONCLUSION: Dementia is a key part of survival in Parkinson disease and must be 
planned for in services for this condition.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000306632.43729.24
PMID: 18362281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1832. Neurology. 2008 Mar 25;70(13):1042-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000306697.48738.b6.

Patterns and stages of alpha-synucleinopathy: Relevance in a population-based 
cohort.

Zaccai J(1), Brayne C, McKeith I, Matthews F, Ince PG; MRC Cognitive Function, 
Ageing Neuropathology Study.

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology, E Floor, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield UK.

BACKGROUND: It is proposed that alpha-synucleinopathy (AS) initially affects the 
medulla oblongata and progresses to more rostral brain areas in a hierarchical 
sequence ("Braak hypothesis"). Predominant involvement of the amygdala is also 
described. This study examines the applicability of these patterns, and their 
relationship to Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology, in brains of a 
population-based donor cohort.
METHODS: Brains donated in two of six Cognitive Function and Ageing Study 
cohorts (Cambridgeshire and Nottingham) were examined. More than 80% were older 
than 80 years at death. The respondents were evaluated prospectively in life for 
cognitive decline and dementia. Immunocytochemistry for tau and alpha-synuclein 
was carried out in 208 brains to establish Braak stage and the pattern and 
severity of AS.
RESULTS: Seventy-six brains showed Lewy bodies. Half (51%) conformed to the 
Braak hypothesis while 17% had pathology in a higher region which was absent in 
a lower region. A further 29% showed amygdala-predominant pathology. Six brains 
showed predominant neocortical pathology with minimal pathology in amygdala or 
substantia nigra. The stage of AD pathology was not associated with particular 
patterns of AS.
CONCLUSION: alpha-Synucleinopathy (AS) is common in older people, and frequently 
associated with Alzheimer disease-type pathology. Although half of brains 
corresponded to the Braak hypothesis, and 29% to amygdala-predominant AS, there 
were a high proportion of cases which did not fit a staging system. An 
unexpectedly high proportion with a cortical form of Lewy body disease was 
identified.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000306697.48738.b6
PMID: 18362284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1833. BMC Med Genet. 2008 Mar 21;9:19. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-19.

Genetic association study of synphilin-1 in idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Myhre R(1), Klungland H, Farrer MJ, Aasly JO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Children's and Women's Health, Norwegian 
University of Science and Technology, Trondheim, Norway. ronny.myhre@ntnu.no

BACKGROUND: Post-mortem Lewy body and Lewy neuritic inclusions are a defining 
feature of Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). With 
the discovery of missense and multiplication mutations in the alpha-synuclein 
gene (SNCA) in familial parkinsonism, Lewy inclusions were found to stain 
intensely with antibodies raised against the protein. Yeast-two-hybrid studies 
identified synphilin-1 as an interacting partner of alpha-synuclein, and both 
proteins show co-immunolocalization in a subset of Lewy body inclusions. In the 
present study, we have investigated whether common variability in synphilin-1, 
including coding substitutions are genetically associated with disease 
pathogenesis.
METHODS: We screened the synphilin-1 gene for 11 single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in 300 affected subjects with idiopathic Parkinson's disease and 412 
healthy controls. Six of these were rare variants including five previously 
identified amino acid substitutions that were chosen in a direct approach for 
association of rare disease causing mutations. An additional five highly 
heterozygous SNPs were chosen for an indirect association approach including 
haplotype analysis, based on the assumption that any disease causing mutations 
might be in linkage disequilibrium with the SNPs selected. We also genotyped a 
microsatellite marker (D5S2950) within intron 6 of the gene and five additional 
microsatellites clustered downstream of the 5p23.1-23.3 synphilin-1 locus. 
Genome-wide linkage analysis, in a number of independent studies, has previously 
highlighted suggestive linkage to PD in this region of chromosome 5.
RESULTS: Screening of previously known amino acid substitutions in the 
synphilin-1 gene, identified the C1861>T (R621C) substitution in four patients 
(chromosomes n = 600) and 10 control subjects (chromosomes n = 824), whereas the 
G2125>C (E706Q) substitution was detected in one patient and four control 
subject, suggesting both these substitutions are not associated with 
susceptibility to PD. Heterozygous non-synonymous T131>C (V44A) and synonymous 
C636>T (P212P) amino acid substitutions were each detected in only one patient 
with PD. Heterozygous C1134>T (L378L) synonymous substitutions were found in two 
patients with PD and one control subject. D5S2010 the most distal telomeric 
microsatellite marker genotyped,15.3 Mb from synphilin-1, was genetically 
associated with PD (p = 0.006, 27df) independently adjusted for multiple testing 
according to its high amount of alleles but not the total number of other 
markers investigated. Other flanking and intronic SNP and microsatellite markers 
showed no evidence for genetic association with disease.
CONCLUSION: In this study rare synphilin-1 SNPs were assessed in a direct 
association approach to identify amino acid substitutions that might confer risk 
of PD in a homozygous or compound heterozygous state. We found none of these 
rare variations were associated with disease. In contrast to prior studies the 
frequency of the R621C substitution was not significantly different between PD 
and control subjects, neither were the V44A or E706Q substitutions. Similarly, 
our indirect study of more heterozygous SNPs, including both single marker and 
haplotype analyses, showed no significant association to PD. However, marginal 
association of microsatellite alleles with idiopathic PD, within the chromosome 
5q21 region, indicates further studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-19
PMCID: PMC2329608
PMID: 18366718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1834. J Biol Chem. 2008 Jun 6;283(23):15845-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800834200. Epub 2008 
Mar 26.

Therapeutic gene silencing delivered by a chemically modified small interfering 
RNA against mutant SOD1 slows amyotrophic lateral sclerosis progression.

Wang H(1), Ghosh A, Baigude H, Yang CS, Qiu L, Xia X, Zhou H, Rana TM, Xu Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Chemical Biology 
Program, Cell Biology, and Neuroscience Program, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605, USA.

Inherited neurodegenerative diseases, such as Huntington disease and subset of 
Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, are 
caused by the mutant genes that have gained undefined properties that harm cells 
in the nervous system, causing neurodegeneration and clinical phenotypes. 
Lowering the mutant gene expression is predicted to slow the disease progression 
and produce clinical benefit. Administration of small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
can silence specific genes. However, long term delivery of siRNA to silence the 
mutant genes, a requirement for treatment of these chronic central nervous 
system (CNS) diseases, remains a critical unsolved issue. Here we designed and 
tested a chemically stabilized siRNA against human Cu,Zn-superoxide dismutase 
(SOD1) in a mouse model for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. We show that the 
modified siRNA has enhanced stability and retains siRNA activity. Administration 
of this siRNA at the disease onset by long term infusion into the CNS resulted 
in widespread distribution of this siRNA, knocked down the mutant SOD1 
expression, slowed the disease progression, and extended the survival. These 
results bring RNA interference therapy one step closer to its clinical 
application for treatment of chronic, devastating, and fatal CNS disorders.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M800834200
PMCID: PMC2414310
PMID: 18367449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1835. Neurologia. 2008 Apr;23(3):152-6.

[Apolipoprotein E4 in dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Spanish]

Carrillo García F(1), Gil Néciga E, Alberca R, García-Solís D, Millán J, 
Rodríguez Uranga JJ, Franco E, Mir P, Suárez A, García R, Serrano-Pozo A, 
Pérez-Díaz H, Polo J.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla. 
fatimacarillo@terra.es

INTRODUCTION: There is a strong association between the e4 allele of 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). This converts this allele 
into a risk factor for the development of AD. The association between APOE4 and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is under discussion. In DLB, the presence of 
APOE4 has been related with a greater amount of senile plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles.
METHOD: This is a case-control study in which the APOE genotype was determined 
using the modified PCR technique of Wenham in 306 patients with diagnosis of 
probably AD, NINCDS-ADRDA criteria, 58 cases of probably DLB, McKeith et al. 
consensus criteria (1996), all of them with SPECT with pathological 123I-FP-CIT 
and 80 normal controls (NC) having similar age and gender distribution.
RESULTS: The frequency of alleles was: DLB group epsilon4: 16%; epsilon3: 75%; 
epsilon2: 9%; AD: epsilon4: 32%; epsilon3: 67%; epsilon2: 1%; and in the normal 
control group: epsilon4: 12%; epsilon3: 83%; epsilon2: 5%. The percentage of 
alleles in both genders was similar in the three groups.
CONCLUSIONS: APOE4 percentage in DLB group (16%) was lower than in AD group 
(32%), and similar to the control group (12%). Considering that the presence of 
morphopathological Alzheimer type alterations in DBL, essentially 
neurofibrillary tangles, is inversely correlated with the presence of 
Parkinsonian signs, this group may represent pure forms of the disease, although 
the lack of neuropathological demonstration does not make it possible to confirm 
this hypothesis.

PMID: 18370334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1836. Ideggyogy Sz. 2008 Jan 30;61(1-2):16-23.

Functional magnetic resonance imaging in neurology.

Auer T(1), Schwarcz A, Horváth RA, Barsi P, Janszky J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Pécs, Pécs.

The present contribution discusses the clinical use of functional MRI (fMRI) and 
its role in the most common neurological diseases. FMRI was found a reliable and 
reproducible examination tool resulting in a wide distribution of fMRI methods 
in presurgical evaluation of epilepsy in determining the relationship of 
eloquent areas and the epileptic focus. Preliminary data suggest that fMRI using 
memory paradigms can predict the postoperative memory decline in epilepsy 
surgery by determining whether a reorganization of memory functions took place. 
Speech-activated fMRI became the most used tool in determining hemispheric 
dominance. Visual and sensory-motor cortex can also be routinely investigated by 
fMRI which helps in decision on epilepsy surgery. FMRI combined with EEG is a 
new diagnostic tool in epilepsy and sleep disorders. FMRI can identify the 
penumbra after stroke and can provide an additional information on metabolic 
state of the threatened brain tissue. FMRI has a predictive role in post-stroke 
recovery. In relapsing-remitting MS an adaptive reorganization can be 
demonstrated by fMRI affecting the visual, motor, and memory systems, despite 
preserved functional performance. Much more extensive reorganization can be 
demonstrated in secondary progressive MS. These findings suggest that the 
different stages of MS are related to different stages of the reorganization and 
MS becomes progressive when there is no more reserve capacity in the brain for 
reorganization. FMRI offers the capability of detecting early functional 
hemodynamic alterations in Alzheimer's disease before morphological changes. 
FMRI can be a valuable tool to test and monitor treatment efficacy in AD. FMRI 
can also provide information about the mechanisms of different therapeutic 
approaches in Parkinson disorder including drug treatment and deep brain 
stimulation.

PMID: 18372771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1837. Methods. 2008 Apr;44(4):289-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2007.06.012.

Neurochemical approaches of cerebrospinal fluid diagnostics in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Otto M(1), Lewczuk P, Wiltfang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
markus.otto@uni-ulm.de

Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD)/Lewy-body disease 
(DLB), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) are the major causes of memory 
impairment and dementia. As new therapeutic agents are visible for the different 
diseases, there is an ultimate need for an early and an early differential 
diagnosis. Since cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is in direct contact with the central 
nervous system (CNS), potentially promising biomarkers might be seen there 
first. In principle, two research approaches can be considered for the 
laboratory diagnosis of dementias: (i) the direct detection of disease specific 
protein like Abeta-peptide-oligomers in AD or alpha-synuclein-aggregates in DLB 
and (ii) the detection of surrogate markers that show an altered pattern of 
expression in early stages of the disease or are used in the differential 
diagnosis of other dementias and thus enable an exclusion diagnosis. Especially 
Abeta-peptides and tau-protein measurements seem to employ a combination of 
these approaches. Until now it was shown that a combined determination of just 
these few markers (tau-proteins and Abeta-peptides) is already sufficient to 
achieve a high degree of diagnostic certainty in the diagnosis of AD. However 
although these markers seem to correlate with neuropathological changes and 
memory disturbances, these markers are not specific for a single form of 
dementia and further research is necessary to improve especially the early 
differential diagnosis of dementias.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymeth.2007.06.012
PMID: 18374272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1838. Gynecol Oncol. 2008 May;109(2):296-302. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2008.02.016. Epub 
2008 Mar 28.

The incidence and risk factors associated with postoperative delirium in 
geriatric patients undergoing surgery for suspected gynecologic malignancies.

McAlpine JN(1), Hodgson EJ, Abramowitz S, Richman SM, Su Y, Kelly MG, Luther M, 
Baker L, Zelterman D, Rutherford TJ, Schwartz PE.

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada BC V5Z-1M9. 
jessica.mcalpine@vch.ca

BACKGROUND: The incidence of postoperative delirium (PD) in the elderly ranges 
between 3-60% but has never been examined in gynecologic oncology. Our goal was 
to identify pre, intra, and postoperative risk factors associated with the 
development of PD.
METHODS: English speaking women of 60 years and above undergoing major surgery 
for suspected gynecologic malignancies were invited to participate. Enrolled 
patients were administered a pre and postoperative Mini-Mental State Exam 
(MMSE), and the postoperative Confusion Assessment Method was used to diagnosis 
PD. Pre, intra, and postoperative clinicopathology parameters were collected. 
Statistics included the Pearson chi-squared tests and multivariate logistic 
regression.
RESULTS: Eighteen of a total of 103 patients (17.5%) developed PD. Univariate 
analysis revealed significant associations (p<0.05) between the development of 
delirium and age, albumin level, Charlson comorbidity index, performance status, 
dementia, level of education, number of pre and postoperative medications, 
prolonged oxygen or Foley catheter usage (>2 d), increased narcotic use (above 
standard regimens), postoperative transfusion, bed restriction and change in 
MMSE scores (pre vs. post). Using multivariate logistic regression analysis, 
older patients (p=0.0002), on multiple medications (p=0.008), given additional 
narcotic doses (p<0.0001) were at highest risk for the development of delirium. 
Intraoperative parameters were not correlated with outcome.
CONCLUSIONS: PD is a common complication in older women undergoing major 
gynecologic surgery. Increased narcotics, age, and preoperative medications were 
strongly associated with this adverse event. Prevention needs to focus on i) 
identifying patients at higher risk for PD based on preoperative parameters, and 
ii) eliminating known postoperative risk factors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2008.02.016
PMID: 18374970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1839. CNS Spectr. 2008 Mar;13(3 Suppl 4):18-25. doi: 10.1017/s1092852900017284.

Psychosis in Parkinson's disease: phenomenology, frequency, risk factors, and 
current understanding of pathophysiologic mechanisms.

Fénelon G(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Henri-Mondor Hospital, Créteil, France. 
gilles.fenelon@hmn.aphp.fr

Psychosis in Parkinson's disease refers to a combination of hallucinations and 
delusions occurring with a clear sensorium and a chronic course. Hallucinations 
may involve several sensory modalities. Complex visual hallucinations are the 
most common type. "Minor" hallucinatory phenomena are frequently present and 
include visual illusions, passage hallucinations, and sense of presence. Insight 
may be lost in patients with cognitive impairment. Delusions of a paranoid type 
are more rare than hallucinations. Both hallucinations and delusions are more 
frequent in Parkinson's disease patients with dementia. Pathogenesis involves 
complex and probably multifactorial mechanisms, including pharmacologic 
(dopaminergic treatment and others) and disease-related factors.

DOI: 10.1017/s1092852900017284
PMID: 18323763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1840. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Apr 1;148(7):I39. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-148-7-200804010-00002.

Summaries for patients. Can thickened liquids or chin-down posture prevent 
aspiration?

[No authors listed]

Original report in
    Ann Intern Med. 2008 Apr 1;148(7):509-18.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-148-7-200804010-00002
PMID: 18378943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1841. Ann Intern Med. 2008 Apr 1;148(7):509-18. doi: 
10.7326/0003-4819-148-7-200804010-00007.

Comparison of 2 interventions for liquid aspiration on pneumonia incidence: a 
randomized trial.

Robbins J(1), Gensler G, Hind J, Logemann JA, Lindblad AS, Brandt D, Baum H, 
Lilienfeld D, Kosek S, Lundy D, Dikeman K, Kazandjian M, Gramigna GD, 
McGarvey-Toler S, Miller Gardner PJ.

Author information:
(1)William S. Middleton Memorial Veterans Hospital, Geriatric Research Education 
and Clinical Center, and University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin 53705, USA.

Erratum in
    Ann Intern Med. 2008 May 6;148(9):715.

Summary for patients in
    Ann Intern Med. 2008 Apr 1;148(7):I39.

BACKGROUND: Aspiration pneumonia is common among frail elderly persons with 
dysphagia. Although interventions to prevent aspiration are routinely used in 
these patients, little is known about the effectiveness of those interventions.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the effectiveness of chin-down posture and 2 consistencies 
(nectar or honey) of thickened liquids on the 3-month cumulative incidence of 
pneumonia in patients with dementia or Parkinson disease.
DESIGN: Randomized, controlled, parallel-design trial in which patients were 
enrolled for 3-month periods from 9 June 1998 to 19 September 2005.
SETTING: 47 hospitals and 79 subacute care facilities.
PATIENTS: 515 patients age 50 years or older with dementia or Parkinson disease 
who aspirated thin liquids (demonstrated videofluoroscopically). Of these, 504 
were followed until death or for 3 months.
INTERVENTION: Participants were randomly assigned to drink all liquids in a 
chin-down posture (n = 259) or to drink nectar-thick (n = 133) or honey-thick (n 
= 123) liquids in a head-neutral position.
MEASUREMENTS: The primary outcome was pneumonia diagnosed by chest radiography 
or by the presence of 3 respiratory indicators.
RESULTS: 52 participants had pneumonia, yielding an overall estimated 3-month 
cumulative incidence of 11%. The 3-month cumulative incidence of pneumonia was 
0.098 and 0.116 in the chin-down posture and thickened-liquid groups, 
respectively (hazard ratio, 0.84 [95% CI, 0.49 to 1.45]; P = 0.53). The 3-month 
cumulative incidence of pneumonia was 0.084 in the nectar-thick liquid group 
compared with 0.150 in the honey-thick liquid group (hazard ratio, 0.50 [CI, 
0.23 to 1.09]; P = 0.083). More patients assigned to thickened liquids than 
those assigned to the chin-down posture intervention had dehydration (6% vs. 
2%), urinary tract infection (6% vs. 3%), and fever (4% vs. 2%).
LIMITATIONS: A no-treatment control group was not included. Follow-up was 
limited to 3 months. Care providers were not blinded, and differences in 
cumulative pneumonia incidence between interventions had wide CIs.
CONCLUSION: No definitive conclusions about the superiority of any of the tested 
interventions can be made. The 3-month cumulative incidence of pneumonia was 
much lower than expected in this frail elderly population. Future investigation 
of chin-down posture combined with nectar-thick liquid may be warranted to 
determine whether this combination better prevents pneumonia than either 
intervention independently.

DOI: 10.7326/0003-4819-148-7-200804010-00007
PMCID: PMC2364726
PMID: 18378947 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1842. Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2008 May;4(5):267-77. doi: 10.1038/ncpneuro0773. Epub 
2008 Apr 1.

Technology insight: imaging neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease.

Brooks DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine at Imperial College, London, UK. 
david.brooks@csc.mrc.ac.uk

Currently, the clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD) can be 
problematic, particularly at the early stages of the disease when the full 
spectrum of symptoms and signs might not yet be manifest. In addition, the 
mechanisms that underlie the nonmotor complications of PD, such as dementia and 
depression, are poorly understood, despite the fact that these symptoms largely 
determine the patient's quality of life at the end stage of the disease. This 
article reviews the latest advances in structural and functional imaging that 
have provided important insights into the structural, pathophysiological and 
pharmacological changes associated with PD. The contribution of inflammatory 
processes to the pathology of PD is discussed, as are the various possible 
mechanisms that lead to coexistent dementia and depression.

DOI: 10.1038/ncpneuro0773
PMID: 18382437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1843. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Curr Med Res Opin. 2008 May;24(5):1379-84. doi: 10.1185/030079908x297321. Epub 
2008 Apr 1.

Efficacy of risedronate against hip fracture in patients with neurological 
diseases: a meta-analysis of randomized controlled trials.

Iwamoto J(1), Matsumoto H, Takeda T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Sports Medicine, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. jiwamoto@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Retraction in
    Curr Med Res Opin. 2017 Apr 5;:1.

OBJECTIVE: Neurological diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, stroke, and 
Parkinson's disease have been reported to increase the risk for fractures. The 
purpose of the present study was to clarify the efficacy of risedronate against 
hip fracture in patients with neurological diseases.
METHODS: The literature was searched with PubMed from 1995 to the present, with 
respect to strictly conducted randomized controlled trials (RCTs) with narrow 
confidence intervals (CIs), and a meta-analysis was conducted.
RESULTS: Four RCTs met the criteria; one RCT for Alzheimer's disease (n = 461, 
mean age = 78 years), two RCTs for stroke (n = 267, mean age = 76 years for men; 
n = 345, mean age = 71 years for women), and one RCT for Parkinson's disease (n 
= 223, mean age = 71 years). According to the results of RCTs, the relative 
risks (95% CI) for hip fracture with risedronate treatment compared with placebo 
treatment were 0.26 (0.10, 0.69) for Alzheimer's disease, 0.20 (0.04, 0.89) for 
stroke in men, 0.14 (0.02, 1.16) for stroke in women, and 0.34 (0.09, 1.21) for 
Parkinson's disease. Overall, the relative risk (95% CI) for hip fracture with 
risedronate treatment was 0.25 (0.13, 0.48), suggesting 75% of risk reduction 
rate with risedronate treatment in patients with one of the three neurological 
diseases (heterogeneity: 0.58, p = 0.9016 and overall effect: 17.36, p < 
0.0001). No severe adverse events were reported in the risedronate and placebo 
groups.
CONCLUSION: The results of a meta-analysis of strictly conducted RCTs suggest 
that there is efficacy against hip fracture and safety with risedronate 
treatment in patients with neurological diseases including Alzheimer's disease, 
stroke, and Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1185/030079908x297321
PMID: 18384711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1844. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2008 Jan;48(1):11-24. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.11.

[Clinical and pathological study on early diagnosis of Parkinson's disease and 
dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Japanese]

Orimo S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital.

[123I] Meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy has been used to 
evaluate postganglionic cardiac sympathetic innervation in heart diseases and 
some neurological disorders. To see clinical usefulness of MIBG myocardial 
scintigraphy to differentiate Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) from related movement disorders and Alzheimer disease (AD), we 
performed MIBG myocardial scintigraphy in patients with these disorders. Cardiac 
uptake of MIBG is specifically reduced in PD and DLB, and this imaging approach 
is a sensitive diagnostic tool that possibly differentiates PD and DLB from 
related movement disorders and AD. To see pathological basis of the reduced 
cardiac uptake of MIBG in Lewy body disease, we immunohistochemically examined 
cardiac tissues from patients with PD, DLB, related movement disorders and AD 
using antibodies against tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) and phosphorylated 
neurofilament (NF). Not only TH- but also NF-immunoreactive (ir) axons in the 
epicardial nerve fascicles were markedly decreased in Lewy body disease, namely 
cardiac sympathetic denervation, which accounts for the reduced cardiac uptake 
of MIBG in Lewy body disease. Patients with PD and DLB have Lewy bodies (LBs) in 
the nervous system, whereas patients with multiple system atrophy (MSA), 
progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, parkin-associated PD 
and AD have no LBs in the nervous system. Even in patients with MSA, cardiac 
sympathetic denervation was associated with the presence of LBs. Therefore, 
cardiac sympathetic denervation is closely related to the presence of LBs in a 
wide range of neurodegenerative processes. Taken together, we conclude that the 
reduced cardiac uptake of MIBG is a potential biomarker for the presence of LBs. 
Because alpha-synuclein is one of the key molecules in the pathogenesis of PD, 
we further investigate how alpha-synuclein aggregates are involved in 
degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve in PD. We immunohistochemically 
examined cardiac tissues from patients with incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) 
and PD using antibodies against TH and phosphorylated alpha-synuclein. We found 
that (1) alpha-synuclein aggregates in the epicardial nerve fascicles, namely 
the distal axons of the cardiac sympathetic nerve, were much more abundant in 
ILBD with preserved TH-ir axons than in ILBD with decreased TH-ir axons and PD; 
(2) alpha-synuclein aggregates in the epicardial nerve fascicles were closely 
related to the disappearance of TH-ir axons; (3) in ILBD with preserved TH-ir 
axons, alpha-synuclein aggregates were consistently more abundant in the 
epicardial nerve fascicles than in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia (pSG); 
and (4) this distal-dominant accumulation of alpha-synuclein aggregates was 
reversed in ILBD with decreased TH-ir axons and PD, which both showed decreased 
or depleted TH-ir axons but more abundant alpha-synuclein aggregates in the pSG. 
These findings indicate that accumulation of alpha-synuclein aggregates in the 
distal axons of the cardiac sympathetic nervous system precedes that of neuronal 
somata or neurites in the pSG and that heralds centripetal degeneration of the 
cardiac sympathetic nerve in PD. This chronological and dynamic relationship 
between alpha-synuclein aggregates and distal-dominant degeneration of the 
cardiac sympathetic nervous system may represent the pathological mechanism 
underlying a common degenerative process in PD.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.11
PMID: 18386627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1845. Neurobiol Aging. 2009 Dec;30(12):1986-91. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.02.008. Epub 2008 Apr 2.

Whole genome analysis in a consanguineous family with early onset Alzheimer's 
disease.

Clarimón J(1), Djaldetti R, Lleó A, Guerreiro RJ, Molinuevo JL, Paisán-Ruiz C, 
Gómez-Isla T, Blesa R, Singleton A, Hardy J.

Author information:
(1)Memory Unit, Alzheimer's Laboratory, and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en 
Red sobre Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Neurology Department, 
Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Barcelona, Spain. jclarimon@santpau.es

Early-onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) is a clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous condition in which the typical features appear significantly 
earlier in life (before 65 years). Mutations in three genes (PSEN1, PSEN2, and 
APP) have been identified in autosomal dominant forms of EOAD. However, in about 
50% of Mendelian cases and in most of the sporadic EOAD patients, no mutations 
have been found. We present clinical characteristics of an Israeli family 
comprising two affected siblings with EOAD born to neurologically healthy 
parents who were first cousins (both parents died after 90 years old). Sequence 
analysis of PSEN1, PSEN2, APP, TAU, PGRN, and PRNP failed to reveal any 
mutations in the affected siblings. Because the disease in this family is 
consistent with an autosomal recessive mode of inheritance we identified all 
homozygous regions identical by descent (IBD) in both siblings, by high-density 
SNP genotyping. We provide here the first catalog of autozygosity in EOAD and 
suggest that the regions identified are excellent candidate loci for a recessive 
genetic lesion causing this disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.02.008
PMCID: PMC8950082
PMID: 18387709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1846. Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Jul;116(1):25-35. doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0372-4. Epub 
2008 Apr 4.

Clinical, neuropathological and genotypic variability in SNCA A53T familial 
Parkinson's disease. Variability in familial Parkinson's disease.

Markopoulou K(1), Dickson DW, McComb RD, Wszolek ZK, Katechalidou L, Avery L, 
Stansbury MS, Chase BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Thessaly Medical School, Papakyriazi 
22, Larissa, 41222, Greece. emarkopo@med.uth.gr

Individuals with familial Parkinson's disease (PD) due to a monogenic defect can 
show considerable clinical and neuropathological variability. To identify 
factors underlying this variability, histopathological analysis was performed in 
two clinically different A53T alpha-synuclein heterozygotes from Family H, a 
multigenerational alpha-synuclein A53T kindred. To determine whether additional 
genetic factors could contribute to phenotypic variability, Family H and another 
multigenerational A53T kindred were analyzed for parkin polymorphisms. We 
identified a previously described variant in parkin exon 4 associated with 
increased PD risk (S167N). The two A53T heterozygotes had markedly different 
neuropathology and different parkin genotypes: A N167 homozygote had early onset 
rapidly progressive disease, early dementia, myoclonus and sleep disorder, while 
a S167 homozygote had late onset, slowly progressive disease and late dementia. 
Both had brainstem, cortical, and intraneuritic Lewy bodies (LB). The N167 
individual had widespread cortical neurofibrillary degeneration, while the S167 
individual had only medial temporal lobe neurofibrillary degeneration. The N167 
individual had severe neuronal loss in CA2 associated with Lewy neurites (LN), 
while the S167 individual had severe neuronal loss in CA1 associated with TDP-43 
immunoreactive neuronal inclusions. These findings implicate TDP-43 in the 
pathology of familial PD and suggest that parkin may act as a modifier of the 
A53T alpha-synuclein phenotype of familial PD. Furthermore, they suggest a 
mechanism by which a rare genetic variant that is associated with a minor 
increase of PD risk in the heterozygous state may, in the homozygous state, 
exacerbate a disease phenotype associated with a highly penetrant dominant 
allele.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0372-4
PMCID: PMC2728685
PMID: 18389263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1847. Rev Neurol. 2008 Apr 1-15;46(7):416-23.

[The NEDICES cohort of the elderly. Methodology and main neurological findings].

[Article in Spanish]

Bermejo-Pareja F(1), Benito-León J, Vega-Q S, Díaz-Guzmán J, Rivera-Navarro J, 
Molina JA, Olazarán-Rodríguez J, Morales-González JM.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Espana. fbermejop2004@yahoo.es

AIM: To summarise the methodological aspects and main findings of the NEDICES 
(Neurological Disorders in Central Spain) cohort study of the elderly 
population, with over 5000 participants.
DEVELOPMENT: The article outlines the findings concerning the following chronic 
neurological diseases (CND): dementia, Parkinson's disease and Parkinsonisms, 
stroke and essential, or senile, tremor. The NEDICES study examined the health, 
mortality and a series of sociological aspects of the cohort that are not 
discussed here. The paper does describe, however, the objectives, methods, 
population and development, with the baseline (1994) and incidence (1997) 
cut-off points, and the main findings regarding the CND under study are 
discussed.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence and incidence of the CND are comparable to those of 
other Spanish and European population-based studies, but with certain 
peculiarities, such as the fact that incidence of senile tremor is the highest 
of those reported in the literature and that this CND is associated with 
dementia. Over half the cases of Parkinson's disease were reported de novo with 
the study and Alzheimer's disease was associated with vascular risk factors.

PMID: 18389461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1848. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;25(5):423-32. doi: 10.1159/000122963. Epub 2008 
Apr 3.

Systematic appraisal using immunohistochemistry of brain pathology in aged and 
demented subjects.

Aho L(1), Parkkinen L, Pirttila T, Alafuzoff I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, Unit of Neurology, Section of 
Neuropathology, Kuopio University, Kuopio, Finland.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Abnormal processing of hyperphosphorylated tau (HPtau), 
amyloid-beta (Abeta) and alpha-synuclein (alphaS) proteins is considered as 
causative with regard to the clinical symptoms in age-related neurodegenerative 
diseases.
METHODS: In this retrospective, postmortem study applying immunohistochemical 
methodology, we assessed Alzheimer's-disease (AD)-related HPtau and Abeta 
pathology in 178 subjects with alphaS pathology.
RESULTS: These pathologies were frequently seen concomitantly, i.e. HPtau in 83% 
and Abeta in 62% of the alphaS-positive cases. Furthermore, the striatum was 
frequently involved, particularly in subjects with cognitive impairment (65%). 
The predictive value of widespread HPtau pathology, i.e. stages V-VI, with 
respect to cognitive impairment was high, since all 18 subjects presenting with 
this stage were demented. In contrast, the predictive value of widespread alphaS 
pathology, i.e. stages 5-6 according to Braak's Parkinson disease staging, was 
debatable. Fifty-three percent of the subjects with widespread alphaS pathology 
and no or mild AD-related HPtau pathology were cognitively unimpaired. It is 
noteworthy that striatal Abeta pathology was more often seen in demented 
subjects independently of HPtau and/or alphaS status.
CONCLUSION: The causative pathology in subjects with clinically diagnosed 
dementia with Lewy bodies needs to be clarified in future studies.

(c) 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000122963
PMID: 18391488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1849. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2008 Dec;14(8):620-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.01.021. Epub 2008 Apr 3.

Grey matter atrophy in early versus late dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Beyer MK(1), Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Stavanger University Hospital, Postbox 8100, 4068 
Stavanger, Norway. bemk@sus.no

There is considerable heterogeneity within patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) regarding time from onset of PD to dementia. We compared grey matter 
atrophy using magnetic resonance images (MRIs) of patients with PD who developed 
dementia early and late in the disease course. The group with early dementia had 
more atrophy than the group with late dementia in some areas, while the late 
dementia group had symmetrical reduction in concentration of grey matter in the 
insula bilaterally compared to the early dementia group. Our results indicate 
that the early development of dementia in PD is associated with more severe 
degeneration of cortical and sub-cortical structures.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2008.01.021
PMID: 18394949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1850. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Jan;31(1):104-13. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.02.021. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Disturbance of automatic auditory change detection in dementia associated with 
Parkinson's disease: A mismatch negativity study.

Brønnick KS(1), Nordby H, Larsen JP, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, P. 
Box 8100, 4068 Helse Stavanger, Norway. bronnick@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether automatic auditory change detection, as 
measured by the mismatch negativity (MMN) event-related potential waveform, 
differs in dementia associated with Parkinson's disease (PDD) and dementia with 
Lewy-bodies (DLB) as compared to Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease 
without dementia (PD) and healthy control subjects (HC).
METHOD: Seventeen DLB, 15 PDD, 16 PD, 16 AD patients and 18 HC subjects 
participated. A passive MMN event-related potential paradigm and an 
oddball-distractor reaction time paradigm were presented.
RESULTS: The PDD patients had reduced MMN area and amplitude compared to the 
DLB, PD, and the HC groups. The MMN area correlated significantly with number of 
missed target stimuli in the oddball-distractor task, and the PDD group missed 
targets significantly more often than the DLB group.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that PDD patients to a larger degree than 
patients with DLB have a deficit of automatic auditory change detection that 
contributes to impairment in their ability to selectively attend and respond to 
deviant auditory stimuli.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.02.021
PMID: 18395939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1851. Brain Nerve. 2008 Mar;60(3):219-24.

[Gait disturbance in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus].

[Article in Japanese]

Mori E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neurology and Cognitive Neuroscience, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980 8575, Japan.

The triad symptoms of idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH), i.e., 
dementia, gait disturbance, and urinary incontinence may appear commonly in the 
elderly suffering from various brain diseases as well as in those with 
musculoskeletal disorders. It would not be easy to differentiate iNPH from other 
neurological diseases with musculoskeletal disorders in the elderly. Gait 
disturbance is an early and central clinical symptom, and its improvement after 
temporary removal of CSF and shunt surgery is the most notable. This paper 
reviews the nature, differential diagnosis, pathophysiology, and evaluation of 
iNPH gait. Broad-based, short-step, magnetic gait with start hesitation and 
increased instability on turning, which is often expressed as apraxic/ataxic 
gait, is the cardinal sign of iNPH. Although iNPH gait shares the features with 
gait in Parkinson disease, progressive supranuclear palsy, and cerebellar 
ataxia, the nature of iNPH gait is the closest to apraxia of gait, which is 
characterized primarily by gait ignition failure. The semiological similarity to 
apraxia of gait and the close relationship to frontal symptoms indicate that the 
iNPH gait is probably caused by frontal dysfunction. The gait subscale of the 
idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus grading scale and the timed "Up and Go" 
test are recommended as useful tools for measuring gait disturbance in iNPH.

PMID: 18402068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1852. Trends Neurosci. 2008 May;31(5):251-6. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.02.008. Epub 
2008 Apr 9.

The mitochondrial impairment, oxidative stress and neurodegeneration connection: 
reality or just an attractive hypothesis?

Fukui H(1), Moraes CT.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Miami, 
FL 33136, USA.

Aging is the most important risk factor for common neurodegenerative disorders 
such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. Aging in the central nervous 
system has been associated with elevated mutation load in mitochondrial DNA, 
defects in mitochondrial respiration and increased oxidative damage. These 
observations support a 'vicious cycle' theory which states that there is a 
feedback mechanism connecting these events in aging and age-associated 
neurodegeneration. Despite being an extremely attractive hypothesis, the bulk of 
the evidence supporting the mitochondrial vicious cycle model comes from 
pharmacological experiments in which the modes of mitochondrial enzyme 
inhibition are far from those observed in real life. Furthermore, recent in vivo 
evidence does not support this model. In this review, we focus on the 
relationship among the components of the putative vicious cycle, with particular 
emphasis on the role of mitochondrial defects on oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2008.02.008
PMCID: PMC2731695
PMID: 18403030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


1853. Neuroepidemiology. 2008;30(4):215-21. doi: 10.1159/000126915. Epub 2008 Apr 18.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in Austria: an autopsy-controlled study.

Gelpi E(1), Heinzl H, Hoftberger R, Unterberger U, Strobel T, Voigtlander T, 
Drobna E, Jarius C, Lang S, Waldhor T, Bernheimer H, Budka H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology and Austrian Reference Centre for Human Prion 
Diseases, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Definite diagnosis of prion diseases or transmissible spongiform 
encephalopathies (TSEs) requires neuropathology, usually at autopsy. 
Epidemiology of human TSEs has relied on definite as well as 'probable' cases in 
which neuropathological confirmation is lacking, usually because of low autopsy 
rates in most countries.
METHODS: In Austria, an active surveillance program for human prion diseases was 
established in 1996. Since then, more than 900 referrals were analyzed. 
Postmortem investigation of brain tissue is mandatory in every suspect case of 
TSE. Thus, epidemiological data on TSEs from Austria may serve as 
autopsy-controlled reference for countries with lower autopsy rates.
RESULTS: The total number of TSE cases in Austria since 1969 is 206. The average 
yearly mortality for the active surveillance period from 1996 to 30 June 2006 is 
1.39 per million, with the highest rates for Vienna (2.37) compared with other 
provinces. Eighty-five percent of definite TSEs were classified as sporadic 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD). We observed a significant linear increase in 
the mean age at death of 0.6 years per calendar year. Clinical diagnostic 
surveillance criteria had a sensitivity and specificity of 82.7 and 80.0% for 
probable CJD, respectively, and a positive predictive value of 80.5% for 
probable and 38.9% for 'possible' CJD. Alternative neuropathological diagnoses 
in suspect cases included Alzheimer's disease with or without Lewy body 
pathology, vascular encephalopathy, metabolic encephalopathies and viral or 
limbic encephalitis.
CONCLUSION: The steady increase in mortality rates, especially in old age 
groups, most likely reflects improved case ascertainment due to active 
surveillance causing higher awareness of the medical community. In comparison 
with other European countries, it is reassuring to note that the overall death 
rate of TSEs does not differ from the Austrian autopsy-controlled data, thus 
confirming the value of clinical surveillance criteria.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000126915
PMID: 18424902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1854. Stroke. 2008 Jul;39(7):2046-51. doi: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.505206. Epub 2008 Apr 
24.

Vascular subcortical hyperintensities predict conversion to vascular and mixed 
dementia in MCI patients.

Bombois S(1), Debette S, Bruandet A, Delbeuck X, Delmaire C, Leys D, Pasquier F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, EA 2691, Memory Center, University Hospital 59037 
Lille, France.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) have an 
increased risk of dementia. The identification of predictors of conversion to 
dementia is therefore important. The aim of our study was to test the hypothesis 
that subcortical hyperintensities (SH) are associated with an increased rate of 
conversion to dementia in MCI patients.
METHODS: This was an observational study on consecutive MCI patients attending a 
memory clinic. We assessed SH on a baseline MRI scan, using a semiquantitative 
rating scale. A multivariable Cox regression model was used to test the 
association of SH with conversion to dementia.
RESULTS: We included 170 MCI patients. The median duration of follow-up was 3.8 
years. During this period, 67 patients (39.4%, 95% CI: 32.1 to 46.8%) developed 
dementia: Alzheimer disease (AD) in 29 patients, dementia with Lewy bodies in 
19, mixed dementia in 8, vascular dementia in 7, fronto-temporal dementia in 2, 
and primary progressive aphasia in 2. SH were not associated with the risk to 
develop dementia as a whole, including AD. However, the risk to develop vascular 
or mixed dementia increased significantly with increasing amounts of SH at 
baseline (HR=1.14 [95% CI: 1.06 to 1.24]), especially periventricular 
hyperintensities (HR=2.71 [95% CI: 1.60 to 4.58]), independently of medial 
temporal lobe atrophy, age, gender, vascular risk factors, education, and 
cognitive functions at baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of vascular or mixed dementia, but not of other types of 
dementia, was significantly increased in MCI patients with a large amount of 
subcortical hyperintensities at baseline.

DOI: 10.1161/STROKEAHA.107.505206
PMID: 18436882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1855. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2008 Apr;164(4):377-83. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2007.09.007. 
Epub 2008 Feb 20.

[Esophageal achalasia, sleep disorders and chorea in a tauopathy without 
ophthalmoplegia, parkinsonian syndrome, nor dementia (progressive supranuclear 
palsy?): clinicopathological study].

[Article in French]

Kaphan E(1), Pellissier JF, Rey M, Robert D, Auphan M, Ali Chérif A.

Author information:
(1)Pôle de neurosciences cliniques, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de Marseille, 
université de la Méditerranée, CHU Timone, 264, Rue St-Pierre, 13005 Marseille, 
France. elsa.kaphan@mail.ap-hm.fr

CONTEXT: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is classically characterized by 
supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, paroxysmal imbalance with backward falling, axial 
dystonia, rigidity, pseudobulbar palsy and cognitive dysfunction. However, 
incomplete or atypical clinical presentation has been previously reported, but 
in all these cases, the patients had at least one of the main clinical features 
of the disease (ophthalmoplegia, parkinsonian syndrome or cognitive 
dysfunction).
CASE REPORT: A 60-year-old woman presented with nocturnal agitation and 
choreiform movements. A few months later she developed severe swallowing 
disorders, caused by achalasia of the upper esophageal sphincter, and 
responsible for recurrent acute respiratory distress and pneumonia, prevailing 
to tracheotomy and gastrostomy. She died suddenly two years after the onset of 
the symptoms.
RESULTS: Postmortem examination of brain revealed a tauopathy, with deposition 
of abnormal phosphorylated tau in threads and in coiled-shaped as well as 
globose tangles in the brainstem, subthalamic nuclei and hippocampus. Nuclei of 
the medulla, including the vagus/solitarius complex and the region of the 
nucleus ambiguous were especially rich in tau positive inclusions. 
Ultrastructural analysis of globoid-shaped tangles in the brainstem revealed the 
presence of straight and paired helicoidal filaments compatible with a PSP.
CONCLUSIONS: This case contributes to improve knowledge of the clinical 
phenotypic range of PSP. In this case, the neuropathological lesions accounted 
for most of the symptoms. However, the early death of the patient was probably 
related to the particular distribution of the neuropathological lesions. This 
case suggests that the initial neuropathological changes in PSP is located in 
the dorsal brainstem.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2007.09.007
PMID: 18439931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1856. Mov Disord. 2008 Jun 15;23(8):1076-84. doi: 10.1002/mds.22066.

Olfactory pathogenesis of idiopathic Parkinson disease revisited.

Lerner A(1), Bagic A.

Author information:
(1)Human Motor Control Section, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. 
lernera@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2010 Jan 15;25(1):122-3.

Idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD) is traditionally considered a movement 
disorder with hallmark lesions located in the substantia nigra pars compacta 
(SNpc). However, recent histopathological studies of some PD cases suggest the 
possibility of a multisystem disorder which progresses in a predictable sequence 
as described in Braak's staging criteria. The disease process starts in the 
dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (dmX) and anterior olfactory nucleus and bulb, 
and from there, spreads through the brainstem nuclei to ultimately reach the 
SNpc, which then presents as symptomatic PD. In this article, we would like to 
revisit the olfactory pathogenesis of PD based on Braak's staging system and 
review anatomical pathways supporting such a possibility. We also suggest some 
biomarkers for early stages of PD. Additionally, we present and discuss the 
possibility that a prion-like process underlies the neurodegenerative changes in 
PD.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22066
PMID: 18442121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1857. Mov Disord. 2008 Jun 15;23(8):1065-75. doi: 10.1002/mds.22051.

Neural control of the gastrointestinal tract: implications for Parkinson 
disease.

Cersosimo MG(1), Benarroch EE.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorder Unit, Hospital de Clínicas, 
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Disorders of swallowing and gastrointestinal motility are prominent nonmotor 
manifestations of Parkinson disease (PD). Motility of the gut is controlled both 
by extrinsic inputs from the dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) and 
paravertebral sympathetic ganglia and by local reflexes mediated by intrinsic 
neurons of the enteric nervous system (ENS). Both the ENS and the DMV are 
affected by Lewy body pathology at early stages of PD. This early involvement 
provides insights into the pathophysiology of gastrointestinal dysmotility in 
this disorder and may constitute an important step in the etiopathogenesis of 
Lewy body disease.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22051
PMID: 18442139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1858. Tunis Med. 2008 Feb;86(2):179-84.

[Clinical and therapeutic particularities of depression in the elderly].

[Article in French]

Maâlej M(1), Zouari L, Ben MS, Rakam A, Dammak M, Zouari N.

Author information:
(1)Service de psychiatrie C, CHU Hédi CHAKER, Sfax.

Depression in older people slightly differs from younger subjects adults. 
Generally, typical depressive symptoms are overlooked by other symptoms. The 
most frequent ones are excessive preoccupation with health and complaints about 
physical symptoms. Anxiety is a common accompaniment of depression in later 
life. Poor subjective memory or dementia-like and psychotic symptoms are also 
common in depression in the elderly. The exogenous depression, the most common 
forms of depression in elderly people, has a little response to antidepressants. 
The endogenous depression is associated with high risk of suicide. Depression in 
older people often coexists with physical disorders. The most frequently 
encountered is Parkinson's disease. Depression could also be one of the side 
effect of the use of drugs for physical illnesses. The Tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs) are generally too toxic for elderly people and should not be considered 
as drugs of first choice. Currently, the drugs of choice are the 
serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs). They have an antidepressant 
effect similar to that of (TCAs), but they are less toxic. The antidepressant 
treatment in the elderly is usually initiated at a low starting dose, ideally no 
more than half the usually recommended for the adults. For psychotic depression 
a combination of an antidepressant used in conjunction with antipsychotic drug 
is more effective than an antidepressant administered alone. The treatment 
should be continued for six months at least in order to reduce the risk of 
relapse. Moreover, long-term treatment is recommended because of the high risk 
of recurrence.

PMID: 18444539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1859. Br J Radiol. 2007 Dec;80 Spec No 2:S146-52. doi: 10.1259/bjr/60346217.

1H magnetic resonance spectroscopy in dementia.

Kantarci K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. 
kantarci.kejal@mayo.edu

Erratum in
    Br J Radiol. 2013 Jun;86(1026):20139005.

Comment in
    Br J Radiol. 2009 Feb;82(974):172; author reply 172.

Present data support the concept that (1)H magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H 
MRS) may become an adjunct to clinical evaluation for differential diagnosis of 
dementia in the future. The value of (1)H MRS in monitoring the disease 
progression in dementia is expected to be in areas where group effects are 
sought such as monitoring effectiveness of therapies in drug trials. Elevation 
of myoinositol to creatine (mI/Cr) and choline to creatine (Cho/Cr) and 
reduction in the neuronal integrity marker N-acetylaspartate to creatine 
(NAA/Cr) levels in individuals with mild cognitive impairment and 
pre-symptomatic Alzheimer's disease suggests that (1)H MRS may also be valuable 
in predicting future development of dementia and monitoring early disease 
progression for preventive therapies. Investigations of in vivo (1)H MRS as a 
marker for differential diagnosis and progression of dementia, however, has been 
limited to clinically confirmed cohorts and remains to be validated by 
histopathology at autopsy. Overall, MRS is a promising investigational technique 
in ageing and dementia at this time. The potential clinical application of MRS 
in ageing and dementia, however, is growing with technical advances in the 
field.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr/60346217
PMID: 18445744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1860. Br J Radiol. 2007 Dec;80 Spec No 2:S160-7. doi: 10.1259/bjr/97295129.

Positron emission tomography imaging in dementia.

Herholz K(1), Carter SF, Jones M.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Molecular Imaging Centre, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. 
Karl.Herholz@manchester.ac.uk

Positron emission tomography (PET) is a well-established imaging modality. 
Measurement of regional cerebral glucose metabolism (rCMR(glc)) using PET and 
[(18)F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) has become a standard technique in both 
oncology and dementia research. When measuring rCMR(glc) in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), characteristic reductions in rCMR(glc) are found in neocortical 
association areas including the posterior cingulate, precuneus, temporoparietal 
and frontal multimodal association regions; the primary visual cortex, 
sensorimotor cortex, basal ganglia and cerebellum are relatively unaffected. 
FDG-PET has been used in the study of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to 
accurately predict the subsequent decline to AD. Impairment in rCMR(glc) may be 
seen in individuals at high genetic risk of AD, even before clinical symptoms 
are apparent. Characteristic patterns of regional hypometabolism are also seen 
in other degenerative dementias such as frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). The use of different radioisotopes and tracers 
increases the versatility of PET. Tracers adopted in dementia research include 
(11)C-PK-11195 and (11)C-PIB, which have been used to investigate 
neuroinflammation and amyloid deposition, respectively, in both AD and MCI 
populations. It is also possible to investigate neurotransmitter systems in 
dementia; targets have included the cholinergic, dopaminergic and serotonergic 
systems. Imaging the brains of dementia patients using PET provides important 
information about the brain function of these individuals that would otherwise 
be unavailable with other imaging modalities. PET will continue to be important 
in future dementia research as new tracers become available to help in the early 
and specific diagnosis of increasingly well-defined clinical syndromes, and 
assist in the assessment of new therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr/97295129
PMID: 18445746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1861. Br J Radiol. 2007 Dec;80 Spec No 2:S71-7. doi: 10.1259/bjr/33117326.

Role of imaging techniques in the diagnosis of dementia.

O'Brien JT(1).

Author information:
(1)Newcastle University, Institute for Ageing and Health, Wolfson Research 
Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. j.t.o'brien@ncl.ac.uk

Dementia is a common and growing problem, affecting 5% of the over 65 s and 20% 
of the over 80s. The recent availability of new treatments for dementia, as well 
as the importance of subtype-specific management, has renewed interest in the 
use of brain imaging techniques that can assist in the accurate recognition of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), vascular dementia 
(VaD) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Structural imaging, historically used 
to exclude an intracerebral lesion as a cause for dementia, is increasingly 
playing a role in "ruling in" diagnoses, with atrophy of the hippocampus and 
entorhinal cortex an early and sensitive marker for AD, and cortical and 
subcortical infarcts and white matter lesions characteristic of VaD. Regionally 
distinct patterns of hypoperfusion on single-photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) or hypometabolism on positron emission tomography (PET) can help 
differentiate FTD, AD and VaD, and dopaminergic loss in the basal ganglia can 
differentiate DLB from AD. Newer techniques show great promise to detect 
specific neuroreceptor changes as well as pathological underpinnings of 
dementia, such as amyloid and tau pathology.

DOI: 10.1259/bjr/33117326
PMID: 18445747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1862. Br J Radiol. 2007 Dec;80 Spec No 2:S78-91. doi: 10.1259/BJR/20005470.

Computational anatomical methods as applied to ageing and dementia.

Thompson PM(1), Apostolova LG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuro Imaging, Department of Neurology, UCLA School of 
Medicine, 635 Charles Young Drive, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA. 
thompson@loni.ucla.edu

The cellular hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease (AD) accumulate in the living 
brain up to 30 years before the characteristic symptoms of dementia can be 
identified. Brain changes in AD are difficult to distinguish from those in 
normal ageing, and this has led to the development of powerful computational 
methods to extract statistical information on the brain changes that are 
characteristic of AD, mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and different dementia 
subtypes. Time-lapse maps can be built to show how the disease spreads in the 
brain, and where treatment affects the disease trajectory. Here, we review three 
computational approaches to map brain deficits in AD: cortical thickness maps, 
tensor-based morphometry and hippocampal/ventricular surface modelling. 
Anatomical structures, modelled as three-dimensional geometrical surfaces, are 
mathematically combined across subjects for group or interval comparisons. 
Mathematical concepts from computational surface modelling, fluid mechanics and 
multivariate statistics are exploited to distinguish disease from normal 
variations in brain structure. These methods yield insight into the dynamics of 
AD and MCI, showing where brain changes correlate with cognitive or behavioural 
changes such as language dysfunction or apathy. We describe cortical and 
hippocampal changes that distinguish dementia subtypes (such as Lewy-body 
dementia, HIV-associated dementia and AD), and we describe brain changes that 
predict recovery or decline in those at risk. Finally, we indicate which 
computational methods are powerful enough to track dementia in clinical trials, 
on the basis of their efficiency and sensitivity to early change, and the detail 
in the measures they provide.

DOI: 10.1259/BJR/20005470
PMID: 18445748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1863. Rev Neurol. 2008 May 1-15;46(9):513-6.

[Characteristics of falls of neurological cause in the elderly].

[Article in Spanish]

Lázaro-del Nogal M(1), Latorre-González G, González-Ramírez A, Ribera-Casado JM.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Caídas. Servicio de Geriatría, Hospital Clínico Universitario San 
Carlos, Madrid, España.

Comment in
    Rev Neurol. 2008 Sep 16-30;47(6):335-6; author reply 336.

INTRODUCTION: Falls are a cause of disability and death in geriatric population. 
Third part of the elderly suffer at least one fall per year. Neurological 
illness are a very important risk factor in developing falls.
AIM: To establish the differences between neurological and not neurological 
patients with recurrent falls.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We select 113 patients over 65 years-old with two or more 
falls in the last six months, collecting demographic and medical data, as well 
as a functional, mental and social evaluation, gait and balance tests and 
posturography. Complementary examinations were done to clarify the diagnosis in 
each case.
RESULTS: Average age was 78 years-old. We define a group A, patients in which 
the main cause of falls is a neurological disease and group B with a 
non-neurological cause. Group A shows more number of falls (p < 0.053), worse 
functional (p < 0.002) and mental (p < 0.001) situation and more comorbility (p 
= 0.05), as well as worse scores in gait tests.
CONCLUSIONS: Neurological illness are a very important risk factor in falls due 
to the disturbances in gait and balance that they produce. Dementia, 
parkinsonism and cerebrovascular diseases are frequently found in elderly 
patients with recurrent falls. Patients with falls due to neurological illness 
tend to fall oftener and have worse mental and functional situation. Evaluating 
neurological risk factors in geriatric patients with recurrent falls is 
essential to establish appropriate prevention strategies.

PMID: 18446691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1864. Psychiatr Pol. 2008 May-Jun;42(3):383-92.

[Early Huntington disease as a cause of dementia in a 34 year old woman].

[Article in Polish]

Nicewicz B(1), Pełka-Wysiecka J, Samochowiec J.

Author information:
(1)Katedra i Klinika Psychiatrii Pomorskiej AM w Szczecinie.

Dementia is a subject of interest for both neurologists and psychiatrists. The 
most common causes of dementia are neurodegenerative diseases of the CNS. 
Alzheimer's disease is the most frequent of them, much less common are Lewy's 
body disease, Pick's disease, Parkinson's disease or Huntington's disease. 
Huntington's disease is an autosomally dominant terminal illness, that occurs in 
approximately 5 - 7 persons in 100 000. In 90% of the cases it begins after the 
age of 35, the remaining 10% is the juvenile and early form, which varies from 
that seen in adults. Rigidity, oral motor dysfunction, gait disorder and rapid 
cognitive decline are the main characteristics of the juvenile and early form. 
Chorea is rare or absent. The case of a young woman who developed dementia with 
motor and speech abnormalities is presented in this paper. Due to the great 
non-specifity of the symptoms she was being diagnosed for about 2 years 
(hospitalized 3 times in the neurology wards and 4 times in the psychiatry 
wards). Lack of family history disorders, no specific abnormalities in 
neurological examination, abundance of traumatic experiences accounted for the 
preliminary diagnosis of a dissociative disorder (pseudodementia). Many 
symptoms, such as depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, personality and 
behavioural disturbances were observed in the course of the disease. Finally, 
after 6 years from the appearance of the first symptoms, based on the third MR 
of CNS, the diagnosis of the early HD was established. The genetic test 
confirmed it.

PMID: 19899566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1865. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008 May;16(5):384-8. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181629971.

Clinical criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer disease: still good after all 
these years.

Ranginwala NA(1), Hynan LS, Weiner MF, White CL 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center, 
Dallas, TX, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the impact of newer neuropathological techniques on the 
power of National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and 
Stroke-AD and Related Disorders Association criteria for Alzheimer disease (AD) 
to detect AD at later postmortem study.
DESIGN: We examined clinical and postmortem diagnoses of persons evaluated 
postmortem with thioflavin-S staining for plaques and tangles and 
immunohistochemical staining techniques for alpha synuclein, uhiquitin, and tau 
protein.
SETTING: Alzheimer Disease Center.
PARTICIPANTS: Clinically evaluated persons for whom tissue diagnosis was 
available.
RESULTS: Of 313 evaluees, 166 met criteria for probable AD. An additional 59 
subjects had clinical diagnoses that included AD, e.g., possible AD, Lewy body 
variant of AD, AD and Parkinsonism, and mixed AD and vascular dementia. Of the 
166 probable AD cases, 147 of 166 (88.6%) met pathologic criteria for AD. When 
all five AD groups were combined, 194 of 225 subjects (86.2%) met pathologic 
criteria for AD. There were five cases diagnosed pathologically as tangle-only 
dementia, which was considered a variant of AD. A pathologic diagnosis of Lewy 
body variant of AD was made in 56 (17.9%) of cases, including 44 of 313 (14.1%) 
cases diagnosed as probable or possible AD. Pure dementia with Lewy bodies was 
seen in 13 (4.2%). There were 9 (2.9%) cases of mixed AD and vascular dementia, 
and 37 (11.4%) cases of frontotemporal dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: McKhann et al. criteria for probable and possible AD are valid for 
AD but do not exclude additional Lewy body pathology.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3181629971
PMID: 18448850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1866. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2008 May;67(5):484; author reply 484-5. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181713cb1.

Striatal beta-amyloid deposition in Parkinson disease with dementia.

Jellinger KA.

Comment on
    J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2008 Feb;67(2):155-61.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181713cb1
PMID: 18451728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1867. J Neurol. 2008 Jun;255(6):839-42. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0729-6. Epub 2008 May 
6.

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis: neuropathological findings.

Pilo de la Fuente B(1), Ruiz I, Lopez de Munain A, Jimenez-Escrig A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Virgen del Puerto Hospital, Paraje de Valcorchero s/n 
Plasencia, 10600 Céceres, Spain. bpilodelafuente@yahoo.es

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis is an inherited autosomal recessive lipid storage 
disease caused by a 27-hydroxylase enzyme deficiency, characterised clinically 
by tendon xanthomas, premature cataracts, chronic diarrhoea and progressive 
neurologic dysfunction. The disease is very uncommon and there are very few 
pathological descriptions. We report a 52-year-old male who presented with a 
neuropsychiatric disorder and cognitive decline. Despite treatment the patient 
developed optic atrophy, parkinsonism and dementia and died. The autopsy 
revealed a nonspecific brain and cerebellar atrophy. Under microscopic 
examination, lipid crystal clefts, neuronal loss, demyelination, reactive 
astrocytosis and perivascular macrophages were found. These findings suggest the 
limited reversibility of the disease, and its poor prognosis, specially if 
treatment is not started early.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-008-0729-6
PMID: 18458861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1868. Clin Nucl Med. 2008 Jun;33(6):398-401. doi: 10.1097/RLU.0b013e3181708244.

Value of combining activated brain FDG-PET and cardiac MIBG for the differential 
diagnosis of dementia: differentiation of dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer disease when the diagnoses based on clinical and neuroimaging criteria 
are difficult.

Schmidt SL(1), Correa PL, Tolentino JC, Manhães AC, Felix RM, Azevedo JC, 
Barbirato GB, Mendes MH, Boechat Y, Cabral H, Schmidt GJ, Dohmann HF, Mesquita 
CT.

Author information:
(1)State University of Rio de Janeiro (UERJ, Niteroi, Rio de Janerio, Brazil.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common cause of dementia. The 
diagnosis of DLB is particularly important because these patients show good 
response to cholinesterase inhibitors. Clinical and neuroimaging criteria for 
DLB have not been acceptable for predictive accuracy. We report a case of 
progressive dementia in which the differentiation of DLB and Alzheimer disease 
(AD) on the basis of clinical criteria alone was not possible. The patient was 
admitted to the hospital because he became worse after he had started treatment 
for severe AD. Both MRI and brain magnetic resonance spectroscopy were normal. 
The patient underwent myocardial scintigraphy with I-123 MIBG showing marked 
reduction in cardiac MIBG accumulation. The heart to mediastinum ratio of MIBG 
uptake was impaired in both early and delayed images. FDG-PET scan before and 
after activation with a visual attention task showed occipital cortex 
hypometabolism as compared with AD and a normal control. This case illustrates 
the value of combining activated brain FDG PET and cardiac MIBG. The association 
of these 2 techniques could be used as a potential diagnostic tool in a patient 
with dementia misdiagnosed as AD.

DOI: 10.1097/RLU.0b013e3181708244
PMID: 18496445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1869. Int Psychogeriatr. 2008 Oct;20(5):1059-70. doi: 10.1017/S1041610208007345. Epub 
2008 May 23.

Clinical correlates of functional performance in community-dwelling Chinese 
older persons with mild cognitive impairment.

Tam CW(1), Lam LC, Lui VW, Chan WC, Chan SS, Chiu HF, Chan WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Tai Po Hospital, Hong Kong SAR.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence suggests that functional impairment can be 
detected in older persons with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). This study 
explores the functional profiles and the clinical correlates of a 
population-based sample of Chinese older persons with MCI in Hong Kong.
METHODS: A random sample of 765 Chinese elderly subjects without dementia was 
recruited, of which 389 were elderly normal controls (Clinical Dementia Rating = 
0), and 376 had questionable dementia (CDR = 0.5). The latter were categorized 
into an MCI group (n = 291) and a very mild dementia (VMD) group (n = 85). Their 
functional performances were measured and compared with the normal controls 
(NC). Multiple regression analyses investigated the associations between 
functional scores (Disability Assessment in Dementia) and clinical correlates 
(cognitive test scores, neuropsychiatric symptoms and motor signs) in the NC 
subjects and cognitively impaired subjects.
RESULTS: Subjects with MCI had intermediate functional performance between the 
NC and those with VMD. Regression analyses revealed that lower scores of 
cognitive tests (delayed recall and categorical verbal fluency tests), apathy, 
aberrant motor symptoms and parkinsonism features were associated with lower 
functional scores in clinically non-demented subjects. Functional scores had no 
correlation with age, education and medical illness burden.
CONCLUSION: Neuropsychiatric symptoms and parkinsonism features were associated 
with functional impairment in the clinically non-demented elderly in the 
community. Assessment of these should be incorporated in the evaluation of older 
persons for early cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610208007345
PMID: 18498668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1870. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2008 Sep;21(3):171-82. doi: 
10.1177/0891988708316861. Epub 2008 May 23.

Driving cessation and self-reported car crashes in older drivers: the impact of 
cognitive impairment and dementia in a population-based study.

Lafont S(1), Laumon B, Helmer C, Dartigues JF, Fabrigoule C.

Author information:
(1)UMRESTTE, INRETS-Université Lyon 1-Institut de Veille Sanitaire, Bron, 
France. sylviane.lafont@inrets.fr

The complexity of driving activity has incited numerous developed countries to 
initiate evaluative procedures in elderly people, varying according to first 
evaluation age, frequency, and screening tools. The objective of this paper is 
to improve the knowledge of the driving cessation process regarding factors 
associated with crash involvement. Driving cessation and self-reported crashes 
during the past 5 years were analyzed with multivariate models, in a 
cross-sectional study including a population-based sample of 1051 drivers aged 
65 years and more. Visual trouble, Parkinson disease, dementia, and stroke 
history were associated with driving cessation. Future dementia was associated 
with self-reported crashes only. Attentional and executive deficits were 
associated with both outcomes. The detection of attentional and executive 
deficits should be included in driving evaluation procedures to improve 
awareness of these deficits by older drivers.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988708316861
PMID: 18503033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1871. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2008 May;133 Suppl 1:S5-7. doi: 10.1055/s-2008-1075678.

[Nuclear medicine imaging in neurodegenerative dementias].

[Article in German]

Gratz S(1), Hahn U, Kaiser JW, Jarnig M, Schwarz J, Förstl H.

Author information:
(1)Praxis für Nuklearmedizin und Radiologie, Stuttgart Bad Cannstatt. 
Nuklearmedizin-Gratz@gmx.net

Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission 
tomography (PET) are important tools in the differential diagnosis and 
therapeutic monitoring of cognitive disorders. SPECT and PET are highly 
sensitive methods for the early diagnosis of underlying neurodegeneration and 
the functional changes in the basal ganglia. Early and reliable diagnosis will 
become even more relevant with the development of options in the causal 
treatment of dementias, which would exert their most beneficial effects well 
before the onset of clinical symptoms. This review provides a brief survey on 
currently available methods of nuclear imaging in cortical (Alzheimer's disease) 
and subcortical forms of neurodegenerative dementia (Parkinson's disease; 
dementia with Lewy bodies).

DOI: 10.1055/s-2008-1075678
PMID: 18437639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1872. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2008 Sep;35(9):1636-41. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-008-0828-8. Epub 2008 May 29.

Cardiac (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine imaging allows early identification of 
dementia with Lewy bodies during life.

Estorch M(1), Camacho V, Paredes P, Rivera E, Rodríguez-Revuelto A, Flotats A, 
Kulisevsky J, Carrio I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Autonomous University of Barcelona, C. Sant Antoni M. Claret 167, Barcelona, 
Spain. mestorch@santpau.cat

PURPOSE: Differential diagnosis between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 
other neurodegenerative diseases with cognitive impairment represents a clinical 
challenge. Due to the overlapping of symptoms, the clinical diagnosis can be 
modified during the prolonged follow-up of these diseases. The purpose of this 
study was to assess the ability of cardiac metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) 
imaging for early identification of DLB.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Since January 2003, all patients with neurodegenerative 
diseases with cognitive impairment at their first visit at the Memory Unit and 
clinical criteria of DLB were consecutively recruited and underwent a cardiac 
(123)I-MIBG study. The heart-to-mediastinum ratio (HMR) and the washout rate 
(WR) of cardiac MIBG uptake were obtained.
RESULTS: Sixty-five patients were included. After a clinical follow-up of 4 
years, the progress of the disease procured a definite diagnosis in 44 (68%) 
patients: 19 DLB, 12 Alzheimer disease (AD), and 13 other neurodegenerative 
diseases with cognitive impairment. HMR was significantly decreased in DLB with 
respect to the other neurodegenerative diseases. WR was only significantly 
different between DLB and AD. The HMR cut off point of 1.36 differentiated DLB 
from the other dementias with a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 96% with 
an accuracy of 95%.
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac MIBG imaging performed at the time of the first clinical 
diagnosis of DLB can help early clinical identification or exclusion of this 
disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-008-0828-8
PMID: 18509631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1873. Dementia -- Caring, Ethics, Ethnical and Economical Aspects: A Systematic Review 
[Internet].

Swedish Council on Health Technology Assessment.

Stockholm: Swedish Council on Health Technology Assessment (SBU); 2008 Jun. SBU 
Assessment No. 172.
SBU Systematic Reviews.

(3 VOLUMES):
PURPOSE: The purpose of this SBU project was to use systematic database searches 
and a review of the scientific literature as a starting point to assess the 
current state of knowledge about dementia disorders from various perspectives. 
Those perspectives included occurrence, risk factors for development, 
diagnostics, care, ethical considerations, ethnicity and drug therapies, as well 
as the health economic aspects.
OBJECTIVE OF THE REPORT: The objective of the report is to: Analyse current 
knowledge and values about caregiving in order to help caregivers of dementia 
patients. Support nurses and caregivers in diagnosing and treating people with 
dementia disorders. Describe the key role of family members in caring for people 
with dementia. Provide public officials and other decision makers with a 
scientific basis for formulating dementia care policy.
SBU’S CONCLUSIONS: OCCURRENCE, RISK AND PREVENTION: Two thirds of the 
approximately 140,000 Swedes with a dementia disorder have Alzheimer’s disease. 
The other two leading disorders are vascular dementia (10%) and frontotemporal 
dementia (5%). Other disorders occur in various combinations with non-dementia 
conditions, such as the frequent comorbidity of Lewy body dementia and 
Parkinson’s disease. A common denominator of all dementia disorders is that 
memory and cognitive function is impaired due to neuron death. Age is the 
primary risk factor for developing dementia (strong scientific evidence). Rising 
life expectancies are increasing the number of people who develop dementia 
disorders. Approximately 1% of 65-year-olds and more than 50% of 90-year-olds 
have a dementia disorder. Among people older than 85, a greater percentage of 
women than men have Alzheimer’s disease (moderately strong scientific evidence). 
Although known genetic changes that cause Alzheimer’s disease are rare, the 
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) ε4 allele is known to increase the risk (strong 
scientific evidence). Currently, there is no specific preventive treatment for 
dementia, but blood pressure monitoring in middle age reduces the risk of 
developing it later in life (moderately strong scientific evidence). Treatment 
with antihypertensives reduces the risk of developing vascular dementia later in 
life (moderately strong scientific evidence). The progression of dementia can be 
delayed among older people who continue to lead active lives (moderately strong 
scientific evidence). RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER DISEASES: Cognitive deterioration 
due to hypothyroidism or hyperthyroidism is unrelated to dementia but needs to 
be diagnosed and treated. Existing studies show contradictory results with 
respect to the cor- relation between low vitamin B12 (cobalamin) levels and 
impaired cognitive function or Alzheimer’s disease. There is a moderate corre- 
lation between low folic acid levels and impaired cognitive function. There is a 
strong correlation between high homocysteine levels and impaired cognitive 
function. Treatment with vitamins such as cobalamin or folic acid that lower 
homocysteine levels does not lead to any improvement in impaired cognitive 
function. DIAGNOSIS: Currently, there is no simple, reliable test for 
identifying dementia at an early stage. In their present form, no diagnostic 
instruments are sufficiently developed to be used for dementia screening. A gold 
standard is lacking for identifying dementia and ruling out other diseases. 
Imprecise definitions of the various dementia disorders limit the ability of 
caregivers to distinguish one disorder from another. Many methods (scales and 
indices) are used to measure the severity of various symptoms of dementia, such 
as cognitive deterioration, functional decline and behavioural changes. The 
insufficient evaluation to which most methods have been subjected makes it more 
difficult to assess the efficacy of specific care and treatment approaches. 
Family, friends and caregivers (knowledgeable informants/collateral sources) can 
provide valuable information to supplement diagnosis and the patient’s 
narrative. Standardised interviews with collateral sources (moderately strong 
scientific evidence), as well as the clock drawing test and other simple 
exercises (moderately strong scientific evidence), allow general practitioners 
to perform an initial selection of patients for possible further diagnosis. 
After a baseline assessment, detection of atrophy of the medial temporal lobe by 
computer tomography (CT scan) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI scan), 
respectively can identify people who have Alzheimer’s disease with a high degree 
of certainty (strong scientific evidence). After a baseline assessment, 
biochemical diagnostic markers such as cerebrospinal fluid analysis (strong 
scientific evidence) and neuropsychological testing (strong scientific evidence) 
effectively identify people with Alzheimer’s disease. Functional diagnosis – 
positron emission tomography (PET scan) and single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT scan) – has moderate value (moderately strong scientific 
evidence), while neurophysiological testing – EEG brain mapping and quantitative 
EEG – has limited value (limited scientific evidence) for identifying dementia 
disorders. The apoliprotein E ε4 is a poor marker for the ApoE ε4 allele for 
identifying Alzheimer’s disease or for differential diagnosis. Studies are 
lacking that have combined different types of testing. As a result, which 
approaches are most cost-effective is not known with certainty. ETHICAL 
CONSIDERATIONS AND ATTITUDES: Because dementia affects almost all areas of life, 
ethical issues often arise. Values and beliefs – including views about the human 
con- dition and the appropriateness of various interventions – influence 
diagnosis, care and treatment alike. The issues are rarely simple or 
uncomplicated, but tend to require active moral reflection based on both 
knowledge and subjective principles. People with dementia are sometimes 
stigmatised. Greater under- standing and candour can lead to more objective and 
compassionate social attitudes. Dementia care varies considerably from one 
Swedish county and municipality to another. The results of the literature search 
should be used, particularly by the municipalities, for the benefit of patients 
and their families. CARING FOR PEOPLE WITH DEMENTIA: In addition to knowledge 
and objectivity, effective care requires a trusting relationship between the 
patient and caregiver. Because the studies that have assessed various kinds of 
care do not generally control for or evaluate the impact of that relationship, 
the benefits of a particular approach are difficult to determine. Substantial 
variations with regard to purpose, type of intervention and assessment 
instrument hamper attempts to summarise the studies as a single evidence grade. 
A number of studies, though with generally low internal validity, have 
demonstrated the efficacy of various interventions – such as multisensory 
stimulation (Snoezelen), music and reminiscence therapy – for improving the 
quality of life of individual patients. Many studies have looked at training 
programmes and clinical guidance for nurses and caregivers. But given that the 
studies do not meet suitable criteria for assessing evidence, the most effective 
approach cannot be identified. Generally speaking, nurses and caregivers need 
support in the form of training. Dementia affects the lives of family members as 
well as the patient. Psychosocial training programmes (moderately strong 
scientific evidence) for family members, along with instruction in dealing with 
the behavioural problems that accompany dementia (limited scientific evidence), 
can alleviate their anxiety and depression. While good quality of life is a 
vital objective in caring for people with dementia, effective methods are 
lacking for evaluating quality of life from the patient’s point of view. 
Existing studies have not found that respite care reduces the community 
resources that must be devoted to people with dementia or the anxiety 
experienced by family members. But it offers family members the opportunity to 
obtain some valuable relief. DRUG THERAPIES: Existing studies have not found 
that treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors (donepezil, galantamine and 
rivastigmine) affects the progress of mild to moderate Alzheimer’s disease. But 
it offers some improvement of global function and cognition (moderately strong 
scientific evidence). However, knowledge about effects for longer than one year 
is limited. Treatment of mild to severe Alzheimer’s disease with memantine can 
lead to some cognitive improvement (limited scientific evidence). Knowledge 
about long-term effects is limited to therapy for six months. Extract of Ginkgo 
biloba can provide some relief of cognitive and Activities of Daily Living (ADL) 
impairment (limited scientific evidence). Knowledge about long-term effects is 
limited to therapy for six months. Cholinesterase inhibitors commonly cause the 
adverse effects of dizziness and nausea (moderately strong scientific evidence). 
A number of drug groups, such as benzodiazepines and anticholi- nergics, have 
undesired effects on cognition (strong scientific evidence). People with 
dementia disorders commonly develop depression. Selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (SSRIs) can provide some relief. The scientific evidence for treating 
coexisting depression in people with dementia is however limited (limited 
scientific evidence). Drug therapies for behavioural symptoms in people with 
dementia disorders have limited effectiveness (limited scientific evidence). 
Increased mortality has been demonstrated in people with dementia who have been 
treated with atypical antipsychotics. The impact on mortality has not shown up 
in individual studies but was identified by a meta-analysis (moderately strong 
scientific evidence). Corresponding data is lacking concerning older 
antipsychotics. The health economic studies published so far suffer from 
methodological flaws and are not conclusive. Because only a few studies contain 
empirical data, determining whether drug therapy is cost-effective or not is 
difficult. SOCIAL IMPACT: Approximately half of all people with dementia move to 
assisted living facilities within 2–3 years after diagnosis. Approximately half 
of all people with dementia are in assisted living facilities. The burden of 
dementia in Sweden corresponds to approximately sek 40 billion (eur 4.36 
billion) a year, a figure that is likely to grow as the size of the elderly 
population continues to increase. Municipalities bear more than 80% of the 
costs, which cover care at assisted living facilities and support for those who 
remain at home.
ADDITIONAL RESEARCH NEEDS: Additional research on dementia disorders is required 
in several areas: How the various disorders progress. Development of diagnostic 
methods. Better evaluation of instruments for identifying and measuring 
cognitive and related symptoms, as well as assessing the quality of life of 
people with dementia. Development of caregiving methods, such as guidance, 
training and studies that focus on the relationship between patient and 
caregiver. Clearer ethical guidelines for diagnosis, treatment and care of 
people with dementia. Drugs for all categories of dementia that are more 
effective and cause fewer adverse effects. Studies that examine the long-term 
effects and costs of drug therapies.

Copyright © 2008 by the Swedish Council on Health Technology Assessment.

PMID: 28876770


1874. Sleep. 2008 May;31(5):717-23. doi: 10.1093/sleep/31.5.717.

123I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy provides clues to the underlying 
neurodegenerative disorder in idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder.

Miyamoto T(1), Miyamoto M, Suzuki K, Nishibayashi M, Iwanami M, Hirata K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center of Sleep Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University 
School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan. miyatomo@dokkyomed.ac.jp

Comment in
    Sleep. 2008 Dec;31(12):1627.

OBJECTIVE: RBD is considered to be a manifestation of an evolving 
synucleinopathy, such as Parkinson disease (PD), dementia of Lewy bodies (DLB), 
and multiple system atrophy (MSA). We tested whether the degree of accumulation 
of cardiac 123I-MIBG scintigraphy can distinguish the clinical syndromes 
associated with Lewy body-related disease from the syndrome of PSP (a tauopathy) 
and MSA.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional.
SETTING: University-based sleep disorders laboratory.
PATIENTS: Subjects comprised 95 patients (31, idiopathic RBD; 26, PD; 10, MSA; 
6, DLB; 13, progressive supranuclear palsy [PSP]) and 9 control subjects.
INTERVENTION: To compare tracer uptake of cardiac 123I-MIBG between idiopathic 
RBD, PD, MSA, DLB, and PSP and control subjects.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: Cardiac 123I-MIBG accumulation was evaluated by the 
heart/mediastinum (H/M) ratio. Mean value of the H/M ratio (early, delayed) was 
significantly reduced in patients with idiopathic RBD compared to MSA patients, 
PSP patients, control subjects (P < 0.001 in each group) and PD patients in 
early images (P < 0.05). There was a correlation between the H/M ratio and 
disease duration in the idiopathic RBD group. ROC analysis revealed that an H/M 
cut-off value of 1.9 was useful for differentiating RBD from MSA and PSP as well 
as distinguishing control subjects from those with RBD in both early and delayed 
images.
CONCLUSION: Cardiac 123I-MIBG findings are similar among idiopathic RBD and the 
syndromes of PD and DLB, but differ from those of PSP and MSA.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/31.5.717
PMCID: PMC2398741
PMID: 18517041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1875. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 May;14(1):59-67. doi: 10.3233/jad-2008-14106.

Value of measuring plasmatic levels of neurosin in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Menendez-Gonzalez M(1), Castro-Santos P, Suarez A, Calatayud MT, Perez-Pinera P, 
Martinez M, Ribacoba R, Gutierrez C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital Alvarez-Buylla, Mieres, Spain. 
manuelmenendez@gmail.com

The search for molecular biomarkers for diagnosing and classifying dementias is 
becoming a high priority need. Neurosin (Kallikrein 6, hk6) is one molecule with 
promising preliminary results since its levels in brain tissue, cerebrospinal 
fluid and blood have been found to be abnormal in Alzheimer's disease (AD). In 
this study, we measured plasmatic levels of neurosin in healthy individuals and 
patients with cognitive symptoms independently of what the final diagnosis was. 
We collected plasma samples from 228 controls and 447 patients finally diagnosed 
with either AD, Mild Cognitive Impairment, Dementia with Lewy Bodies or 
Parkinson-Dementia, Frontotemporal Dementia, Huntington's disease, Primary 
Progressive Aphasia, Corticobasal degeneration, Creutzfeldt-Jakob's disease or 
Pseudodementia. We found that plasmatic levels of neurosin increase with age in 
healthy individuals and decrease in patients with AD. Plasmatic levels of 
neurosin differ significantly between AD and Vascular Dementia, Pseudodementia 
and the control group. Analyses comparing any other form of neurodegenerative 
dementia to the AD group did not show significant differences. In conclusion, 
measurement of plasmatic levels of neurosin is useful to distinguish AD patients 
from subjects without neurodegenerative dementia (either Pseudodementia, 
Vascular Dementia or controls) although it is not useful to distinguish among 
neurodegenerative dementias.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2008-14106
PMID: 18525128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1876. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2008 Apr-Jun;22(2):163-9. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181641341.

The prevalence of misidentification syndromes in neurodegenerative diseases.

Harciarek M(1), Kertesz A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neurology, St Joseph's Hospital, University of 
Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada. mharciarek@yahoo.com

Although misidentification syndromes (MISs) have been often described in 
Alzheimer disease (AD), the prevalence of these phenomena in different 
neurodegenerative diseases has not been systematically studied. Three hundred 
ninety-two individuals with probable AD, 119 patients with the behavioral 
variety of frontotemporal dementia (FTD-bv), 101 patients with primary 
progressive aphasia, 24 subjects with semantic dementia, 18 subjects with 
corticobasal degeneration, 8 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy, 36 
individuals with probable Lewy body dementia (DLB), and 26 subjects with 
Parkinson disease (PD) were the participants of this study. On the basis of a 
semistructured interview with both patients and their reliable caregivers, MIS 
was identified in 15.8% of cases with AD, 16.6% of patients with DLB, and in 
8.3% of individuals with semantic dementia. The most frequent form of MIS was 
Capgras delusions, often accompanied by reduplication of place, phantom border 
phenomenon, or both. Although MIS typically appears in later stages of the 
disease, it can also occur surprisingly early in patients with AD. None of the 
patients with FTD-bv, primary progressive aphasia, corticobasal 
degeneration/supranuclear palsy, or PD developed MIS. Thus, our findings suggest 
that MISs are characteristic of AD and DLB, and tend to exclude FTD/Pick complex 
and PD.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e3181641341
PMID: 18525289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1877. Cleve Clin J Med. 2008 Mar;75 Suppl 2:S54-8. doi: 10.3949/ccjm.75.suppl_2.s54.

Cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in patients with movement disorders.

Walter BL(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurological Restoration, Neurological Institute, Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. walterb@ccf.org

Autonomic dysfunction is common in parkinsonian syndromes, particularly those 
involving dysregulation of alpha-synuclein, and may result from 
neurodegeneration in autonomic regulatory regions of the brain or peripherial 
autonomic ganglia. The most limiting cardiovascular autonomic dysfunction in 
these diseases is orthostatic hypotension, which is particularly prominent in 
multiple system atrophy. Postprandial hypotension and supine hypertension, as 
well as dopaminergic therapy, often complicate the management of orthostatic 
hypotension in patients with parkinsonian syndromes.

DOI: 10.3949/ccjm.75.suppl_2.s54
PMID: 18540148 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1878. Mov Disord. 2008 Aug 15;23(11):1546-50. doi: 10.1002/mds.22173.

Cut-off score of the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale for screening dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Llebaria G(1), Pagonabarraga J, Kulisevsky J, García-Sánchez C, Pascual-Sedano 
B, Gironell A, Martínez-Corral M.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Autonomous 
University of Barcelona and CIBERNED (Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas en 
Red - Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas), Barcelona, Spain.

The prevalence of dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) is close to 30%, and its 
incidence is 4 to 6 times higher than in age-matched general population. PD with 
dementia (PDD) is mainly characterized by a predominant and progressive 
frontal-subcortical impairment. The Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (MDRS) is a 
commonly used screening test that sensitively measures the degree of 
frontal-subcortical defects. Although the MDRS has been validated as a screening 
test of cognitive dysfunction in nondemented PD patients (PD-ND), its utility 
for screening dementia in PD is unknown. In order to validate the MDRS for 
diagnosis of PDD it was prospectively administered to 92 PD patients (57 PD-ND, 
35 PDD) fulfilling UK-PDSBB criteria. Dementia was diagnosed according to 
DSM-IV-TR and a Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale score >or=1. Univariate, 
logistic regression, and ROC curve analysis were carried out to measure the 
discriminative power of MDRS in PDD. Regression analysis showed MDRS total 
scores to independently differentiate PD-ND from PDD (P < 0.001). Age and 
education did not predict the presence of dementia. ROC curve analysis showed a 
cut-off score of <or=123 on the MDRS total scores to yield high sensitivity 
(92.65%), specificity (91.4%), positive and negative predictive values (PPV 
83.3%, NPV 96.4%). A brief version of the MDRS obtained by the addition of the 
memory, initiation/perseveration, and conceptualization subscores yielded 
similar discriminant properties. The MDRS has an excellent discriminant ability 
to diagnose dementia in PD and provides an objective measure to distinguish 
PD-ND from PDD.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22173
PMID: 18546326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1879. Annu Rev Neurosci. 2008;31:151-73. doi: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090711.

Role of axonal transport in neurodegenerative diseases.

De Vos KJ(1), Grierson AJ, Ackerley S, Miller CC.

Author information:
(1)MRC Center for Neurodegeneration Research, Institute of Psychiatry, King's 
College, London SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. Kurt.DeVos@iop.kcl.ac.uk

Many major human neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), display axonal 
pathologies including abnormal accumulations of proteins and organelles. Such 
pathologies highlight damage to the axon as part of the pathogenic process and, 
in particular, damage to transport of cargoes through axons. Indeed, we now know 
that disruption of axonal transport is an early and perhaps causative event in 
many of these diseases. Here, we review the role of axonal transport in 
neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.neuro.31.061307.090711
PMID: 18558852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1880. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2008 Jul;9(7):532-44. doi: 10.1038/nrn2420.

Animal models of Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia.

Götz J(1), Ittner LM.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's & Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain & Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, 100 Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050, 
Australia. jgoetz@med.usyd.edu.au

Insoluble protein aggregates have been linked to Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Recent work in transgenic mice has shed light on 
the role of these aggregates by identifying soluble oligomeric species that may 
interfere with essential cellular mechanisms at an early disease stage. This 
review summarizes what we have learned about the roles of these proteins from 
transgenic mice and invertebrate species such as flies and worms. Proteomic and 
transcriptomic analyses of tissue from these animal models have identified new 
molecules with crucial roles in disease. Moreover, transgenic animals have been 
instrumental in defining drug targets and designing novel therapeutic 
strategies. With advanced imaging techniques that can be used in both humans and 
mice an early, preclinical diagnosis of AD and FTD could be within reach.

DOI: 10.1038/nrn2420
PMID: 18568014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1881. Exp Aging Res. 2008 Jul-Sep;34(3):173-87. doi: 10.1080/03610730802070001.

Odor identification and progression of parkinsonian signs in older persons.

Wilson RS(1), Arnold SE, Buchman AS, Tang Y, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center and Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. rwilson@rush.edu

The authors tested the hypothesis that difficulty in identifying odors, a common 
finding in Parkinson's disease, is associated with more rapid progression of 
parkinsonian signs in 743 community-dwelling older people without dementia or 
Parkinson's disease at study onset. Odor identification ability was assessed at 
baseline with the 12-item Brief Smell Identification Test (mean = 9.0 correct, 
SD = 2.1), and parkinsonism was assessed annually for up to 5 years with a 
modified version of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. In an analysis 
adjusted for age, sex, and education, lower odor identification score was 
related to higher level of global parkinsonism at baseline (p < .001) and more 
rapid progression of global parkinsonism on follow-up (p = .002). This result 
mainly reflected an association of odor identification with worsening 
parkinsonian gait. The results suggest that impaired odor identification is 
associated with more rapid progression of parkinsonism in old age, particularly 
parkinsonian gait disturbance.

DOI: 10.1080/03610730802070001
PMCID: PMC3142656
PMID: 18568978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1882. Psychol Med. 2009 Jan;39(1):3-11. doi: 10.1017/S0033291708003681. Epub 2008 Jun 
23.

Physical activity and risk of neurodegenerative disease: a systematic review of 
prospective evidence.

Hamer M(1), Chida Y.

Author information:
(1)Psychobiology Group, Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, University 
College London, UK. m.hamer@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The association between physical activity and risk of 
neurodegenerative diseases is not well established. We therefore aimed to 
quantify this association using meta-analytical techniques.
METHOD: We searched Medline, the Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and Web 
of Science databases from 1990 to 2007 for prospective epidemiological studies 
of physical activity and incident dementia, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. 
We excluded studies of physical activity and cognitive decline without diagnosis 
of a neurodegenerative disease. Information on study design, participant 
characteristics, measurement of exposure and outcome variables, adjustment for 
potential confounding, and estimates of associations was abstracted 
independently by the two investigators.
RESULTS: We included 16 prospective studies in the overall analysis, which 
incorporated 163797 non-demented participants at baseline with 3,219 cases at 
follow-up. We calculated pooled relative risk (RR) using a random effects model. 
The RR of dementia in the highest physical activity category compared with the 
lowest was 0.72 [95% confidence interval (CI) 0.60-0.86, p<0.001], for 
Alzheimer's, 0.55 (95% CI 0.36-0.84, p=0.006), and for Parkinson's 0.82 (95% CI 
0.57-1.18, p=0.28).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that physical activity is inversely associated 
with risk of dementia. Future studies should examine the optimal dose of 
physical activity to induce protection, which presently remains unclear.

DOI: 10.1017/S0033291708003681
PMID: 18570697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1883. Arch Intern Med. 2008 Jun 23;168(12):1270-6. doi: 10.1001/archinte.168.12.1270.

Subtle neurological abnormalities as risk factors for cognitive and functional 
decline, cerebrovascular events, and mortality in older community-dwelling 
adults.

Inzitari M(1), Pozzi C, Ferrucci L, Chiarantini D, Rinaldi LA, Baccini M, Pini 
R, Masotti G, Marchionni N, Di Bari M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine and Surgery, Unit of Gerontology and 
Geriatrics, University of Florence, via delle Oblate, 4, 50141 Florence, Italy. 
marcoinzitari@gmail.com

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 2008 Jun 23;168(12):1252-3.

BACKGROUND: Subtle, but clinically detectable, neurological abnormalities (SNAs) 
are associated with impaired physical performance in elderly persons without 
overt neurological diseases. We investigated whether SNAs were prospectively 
associated with cognitive and functional status, death, and cerebrovascular 
events (CVEs) in older community-dwelling individuals.
METHODS: In participants without history of stroke, parkinsonism and dementia, 
or cognitive impairment, a score (N(SNA)) was obtained by summing SNAs detected 
with a simple neurological examination. Cognitive status and disability were 
reassessed 4 years later, and deaths and CVEs were documented over 8 years.
RESULTS: Of 506 participants free of neurological diseases (mean [SEM] age, 71.9 
[0.3] years; 42% were men), 59% had an N(SNA) of 1 or more (mean [SEM], 1.1 
[0.06]; range, 0-8). At baseline, the N(SNA) increased with age and with 
declining cognitive and physical performance, depressive symptoms, and 
disability, after adjusting for several covariates, but did not increase with 
falls and urinary incontinence. The N(SNA) prospectively predicted worsening 
cognitive status and disability, adjusting for demographics and for baseline 
comorbidity and cognitive and physical performance. The mortality rates were 
22.6, 23.3, 23.9, 58.6, and 91.9 per 1000 person-years in participants with an 
N(SNA) of 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 or higher, respectively. Compared with an N(SNA) of 
less than 3, having an N(SNA) of 3 or higher was associated with an increased 
adjusted risk of death (hazard ratio, 1.77; 95% confidence interval [CI], 
1.25-2.74) and of CVE (hazard ratio, 1.94; 95% CI, 1.07-3.54) over 8 years.
CONCLUSION: In this sample of older community-dwelling persons without overt 
neurological diseases, multiple SNAs were associated with cognitive and 
functional decline and independently predicted mortality and CVEs.

DOI: 10.1001/archinte.168.12.1270
PMCID: PMC4642714
PMID: 18574083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1884. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;26(1):32-42. doi: 10.1159/000141039. Epub 2008 
Jun 25.

Alpha- and gamma-synuclein proteins are present in cerebrospinal fluid and are 
increased in aged subjects with neurodegenerative and vascular changes.

Mukaetova-Ladinska EB(1), Milne J, Andras A, Abdel-All Z, Cerejeira J, Greally 
E, Robson J, Jaros E, Perry R, McKeith IG, Brayne C, Xuereb J, Cleghorn A, 
Doherty J, McIntosh G, Milton I.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK. Elizabeta.Mukaetova-Ladinska@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Disease-specific biomarkers should reflect a fundamental feature of 
neuropathology and be validated in neuropathologically confirmed cases. Several 
synaptic proteins have been described in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients 
with dementia. In Lewy body disease alpha-synuclein is incorporated within Lewy 
bodies and alpha-, beta- and gamma-synucleins in dystrophic neuritis. These 
pathological changes are expected to be seen in CSF.
METHODS: A total of 25 CSF post-mortem samples (8 control and 17 subjects with 
dementia) were used to quantify alpha- and gamma-synucleins and IgG.
RESULTS: We describe for the first time the presence of gamma-synuclein in CSF. 
There is an elevation of both alpha- and gamma-synucleins in CSF from elderly 
individuals with Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body disease (LBD) and vascular 
dementia (CVD), compared to normal controls. gamma-Synuclein showed a greater 
elevation in LBD, IgG in CVD. The elevation of alpha- and gamma-synucleins was 
seen from Braak stage III onwards and remained stable until Braak stage VI. 
These results were not influenced by age at death or post-mortem delay.
CONCLUSIONS: The reported increases in alpha- and gamma-synucleins and IgG in 
the ventricular CSF of individuals with dementia are novel findings. They now 
need to be explored further using a greater number of cases in each subgroup, 
using lumbar CSF samples to determine their applicability and relevance to a 
clinical diagnostic setting. It needs to be established whether using these 
markers may help to discriminate LBD from other types of neurodegenerative and 
vascular dementias.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000141039
PMID: 18577885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1885. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Sep 15;17(18):2863-7. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn183. Epub 2008 Jun 
25.

Association study of the NEDD9 gene with the risk of developing Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's disease.

Chapuis J(1), Moisan F, Mellick G, Elbaz A, Silburn P, Pasquier F, Hannequin D, 
Lendon C, Campion D, Amouyel P, Lambert JC.

Author information:
(1)Inserm, U744, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Université de Lille 2, Lille, 
France.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), the two most common 
neurodegenerative disorders in the elderly, have been hypothesized to share 
genetic determinants. Recently, Li et al. proposed that a variant in the NEDD9 
gene may be one of these common genetic factors. We attempted to confirm this 
initial observation by conducting an equivalent analysis in terms of pathologies 
and sample size. We genotyped the NEDD9 rs760678 SNP in three independent AD 
case-control studies (n = 3176) and two independent PD case-control studies (n = 
1855). However, we failed to detect an association of this SNP with the risk of 
developing AD or PD, in any of these populations. In conclusion, these data 
indicate that the rs760678 SNP of the NEDD9 gene is at best a weak genetic 
determinant of AD or PD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddn183
PMID: 18579580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1886. Neurology. 2008 Aug 12;71(7):474-80. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000310812.43352.66. 
Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Fourteen-year final report of the randomized PDRG-UK trial comparing three 
initial treatments in PD.

Katzenschlager R(1), Head J, Schrag A, Ben-Shlomo Y, Evans A, Lees AJ; 
Parkinson's Disease Research Group of the United Kingdom.

Collaborators: Abbott R, Banerji N, Barrie M, Boddie G, Bradbury P, Clarke C, 
Clifford-Jones R, Corston R, Critchley E, Cull R, Dick J, Draper I, Ellis C, 
Elrington G, Findley L, Fowler T, Frankel J, Gale A, Gardner-Thorpe C, Gibb W, 
Gibson JD, Gibson JM, Godwin-Austen R, Greenwood R, Hardie R, Harley D, Hawkes 
C, Hawkins S, Hildick-Smith M, Hughes R, Illis L, Jestico J, Kafetz K, Kapoor R, 
Kennard C, Knight R, Kocen R, Lees A, Leigh N, Loizou L, Lenton R, MacMahon D, 
Marsden CD, Michael W, Mitchell J, Monro P, Murdoch P, Mutch W, Overstall P, 
Park D, Parkes JD, Pentland B, Perkin GD, Ponsford R, Quinn N, Rawson M, Rees J, 
Rice-Oxley M, Riddoch D, Schon F, Schapira A, Shepherd D, Stern G, Summers B, 
Turnbull C, Turner A, Vakil S, Ward C, Whiteley A, Williams A.

Author information:
(1)National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, UK.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2008 Aug 12;71(7):470-1.
    Nat Clin Pract Neurol. 2008 Nov;4(11):590-1.

BACKGROUND: Ten-year follow-up results from the Parkinson's Disease Research 
Group of the United Kingdom trial demonstrated that there were no long-term 
advantages to initiating treatment with bromocriptine compared with l-dopa in 
early Parkinson disease (PD). Increased mortality in patients on selegiline 
combined with l-dopa led to premature termination of this arm after 6 years.
METHODS: Between 1985 and 1990, 782 patients were recruited into an open 
pragmatic multicenter trial and were randomized to l-dopa/decarboxylase 
inhibitor (DDCI), l-dopa/DDCI plus selegiline, or bromocriptine. The main 
endpoints were mortality, disability, and motor complications. For final 
follow-up, health-related quality of life and mental function were also 
assessed.
RESULTS: Median duration of follow-up at final assessment was 14 years in the 
166 (21%) surviving participants who could be contacted. After adjustment for 
baseline characteristics, disability scores were better in the l-dopa than in 
the bromocriptine arm (Webster: 16.6 vs 19.8; p = 0.03; Northwestern University 
Disability: 34.3 vs 30.0, p = 0.05). Physical functioning (difference 20.8; 95% 
CI 10.0, 31.6; p < 0.001) and physical summary scores (difference 5.2; 95% CI 
0.7, 9.7; p = 0.03) on the 36-item short-form health survey were also superior 
on l-dopa. Differences in mortality rates and prevalence of dyskinesias, motor 
fluctuations, and dementia were not significantly different.
CONCLUSION: Initial treatment with the dopamine agonist bromocriptine did not 
reduce mortality or motor disability and the initially reduced frequency in 
motor complications was not sustained. We found no evidence of a long-term 
benefit or clinically relevant disease-modifying effect with initial dopamine 
agonist treatment.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000310812.43352.66
PMID: 18579806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1887. Arch Esp Urol. 2008 Apr;61(3):403-11. doi: 10.4321/s0004-06142008000300007.

[Neurogenic etiology in patients with erectile dysfunction].

[Article in Spanish]

Valles Antuña C(1), Fernández Gómez JM, Escaf S, Fernández-González F.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurofisiología, Clínica del Hospital Universitario Central de 
Asturias, Oviedo, España. consuvall@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVES: Erectile dysfunction (ED) is a disorder with a high prevalence that 
increases with age. It is estimated that 18.9% of men's between 25 and 70 years 
suffer it in Spain. Most cases have a multifactorial origin and it is admitted 
the influence on its pathogenesis of systemic diseases, different kind of drugs, 
psychogenic factors, cardiovascular, endocrinological and neurological diseases. 
Neurologic cause erectile dysfunction may have its origin in the central or 
peripheral nervous system. Among possible process of neurogenic erectile 
dysfunction of central origin would be tumors, cerebral vascular accidents, 
encephalitis, Parkinson disease, multiple sclerosis and other demyelinization 
diseases, dementias, olivopontocerebellar degeneration and epilepsy. 
Myelopathies of any etiology may be, depending on their localization and 
extension, cause of erectile dysfunction. At the peripheral level, disorders of 
the sensitive tracts constituting the afferent limb of the erection spinal 
reflex, and the efferent vegetative or somatic tracts mediating arterial 
vasodilatation, cavernous smooth muscle relaxation or pelvic floor striated 
muscle contraction. The aim of this work is to review in detail the most 
relevant causes of neurogenic erectile dysfunction, their etiopathogenic 
mechanisms and therapeutic approaches currently considered more adequate for 
each particular case.
CONCLUSIONS: The correct diagnostic approach to patients with erectile 
dysfunction passes through identification, if possible, of the etiopathogenic 
factors implied. Regarding this, detection and identification of a possible 
neurogenic risk factor will contribute to a better understanding of the 
physiopathologic mechanisms, and more adequate diagnostic, prognostic and 
therapeutic approaches, mainly in those patients refractory to first line 
therapy.

DOI: 10.4321/s0004-06142008000300007
PMID: 18581678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1888. Rev Med Interne. 2008 Oct;29(10):785-93. doi: 10.1016/j.revmed.2008.01.029. Epub 
2008 Jun 26.

[Near a biological diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and related disorders].

[Article in French]

Krolak-Salmon P(1), Seguin J, Perret-Liaudet A, Desestret V, Vighetto A, 
Bonnefoy M.

Author information:
(1)Service de médecine gériatrique, centre hospitalier Lyon-Sud, hospices civils 
de Lyon, Pierre-Bénite cedex, France. pierre.krolak-salmon@chu-lyon.fr

PURPOSE: To review the current concepts in the biological diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related disorders.
CURRENT KNOWLEDGE AND KEY POINTS: As new therapeutics specific of AD may be 
available soon, early diagnosis of AD in the context of mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) or dementia appears to be challenging. The high amount of 
atypical clinical forms of AD leads to develop new tools allowing in vivo 
diagnosis. New CerebroSpinal Fluid (CSF) biomarkers seem to reflect specific 
aspects of deep neuropathological changes observed in AD, i.e. amyloid deposits 
and neurofibrillary tangles. Amyloid beta-peptide 1-42 (Abeta(1-42)) and 
hyperphosphorylated tubulin associated unit (tau) isoforms appear to be the most 
sensitive and specific CSF biomarkers, the combination of these biomarkers 
depicting the best diagnosis value for AD. These molecules are also efficient in 
the prediction of the conversion from the MCI state to the dementia state of AD. 
Combined to clinical and neuro-imaging information, CSF biomarkers appear thus 
to be highly relevant in improving the early etiological diagnosis of dementia.
FUTURE PROSPECTS AND PROJECTS: The current research focalises on the development 
of new molecules coming from Abeta and tau protein families, in the CSF and in 
the serum, as well as molecules reflecting other pathological metabolism 
changes, as alpha-synuclein in Lewy Body Disease. The diagnosis value of CSF 
biological markers is so promising that they have been recently included in the 
research diagnosis criteria of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.revmed.2008.01.029
PMID: 18584921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1889. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Dec;79(12):1318-23. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.147629. Epub 2008 Jun 27.

Poor attentional function predicts cognitive decline in patients with 
non-demented Parkinson's disease independent of motor phenotype.

Taylor JP(1), Rowan EN, Lett D, O'Brien JT, McKeith IG, Burn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 6BE, UK. 
john-paul.taylor@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Postural instability gait difficulty (PIGD) motor phenotype in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) is associated with a faster rate of cognitive decline 
than in tremor dominant cases and may be a risk factor for incident dementia. 
People with PD display attentional deficits; however, it is not clear whether 
attentional deficits in patients with non-demented PD are associated with (i) 
PIGD phenotype and/or (ii) subsequent cognitive decline.
AIMS: (i) To examine rates of cognitive decline (Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) and Cambridge Cognitive Examination (CAMCOG)) over 3 years in subjects 
with non-demented PD aged over 65 years, (ii) using Cognitive Drug Research 
computerised assessment test battery, determine the rate of change in power of 
attention (PoA) scores over time (sum of mean choice reaction time, simple 
reaction time and digit vigilance reaction time scores), (iii) determine whether 
the PIGD phenotype is associated with changes in PoA and (iv) establish whether 
baseline PoA is associated with subsequent cognitive decline.
RESULTS: 14 subjects (38%) were classified as PIGD motor phenotype at baseline. 
Cognitive decline was greater in PIGD compared with non-PIGD subjects (p < or = 
0.02). PIGD phenotype was not associated with baseline PoA score although it was 
associated with subsequent worsening in PoA (mean PoA increase/year: non-PIGD 
subjects 11.4 ms; PIGD subjects 244.0 ms; p = 0.01). Higher baseline PoA scores 
were associated with greater cognitive decline (MMSE, p = 0.03; CAMCOG, p = 
0.05) independent of PIGD status.
CONCLUSION: PIGD phenotype and attention deficits are independently associated 
with a greater rate of cognitive decline in patients with non-demented PD. We 
propose that subtle attentional deficits in patients with non-demented PD 
predict subsequent cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.147629
PMID: 18586866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1890. Dement Neuropsychol. 2008 Jul-Sep;2(3):197-200. doi: 
10.1590/S1980-57642009DN20300006.

Detecting cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease with a brief 
cognitive screening tool: the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE).

Chade A(1)(2), Roca M(1)(2), Torralva T(1)(2), Gleichgerrcht E(1), Fabbro N(2), 
Arévalo GG(1)(2), Gershanik O(1)(2), Manes F(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cognitive Neurology (INECO), Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Institute of Neurosciences at Favaloro Foundation, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Detecting cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease is crucial 
for good clinical practice given the new therapeutic possibilities available. 
When full neuropsychological evaluations are not available, screening tools 
capable of detecting cognitive difficulties become crucial.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to investigate whether the Spanish version 
of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination (ACE) is capable of detecting 
cognitive difficulties in patients with Parkinson's disease and discriminating 
their cognitive profile from patients with dementia.
METHODS: 77 early dementia patients (53 with Alzheimer's Disease and 24 with 
Frontotemporal Dementia), 22 patients with Parkinson's disease, and 53 healthy 
controls were evaluated with the ACE.
RESULTS: Parkinson's disease patients significantly differed from both healthy 
controls and dementia patients on ACE total score.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that the Spanish version of the ACE is capable of 
detecting patients with cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease and is able 
to differentiate them from patients with dementia based on their general 
cognitive status.

Publisher: A detecção de comprometimento cognitivo em pacientes com doença de 
Parkinson é crucial para uma boa prática clínica devido às novas possibilidades 
terapêuticas disponíveis. Quando uma avaliação neuropsicológica completa não 
está disponível, instrumentos de rastreio capazes de detectar dificuldades 
cognitivas tornam-se cruciais.
OBJETIVO: Investigar se a versão espanhola do Addenbrooke's Cognitive 
Examination (ACE) é capaz de detectar dificuldades cognitivas em pacientes com 
doença de Parkinson e discriminar seu perfil cognitivo de pacientes com 
demência.
MÉTODOS: 77 pacientes com demência leve (53 com doença de Alzheimer e 24 com 
demência frontotemporal), 22 pacientes com doença de Parkinson e 53 controles 
saudáveis foram avaliados com a ACE.
RESULTADOS: Os pacientes com doença de Parkinson significativamente diferiram de 
controles saudáveis e pacientes com demência no escore total do ACE.
CONCLUSÕES: Este estudo mostra que a versão espanhola do ACE é capaz de detectar 
pacientes com comprometimento cognitivo na doença de Parkinson e de 
diferenciá-los de pacientes com demência baseados no seu estado cognitivo geral.

DOI: 10.1590/S1980-57642009DN20300006
PMCID: PMC5619465
PMID: 29213570


1891. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 1998 Aug;4(2):65-72. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(98)00015-7.

Clinical, pathologic and genetic studies on autosomal recessive early-onset 
parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation.

Yamamura Y(1), Kuzuhara S, Kondo K, Yanagi T, Uchida M, Matsumine H, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, 
Hiroshima, Japan.

To clarify the genetic mode and clinical characteristics of familial early-onset 
parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation, we studied 43 patients from 22 families. 
The estimated segregation ratio (0.2963) and absence of gender preponderance 
indicated autosomal recessive inheritance. Clinical features included the 
average age at onset of 26.1 years, parkinsonism with marked diurnal 
fluctuation, remarkable effect of levodopa, dyskinesias, dystonia, 
hyperreflexia, absence of dementia, and a benign course; autonomic symptoms were 
only mild if present. Autopsy study in one of our patients disclosed neuronal 
loss without Lewy bodies and the presence of melanin-poor neurons in the 
substantia nigra. Linkage analysis on 16 families mapped the disease gene to 
chromosome 6q25.2-27.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(98)00015-7
PMID: 18591091


1892. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008 Jul;16(7):594-602. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e318173f5fc.

Concurrent validity of neuropsychiatric subgroups on caregiver burden in 
Alzheimer disease patients.

Tun SM(1), Murman DL, Colenda CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

OBJECTIVE: In a previously published study, the authors conceptualized 
neuropsychiatric symptoms in Alzheimer disease (AD) patients as distinct symptom 
profiles with differential outcomes. In the present study, our aim was to 
further examine the validation of the classification by considering its 
concurrent validity on caregiver burden.
METHOD: As described previously, neuropsychiatric symptoms, as assessed by the 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory, in 122 patients with AD were categorized, using 
cluster analysis. The presence as well as the severity and frequency of symptoms 
were both used in the classification. After the classification, group 
differences in caregiver burden, as measured by Screen for Caregiver Burden, 
were tested using analysis of covariance. The effects of important covariates, 
such as functional impairment, comorbid medical conditions, parkinsonism, age, 
and cognitive functioning, were examined.
RESULTS: Based on the presence of symptoms, subgroups differed in the level of 
caregiver distress in that caregivers of the "minimally symptomatic" and the 
"affective/apathetic" subgroups experienced less distress than the caregivers of 
the "highly symptomatic" subgroup. Based on the severity and frequency of 
symptoms, subgroups differed in such a way that caregivers of the "minimally 
symptomatic" and the "predominantly apathetic" subgroups endorsed less distress 
than the caregivers of the "affective" and the "highly symptomatic" subgroups.
CONCLUSION: Neuropsychiatric subgroups were able to differentially predict 
caregiver burden. The findings appear to lend further support to the validity of 
classifying neuropsychiatric symptoms in AD patients using cluster analysis.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e318173f5fc
PMID: 18591579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1893. Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Jul;116(1):1-16. doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0406-y. Epub 
2008 Jul 1.

A critical reappraisal of current staging of Lewy-related pathology in human 
brain.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Kenyongasse 18, 1070, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Sporadic Parkinson disease (sPD) or brainstem-predominant type of Lewy body (LB) 
disease, and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), the two most frequent 
alpha-synucleinopathies, are progressive multisystem neurodegenerative disorders 
with widespread occurrence of alpha-synuclein (AS) deposits in the central, 
peripheral, and autonomic nervous system. For both LB-related disorders, 
staging/classification systems based on semiquantitative assessment of the 
distribution and progression pattern of Lewy-related/AS pathology are used that 
are considered to be linked to clinical dysfunctions. In PD, a six-stage system 
(Braak) has been suggested to indicate a predictable sequence of lesions with 
ascending progression from medullary and olfactory nuclei to the cortex, the 
first two presymptomatic stages being related to incidental LB disease, stages 3 
and 4 with motor symptoms, and the last two (cortical) stages may be frequently 
associated with cognitive impairment. DLB, according to consensus pathologic 
guidelines, by semiquantitative scoring of AS pathology (LB density and 
distribution) in specific brain regions, is distinguished into three phenotypes 
(brainstem, transitional/limbic, and diffuse neocortical), also considering 
concomitant Alzheimer-related pathology. Retrospective clinico-pathologic 
studies, although largely confirming the staging system, particularly for 
younger onset PD with long duration, have shown that between 6.3 and 43% of the 
cases did not follow the proposed caudo-rostral progression pattern of AS 
pathology. There was sparing of medullary nuclei in 7-8.3% of clinically 
manifested PD cases with AS inclusions in midbrain and cortex corresponding to 
Braak stages 4 and 5, whereas mild parkinsonian symptoms were already observed 
in stages 2 and 3. There is considerable clinical and pathologic overlap between 
PD (with or without dementia) and DLB, corresponding to Braak LB stages 5 and 6, 
both frequently associated with variable Alzheimer-type pathology. Dementia 
often does not correlate with progressed stages of LB pathology, but may also be 
related to concomitant Alzheimer lesions or mixed pathologies. There is no 
relationship between Braak LB stage and the clinical severity of PD, and the 
predictive validity of this concept is doubtful, since large unselected, 
retrospective autopsy series in 30-55% of elderly subjects with widespread 
AS/Lewy-related pathology (Braak stages 5 and 6) reported no definite 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, suggesting considerable cerebral compensatory 
mechanisms. Applying the original criteria to large dementia samples, 49% of 
positive cases were not classifiable. Therefore, modified criteria for the 
categorization of Lewy-related pathology were proposed for patients with a 
history of dementia. The causes and molecular basis of the not infrequent 
deviations from the current staging schemes of AS pathology in PD and DLB, its 
relation to the onset of classical parkinsonian symptoms and for the lack of 
definite clinical deficits despite widespread AS pathology in the nervous system 
remain to be elucidated.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0406-y
PMID: 18592254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1894. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2008 Jul;67(7):649-56. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31817d7a1d.

Validation of the neuropathologic criteria of the third consortium for dementia 
with Lewy bodies for prospectively diagnosed cases.

Fujishiro H(1), Ferman TJ, Boeve BF, Smith GE, Graff-Radford NR, Uitti RJ, 
Wszolek ZK, Knopman DS, Petersen RC, Parisi JE, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

There is limited information on the validity of the pathologic criteria of the 
Third Consortium on Dementia with Lewy bodies (CDLB), and none are based on 
prospectively diagnosed cases. In this study, the core clinical features of 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and the suggestive clinical feature of rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder were assessed using a battery of standardized 
clinical instruments in 76 patients with the clinical diagnosis of either DLB or 
Alzheimer disease. At autopsy, 29 patients had high-likelihood, 17 had 
intermediate-likelihood, and 6 had low-likelihood DLB pathology. The frequency 
of core clinical features and the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of probable 
DLB were significantly greater in high-likelihood than in low-likelihood cases. 
This is consistent with the concept that the DLB clinical syndrome is directly 
related to Lewy body pathology and inversely related to Alzheimer pathology. 
Thus, the Third Consortium on DLB neuropathologic criteria scheme performed 
reasonably well and are useful for estimating the likelihood of the premortem 
DLB syndrome based on postmortem findings. In view of differences in the 
frequency of clinically probable DLB in cases with Braak neurofibrillary tangle 
stages V (90%) and VI (20%) and diffuse cortical Lewy bodies, a possible 
modification of the scheme is to consider cases with neurofibrillary tangle 
stage VI to be low-likelihood DLB.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31817d7a1d
PMCID: PMC2745052
PMID: 18596548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1895. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008 Aug;21(4):472-7. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328305044d.

Abnormal sleep and sleepiness in Parkinson's disease.

Arnulf I(1), Leu S, Oudiette D.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Unit, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance 
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, and team 106, CRIMS, Pierre and Marie Curie 
University, Paris, France.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Sleep problems are frequent and disabling in patients with 
Parkinson's disease. Recent data provide major advances in the mechanisms and 
consequences of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorders, insomnia and 
narcolepsy-like daytime sleepiness.
RECENT FINDINGS: A large series confirms that rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorders may precede parkinsonism or dementia (particuarly, but not 
exclusively, Lewy bodies dementia) for several years. In Parkinson's disease, 
rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorders expose patients to higher risks of 
dementia and hallucinations. Surprisingly, parkinsonism disappears during rapid 
eye movement sleep behavior disorders, suggesting basal ganglia are bypassed. 
The interest for structures controlling atonia during rapid eye movement sleep 
switches from the pedunculopontine nuclei to the locus subcoeruleus. The 
neuropathology of hypothalamus in Parkinson's disease indicates a massive 
hypocretin loss, probably underlying the narcolepsy phenotype. The benefit of 
the new, 24-h long acting ropinirole and transdermal rotigotine on sleep and 
sleepiness is modest. Eventually, the dopamine release in the mesocorticolimbic 
pathway is increased during rapid eye movement sleep, supporting its role in 
dopaminergic-induced vivid dreams.
SUMMARY: In clinical practice, rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorders 
should be looked at as heralding neurodegenerative diseases in patients with 
mild cognitive impairment and as a risk factor for dementia and hallucinations 
in patients with Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e328305044d
PMID: 18607209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1896. Amyotroph Lateral Scler. 2009 Apr;10(2):95-8. doi: 10.1080/17482960802209664.

Aggregation of neurodegenerative disease in ALS kindreds.

Fallis BA(1), Hardiman O.

Author information:
(1)University College Dublin, Dublin, Ireland.

The objective was to investigate the familial occurrence of the 
neurodegenerative condition amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's 
disease and dementia in the relatives of Irish ALS patients. A retrospective 
case control chart review study was conducted to extract the neurological family 
histories of Irish ALS patients and controls who attended the National 
Neurological Centre between January 2001 and January 2006. In total, details 
were extracted from 197 ALS and 235 general neurology pedigrees. Using the 
recurrence risk, lambda, ALS (lambda (1st degree)=7.77), Parkinson's disease 
(lambda (1st degree)=2.67) and dementia (lambda (1st degree)=6.21) were reported 
more frequently in relatives of ALS patients compared to those of non-ALS 
controls. Within sporadic ALS kindreds, the presence of neurodegenerative 
disease was not uniformly distributed. This study supports the conjecture that 
neurodegenerative disease aggregates within ALS kindreds, and indicates a shared 
genetic susceptibility towards some neurodegenerative phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1080/17482960802209664
PMID: 18608094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1897. Clin Neuropsychol. 2009 Feb;23(2):205-30. doi: 10.1080/13854040802003299.

Assessment of depression in three medically ill, elderly populations: 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and stroke.

Strober LB(1), Arnett PA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Psychology, The Cleveland Clinic Foundation, 
Cleveland, OH 44195, USA. strobel@ccf.org

Prevalence rates of depression in medically ill elderly people are strikingly 
high. In particular, the prevalences of depression at any given time in 
Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and stroke are as high as 87%, 75%, and 79%, 
respectively. Proper detection and management of depression in primary care is 
imperative. The present review examines the risk factors, peculiarities, and 
etiologies of depression in these populations. We suggest that certain features 
of depression be considered in assessing depression in these populations and 
provide guidelines for distinguishing depression from medical, psychosocial, and 
physical complaints common in elderly people. Additionally, we explore the use 
of self-report instruments of depression and provide guidelines regarding the 
specific measures and cutoffs most appropriate for use with these populations. 
To this end, we hope that readers acquire a greater appreciation for the 
experience of depression of those suffering from these neurological disorders to 
aid in their assessment.

DOI: 10.1080/13854040802003299
PMID: 18609323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1898. Exp Gerontol. 2009 Jan-Feb;44(1-2):46-50. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2008.06.006. Epub 
2008 Jun 24.

Prevention of common neurodegenerative disorders in the elderly.

Fratiglioni L(1), Qiu C.

Author information:
(1)Aging Research Center, Department of Neurobiology, Care Sciences and Society, 
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm Gerontology Research Center, Gavlegatan 16, 
S-113 30, Stockholm, Sweden. laura.fratiglioni@ki.se

Since population aging has become a worldwide phenomenon, the burden of the 
age-related neurodegenerative diseases is expected to increase dramatically in 
both developed and developing nations. Alzheimer's disease is the most common 
neurodegenerative disorder among old people. Prevention may represent an ideal 
solution to the challenge posed by this condition. Recent epidemiological 
studies have revealed a number of risk and protective factors that could 
influence occurrence of dementia including Alzheimer type dementia. We propose 
that an active and stimulating lifestyle in late life as well as an optimal 
control of vascular and other chronic diseases both at middle age and late life 
can be two possible intervention strategies to prevent or postpone the onset of 
dementia, and perhaps other neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2008.06.006
PMID: 18620039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1899. Bioessays. 2008 Aug;30(8):719-27. doi: 10.1002/bies.20784.

Tumorigenesis and neurodegeneration: two sides of the same coin?

Staropoli JF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Gray-Jackson 249, 
MGH, 55 Fruit St Boston, MA 02114-2696, USA. jstaropoli@partners.org

Dysregulation of genes that control cell-cycle progression and DNA repair is a 
hallmark of tumorigenesis. It is becoming increasingly apparent, however, that 
these defects also contribute to degeneration of post-mitotic neurons under 
certain conditions. The gene for ataxia-telangiectasia mutated (ATM) is a 
prototype for this dual mechanism of action, with loss-of-function mutations 
causing not only selective degeneration of cerebellar neurons but also increased 
susceptibility to breast cancer and hematologic malignancy. Increased dosage of 
amyloid precursor protein in Down syndrome (trisomy 21) predisposes to dementia 
of Alzheimer type and may also contribute to acute leukemia and transient 
myeloproliferative disorder. The gene parkin, loss-of-function mutations in 
which account for about half of cases of early-onset Parkinson disease, has been 
identified as a candidate tumor suppressor gene by several groups. Parkin is 
deleted or downregulated in several tumor types, and its re-expression 
sensitizes derivative cell lines to inhibitors of cell-cycle progression. The 
overlap of molecular pathways implicated in cancer and neurodegeneration 
challenges long-held notions about differentiated cellular states and may open 
the door to novel therapeutic approaches to both groups of disorders.

(c) 2008 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/bies.20784
PMID: 18623069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1900. Alzheimers Dement. 2008 Jan;4(1 Suppl 1):S77-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.jalz.2007.09.004. Epub 2007 Dec 21.

Dementia: is it time for a change in focus?

Kuller LH(1), Lopez OL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. kullerl@edc.pitt.edu

One of Dr Leon Thal's major contributions to Alzheimer's disease (AD) research 
was the network of clinical trials and his strong commitment to finding 
effective therapies for both the prevention and treatment of AD in the 
population. AD and dementia research has matured since the inception of the 
Alzheimer's Disease Center program from a primary social service problem to 
clinical-pathologic correlates and better definition of disease to evaluation of 
measures of cognition, in vivo images of the brain, and then to measures of beta 
amyloid and tau in vivo and relationship to clinical dementia. Unfortunately, we 
still do not know the etiology of AD or the relationship to other brain 
abnormalities such as vascular disease and Lewy bodies. We also do not have good 
preventive or treatment strategies. Both are badly needed. The critical question 
is whether this field is ready for a major change in focus from primarily a 
descriptive science to analytical, longitudinal studies testing new research 
hypotheses that will lead to better preventive and treatment approaches.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2007.09.004
PMID: 18632006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]