2901. Eur J Neurol. 2013 Feb;20(2):251-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2012.03831.x. Epub 
2012 Aug 20.

Phenotypic variability in three families with valosin-containing protein 
mutation.

Spina S(1), Van Laar AD, Murrell JR, Hamilton RL, Kofler JK, Epperson F, Farlow 
MR, Lopez OL, Quinlan J, DeKosky ST, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana Alzheimer Disease 
Center, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The phenotype of IBMPFD [inclusion body myopathy with 
Paget's disease of the bone and frontotemporal dementia (FTD)] associated with 
valosin-containing protein (VCP) mutation is described in three families.
METHODS: Probands were identified based on a pathological diagnosis of 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43-positive inclusions type IV. VCP 
sequencing was carried out. Clinical data on affected family members were 
reviewed.
RESULTS: Ohio family: four subjects presented muscle weakness and wasting. (One 
subject had both neuropathic and myopathic findings and another subject showed 
only evidence of myopathy. The etiology of weakness could not be ascertained in 
the remaining two subjects.) Two individuals also showed Parkinsonism (with 
associated FTD in one of the two). The proband's brain displayed FTLD-TDP type 
IV and Braak stage five Parkinson's disease (PD). A VCP R191Q mutation was 
found. Pennsylvania family: 11 subjects developed IBMPFD. Parkinsonism was noted 
in two mutation carriers, whilst another subject presented with primary 
progressive aphasia (PPA). A novel VCP T262A mutation was found. Indiana family: 
three subjects developed IBMPFD. FTD was diagnosed in two individuals and 
suspected in the third one who also displayed muscle weakness. A VCP R159C 
mutation was found.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified three families with IBMPFD associated with VCP 
mutations. Clinical and pathological PD was documented for the first time in 
members of two families. A novel T262A mutation was found. One individual had 
PPA: an uncommon presentation of IBMPFD.

© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2012.03831.x
PMCID: PMC3734548
PMID: 22900631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure of conflict of interest The authors 
declare no other conflict of interests.


2902. Neurotoxicology. 2012 Oct;33(5):1298-304. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.08.002. Epub 
2012 Aug 18.

Association between polychlorinated biphenyls and Parkinson's disease 
neuropathology.

Hatcher-Martin JM(1), Gearing M, Steenland K, Levey AI, Miller GW, Pennell KD.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory University School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) are synthetic chemicals primarily used as 
coolants and insulators in electrical equipment. Although banned for several 
decades, PCBs continue to exist in the environment because of their long 
half-life, continued presence in items produced before the ban, and poor 
disposal practices. Epidemiological and experimental studies have identified 
exposure to PCBs as a potential risk factor for Parkinson's disease, perhaps 
more so in females. The objective of this work was to examine the association 
between PCB levels in post-mortem human brain tissue and the diagnosis of 
Parkinson's disease, as well as the degree of nigral depigmentation. We also 
sought to determine if this association was more significant when patients were 
stratified by sex. Post-mortem brain samples from control patients and those 
diagnosed with Parkinson's disease were obtained from the Emory University Brain 
Bank and from the Nun Study. Concentrations of eight prevalent PCB congeners 
were extracted from post-mortem brain tissue and analyzed using gas 
chromatography-mass spectrometry. PCB congeners 153 and 180 were significantly 
elevated in the brains of Parkinson's disease patients. When stratified by sex, 
the female Parkinson's disease group demonstrated significantly elevated 
concentrations of total PCBs and specifically congeners 138, 153, and 180 
compared to controls, whereas PCB concentrations in males were not significantly 
different between control and Parkinson's disease groups. In a separate 
population of women (Nun Study) who had no clinical signs or symptoms of PD, 
elevated concentrations total PCB and congeners 138, 153 and 180 were also 
observed in post-mortem brain tissue exhibiting moderate nigral depigmentation 
compared to subjects with mild or no depigmentation. These quantitative data 
demonstrate an association between brain PCB levels and Parkinson's 
disease-related pathology. Furthermore, these data support epidemiological and 
laboratory studies reporting a link between PCB exposure and an increased risk 
for Parkinson's disease, including greater susceptibility of females.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2012.08.002
PMCID: PMC3470755
PMID: 22906799 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement We declare that 
we have no financial or personal relationships with other people or 
organizations that can inappropriately influence our work, there is no 
professional or other personal interest of any nature or kind in any product, 
service and/or company that could be construed as influencing the position 
presented in, or the review of, the manuscript.


2903. Neurology. 2012 Sep 4;79(10):1049-55. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182684707. Epub 
2012 Aug 22.

Recommendations for optimal ICD codes to study neurologic conditions: a 
systematic review.

St Germaine-Smith C(1), Metcalfe A, Pringsheim T, Roberts JI, Beck CA, 
Hemmelgarn BR, McChesney J, Quan H, Jette N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Calgary, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Administrative health data are frequently used for large 
population-based studies. However, the validity of these data for identifying 
neurologic conditions is uncertain.
METHODS: This article systematically reviews the literature to assess the 
validity of administrative data for identifying patients with neurologic 
conditions. Two reviewers independently assessed for eligibility all abstracts 
and full-text articles identified through a systematic search of Medline and 
Embase. Study data were abstracted on a standardized abstraction form to 
identify ICD code-based case definitions and corresponding sensitivity, 
specificity, positive predictive values (PPVs), and negative predictive values 
(NPVs).
RESULTS: Thirty full-text articles met the eligibility criteria. These included 
8 studies for Alzheimer disease/dementia (sensitivity: 8-86.5, specificity: 
56.3-100, PPV: 60-97.9, NPV: 68.0-98.9), 2 for brain tumor (sensitivity: 
54.0-100, specificity: 97.0-99.0, PPV: 91.0-98.0), 4 for epilepsy (sensitivity: 
98.8, specificity: 69.6, PPV: 62.0-100, NPV: 89.5-99.1), 4 for motor neuron 
disease (sensitivity: 78.9-93.0, specificity: 99.0-99.9, PPV: 38.0-90.0, NPV: 
99), 2 for multiple sclerosis (sensitivity: 85-92.4, specificity: 55.9-92.6, 
PPV: 74.5-92.7, NPV: 70.8-91.9), 4 for Parkinson disease/parkinsonism 
(sensitivity: 18.7-100, specificity: 0-99.9, PPV: 38.6-81.0, NPV: 46.0), 3 for 
spinal cord injury (sensitivity: 0.9-90.6, specificity: 31.9-100, PPV: 
27.3-100), and 3 for traumatic brain injury (sensitivity: 45.9-78.0 specificity: 
97.8, PPV: 23.7-98.0, NPV: 99.2). No studies met eligibility criteria for 
cerebral palsy, dystonia, Huntington disease, hydrocephalus, muscular dystrophy, 
spina bifida, or Tourette syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: To ensure the accurate interpretation of population-based studies 
with use of administrative health data, the accuracy of case definitions for 
neurologic conditions needs to be taken into consideration.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182684707
PMCID: PMC3430709
PMID: 22914826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2904. Biomark Med. 2012 Aug;6(4):419-30. doi: 10.2217/bmm.12.46.

Recommendations to standardize preanalytical confounding factors in Alzheimer's 
and Parkinson's disease cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers: an update.

del Campo M(1), Mollenhauer B, Bertolotto A, Engelborghs S, Hampel H, Simonsen 
AH, Kapaki E, Kruse N, Le Bastard N, Lehmann S, Molinuevo JL, Parnetti L, 
Perret-Liaudet A, Sáez-Valero J, Saka E, Urbani A, Vanmechelen E, Verbeek M, 
Visser PJ, Teunissen C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Neurology Laboratory, VU University medical 
center, De Boelelaan 1117, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. m.delcampomilan@vumc.nl

Early diagnosis of neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's (AD) or 
Parkinson's disease (PD) is needed to slow down or halt the disease at the 
earliest stage. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers can be a good tool for 
early diagnosis. However, their use in clinical practice is challenging due to 
the high variability found between centers in the concentrations of both AD CSF 
biomarkers (Aβ42, total tau and phosphorylated tau) and PD CSF biomarker 
(α-synuclein). Such a variability has been partially attributed to different 
preanalytical procedures between laboratories, thus highlighting the need to 
establish standardized operating procedures. Here, we merge two previous 
consensus guidelines for preanalytical confounding factors in order to achieve 
one exhaustive guideline updated with new evidence for Aβ42, total tau and 
phosphorylated tau, and α-synuclein. The proposed standardized operating 
procedures are applicable not only to novel CSF biomarkers in AD and PD, but 
also to biomarkers for other neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.2217/bmm.12.46
PMID: 22917144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2905. Mol Neurodegener. 2012 Aug 24;7:42. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-7-42.

Exosomal cell-to-cell transmission of alpha synuclein oligomers.

Danzer KM(1), Kranich LR, Ruf WP, Cagsal-Getkin O, Winslow AR, Zhu L, Vanderburg 
CR, McLean PJ.

Author information:
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease, Department of Neurology, 
Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA, USA.

BACKGROUND: Aggregation of alpha-synuclein (αsyn) and resulting cytotoxicity is 
a hallmark of sporadic and familial Parkinson's disease (PD) as well as dementia 
with Lewy bodies, with recent evidence implicating oligomeric and pre-fibrillar 
forms of αsyn as the pathogenic species. Recent in vitro studies support the 
idea of transcellular spread of extracellular, secreted αsyn across membranes. 
The aim of this study is to characterize the transcellular spread of αsyn 
oligomers and determine their extracellular location.
RESULTS: Using a novel protein fragment complementation assay where αsyn is 
fused to non-bioluminescent amino-or carboxy-terminus fragments of humanized 
Gaussia Luciferase we demonstrate here that αsyn oligomers can be found in at 
least two extracellular fractions: either associated with exosomes or free. 
Exosome-associated αsyn oligomers are more likely to be taken up by recipient 
cells and can induce more toxicity compared to free αsyn oligomers. 
Specifically, we determine that αsyn oligomers are present on both the outside 
as well as inside of exosomes. Notably, the pathway of secretion of αsyn 
oligomers is strongly influenced by autophagic activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that αsyn may be secreted via different secretory 
pathways. We hypothesize that exosome-mediated release of αsyn oligomers is a 
mechanism whereby cells clear toxic αsyn oligomers when autophagic mechanisms 
fail to be sufficient. Preventing the early events in αsyn exosomal release and 
uptake by inducing autophagy may be a novel approach to halt disease spreading 
in PD and other synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-7-42
PMCID: PMC3483256
PMID: 22920859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2906. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2012 Aug-Sep;168(8-9):620-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2012.06.011. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

[Apathy and deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in French]

Lozachmeur C(1), Drapier D.

Author information:
(1)Service de psychiatrie et de psychologie médicale, centre hospitalier 
universitaire Pontchaillou, Rennes, France. clement.lozachmeur@chu-rennes.fr

Apathy was defined by Marin as diminished motivation not attributable to 
diminished level of consciousness, cognitive impairment, or emotional distress. 
Up to 42% of Parkinson's disease patients could be concerned. It has a 
pejorative impact on quality of life and could be predictive of cognitive 
decline. It has been shown that deep brain stimulation in Parkinson's disease 
may induce apathy. It seems directly related to the stimulation target, i.e. the 
subthalamic nucleus, since such an effect has not been observed so far in 
thalamic and pallidal stimulation. It should certainly not make us question the 
remarkable effectiveness of subthalamic stimulation in Parkinson's disease 
patients, but encourages us to be very careful about operability criteria. We 
must, in this sense, improve identification of at risk patients, seeking a 
thoroughly diminished motivation, loss of interest or blunting affects.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2012.06.011
PMID: 22921249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2907. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Sep 27;526(2):144-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.08.020. Epub 
2012 Aug 17.

G1/S checkpoint proteins in peripheral blood lymphocytes are potentially 
diagnostic biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.

Song J(1), Wang S, Tan M, Jia J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital of Capital Medical University, 45 
Changchun Street, Beijing 100053, China.

The recognition that G(1)/S checkpoint dysfunctions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
has opened a novel avenue for better understanding the pathogenesis of AD, as 
well as for searching for new biomarkers for early diagnosis of AD. In present 
study, we investigated Cyclin E, Rb, CDK2 and E(2)F-1, four G1/S checkpoint 
proteins, in the lymphocytes from AD and non-AD individuals, and explored their 
potential for diagnosis application. A total of 176 age-matched subjects were 
enrolled, including 74 AD patients, 80 cognitively normal individuals, 11 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and 11 patients with vascular dementia 
(VaD). Peripheral blood lymphocytes were collected from each individual, and 
Cyclin E, Rb, CDK2, E(2)F-1 were analyzed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay, 
western blot, confocal microscopy and flow cytometry. The results showed that 
four proteins increased in AD compared with other three groups (P<0.05), with 
CDK2 and E(2)F-1 showing higher statistical significance (P<0.01). Their 
specificity/sensitivity (Cyclin E 84%/81%; Rb 74%/89%, CDK2 80%/78%, E(2)F-1 
85%/85%) were acceptable, suggesting their potential as biomarkers for AD. 
Furthermore, these four proteins had the best sensitivity/specificity and 
highest Area Under the Curve (AUC) in mild-moderate AD compared with the severe 
AD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.08.020
PMID: 22922216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2908. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2012;34(1):44-50. doi: 10.1159/000339727. Epub 2012 
Aug 20.

Comparing hippocampal atrophy in Alzheimer's dementia and dementia with lewy 
bodies.

Chow N(1), Aarsland D, Honarpisheh H, Beyer MK, Somme JH, Elashoff D, Rongve A, 
Tysnes OB, Thompson PM, Apostolova LG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Laboratory of Neuroimaging, David Geffen School of 
Medicine Los Angeles, Calif., USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
are the two most common neurodegenerative dementias. During the early stages, 
clinical distinction between them is often challenging. Our objective is to 
compare hippocampal atrophy patterns in mild AD and mild DLB. We hypothesized 
that DLB subjects have milder hippocampal atrophy relative to AD subjects.
METHODS: We analyzed the T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging data from 113 
subjects: 55 AD, 16 DLB and 42 cognitively normal elderly (normal controls, NC). 
Using the hippocampal radial distance technique and multiple linear regression, 
we analyzed the effect of clinical diagnosis on hippocampal radial distance, 
while adjusting for gender and age. Three-dimensional statistical maps were 
adjusted for multiple comparisons using permutation-based statistics with a 
threshold of p < 0.01.
RESULTS: Compared to NC, AD exhibited significantly greater atrophy in the cornu 
ammonis (CA)1, CA2-3 and subicular regions bilaterally while DLB showed 
left-predominant atrophy in the CA1 region and subiculum. Compared directly, AD 
and DLB did not reveal statistically significant differences.
CONCLUSION: Hippocampal atrophy, while present in mildly impaired DLB subjects, 
is less severe than atrophy seen in mildly impaired AD subjects, when compared 
to NC. Both groups show predominant atrophy of the CA1 subfield and subiculum.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000339727
PMCID: PMC3470878
PMID: 22922563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2909. Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Apr;47(2):509-24. doi: 10.1007/s12035-012-8330-5. Epub 2012 
Aug 25.

α-Synuclein posttranslational modification and alternative splicing as a trigger 
for neurodegeneration.

Beyer K(1), Ariza A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Hospital Universitari Germans Trias i Pujol, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08916 Badalona, Barcelona, Spain. 
katrinbeyer@hotmail.com

Lewy body diseases include Parkinson disease and dementia with Lewy bodies and 
are characterized by the widespread distribution of Lewy bodies in virtually 
every brain area. The main component of Lewy bodies is alpha-synuclein (AS). 
Accumulating evidence suggests that AS oligomerization and aggregation are 
strongly associated with the pathogenesis of Lewy body diseases. AS is a small 
soluble protein with aggregation-prone properties under certain conditions. 
These properties are enhanced by posttranslational modifications such as 
phosphorylation, ubiquitination, nitration, and truncation. Accordingly, Lewy 
bodies contain abundant phosphorylated, nitrated, and monoubiquitinated AS. 
However, alternative splicing of the AS gene is also known to modify AS 
aggregation propensities. Splicing gives rise to four related forms of the 
protein, the main transcript and those that lack exon 4, exon 6, or both. Since 
AS structure and properties have been extensively studied, it is possible to 
predict the consequences of the splicing out of the two aforesaid exons. The 
present review discusses the latest insights on the mechanisms of AS 
posttranslational modifications and intends to depict their role in the 
pathogenesis of Lewy body diseases. The implications of deregulated alternative 
splicing are examined as well, and a hypothesis for the development of the pure 
form of dementia with Lewy bodies is proposed.

DOI: 10.1007/s12035-012-8330-5
PMID: 22923347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2910. J Parkinsons Dis. 2012 Jan 1;2(1):57-65. doi: 10.3233/JPD-2012-11073.

Presence of Striatal Amyloid Plaques in Parkinson's Disease Dementia Predicts 
Concomitant Alzheimer's Disease: Usefulness for Amyloid Imaging.

Dugger BN(1), Serrano GE, Sue LI, Walker DG, Adler CH, Shill HA, Sabbagh MN, 
Caviness JN, Hidalgo J, Saxon-Labelle M, Chiarolanza G, Mariner M, Henry-Watson 
J, Beach TG; the Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ.

Dementia is a frequent complication of Parkinson's disease (PD). About half of 
PD dementia (PDD) is hypothesized to be due to progression of the underlying 
Lewy body pathology into limbic regions and the cerebral cortex while the other 
half is thought to be due to coexistent Alzheimer's disease. Clinically, 
however, these are indistinguishable. The spread of amyloid plaques to the 
striatum has been reported to be a sensitive and specific indicator of dementia 
due to Alzheimer's disease (AD). The purpose of the present study was to 
determine if the presence of striatal plaques might also be a useful indicator 
of the presence of diagnostic levels of AD pathology within PD subjects. We 
analyzed neuropathologically-confirmed cases of PD without dementia (PDND, N = 
31), PDD without AD (PDD, N = 31) and PD with dementia meeting 
clinicopathological criteria for AD (PDAD, N =40). The minimum diagnostic 
criterion for AD was defined as including a clinical history of dementia, 
moderate or frequent CERAD cortical neuritic plaque density and Braak 
neurofibrillary stage III-VI. Striatal amyloid plaque densities were determined 
using Campbell-Switzer and Thioflavine S stains. Striatal plaque densities were 
significantly higher in PDAD compared to PDD (p<0.001). The presence of striatal 
plaques was approximately 80% sensitive and 80% specific for predicting AD. In 
comparison, the presence of cerebral cortex plaques alone was highly sensitive 
(100%) but had poor specificity (48% to 55%). The results suggest that striatal 
amyloid imaging may be clinically useful for making the distinction between PDD 
and PDAD.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-2012-11073
PMCID: PMC3423968
PMID: 22924088


2911. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2013 Mar;45(3):579-94. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2012.03.013. Epub 2012 Aug 25.

Sleep and sleep-wake disturbances in care recipient-caregiver dyads in the 
context of a chronic illness: a critical review of the literature.

Kotronoulas G(1), Wengström Y, Kearney N.

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing & Midwifery, University of Dundee, Dundee, United Kingdom. 
g.kotronoulas@dundee.ac.uk

CONTEXT: Alterations in sleep-wake patterns of care recipients and their 
informal caregivers are common in the context of a chronic illness. Given the 
current notion that sleep may be regulated within and affected by close human 
relationships, concurrent and interrelated sleep problems may be present in care 
recipient-caregiver dyads.
OBJECTIVES: To critically analyze evidence regarding concurrent sleep patterns 
or changes in care recipient-caregiver dyads in the context of a chronic illness 
and address methodological and research gaps.
METHODS: Using a wide range of key terms and synonyms, three electronic 
databases (Medline, CINAHL, and Embase) were systematically searched for the 
period between January 1990 and July 2011.
RESULTS: Ten studies met prespecified selection criteria and were included for 
analysis. Study quality was fair to good on average. Seven studies were 
conducted in the context of dementia or Parkinson's disease, two in the context 
of cancer, and one study included a group of community elders with mixed related 
comorbidities and their informal caregivers. Bidirectional associations in the 
sleep of care recipient-caregiver dyads seem to exist. Concurrent and comparable 
nocturnal sleep disruptions also may be evident. Yet, inconsistencies in the 
methods implemented, and the samples included, as well as uncertainty regarding 
factors coaffecting sleep, still preclude safe conclusions to be drawn on.
CONCLUSION: The dyadic investigation of sleep is a promising approach to the 
development of truly effective interventions to improve sleep quality of care 
recipients and their caregivers. Nevertheless, more systematic, longitudinal 
dyadic research is warranted to augment our understanding of co-occurrence and 
over time changes of sleep problems in care recipient-caregiver dyads, as well 
as to clarify covariates/factors that appear to contribute to these problems 
within the dyad and across time and context of illness.

Copyright © 2013 U.S. Cancer Pain Relief Committee. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2012.03.013
PMID: 22926086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2912. Med Health R I. 2012 Jul;95(7):207-9.

Clinical and pathological examples of Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, and frontotemporal dementia.

Salloway S(1).

Author information:
(1)Warren Alpert Medical School of Brown University, USA. ssalloway@butler.org

Dementia syndromes usually consist of distinct clinical and pathological 
phenotypes. A careful history is required to document the onset and progression 
of symptoms to generate the differential diagnosis. New biomarker tests can 
provide evidence to increase diagnostic certainty. Disease-specific 
interventions, based on advances in genetic and molecular biomarkers, are likely 
to have the greatest impact when given in preclinical and early symptomatic 
phases.

PMID: 22928231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2913. Neurologist. 2012 Sep;18(5):266-72. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3182675376.

Atypical motor and behavioral presentations of Alzheimer disease: a case-based 
approach.

Duker AP(1), Espay AJ, Wszolek ZK, Rademakers R, Dickson DW, Kelley BJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH 45267-0525, 
USA. andrew.duker@uc.edu

BACKGROUND: The correlation of clinical presentation to pathology in dementia 
syndromes is important to correctly classify and ultimately treat these 
conditions. However, despite careful clinical characterization, it remains 
difficult to accurately predict an underlying causative pathology in some cases. 
Alzheimer disease is a well-defined clinical entity having established 
diagnostic criteria and characteristic neuropathologic findings. Alzheimer 
pathology, however, can cause varying clinical syndromes, including both 
atypical motor and behavioral presentations.
REVIEW SUMMARY: Atypical clinical presentations of Alzheimer disease are 
reviewed in a case-based format. Corticobasal syndrome, with asymmetric 
Parkinsonism, dystonia, and apraxia, is increasingly recognized as a 
presentation of Alzheimer pathology. Frontal variant Alzheimer, clinically 
indistinguishable from behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bv-FTD), can 
present with difficulties in executive function, poor attention, and behavioral 
issues. Posterior cortical atrophy (the "visual variant" of Alzheimer) has 
predominant visuospatial dysfunction and can be an Alzheimer presentation. 
Finally, Alzheimer can present as logopenic progressive aphasia with 
word-finding difficulty.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicopathologic correlation may be more complex than previously 
realized, and the location of the microscopic changes may have as much to do 
with the clinical presentation as the nature of the changes themselves. 
Recognizing these clinical syndromes can lead to greater accuracy in diagnosis 
and treatment.

DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3182675376
PMID: 22931731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2914. Methods Mol Biol. 2012;934:121-44. doi: 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_7.

Cytokines as potential biomarkers for Parkinson's disease: a multiplex approach.

Litteljohn D(1), Hayley S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Ottawa, ON, Canada.

Cytokines, which are immunological messengers facilitating both intra- and 
inter-system communication, are considered central players in the 
neuroinflammatory cascades associated with the neurodegenerative process in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and other neurological disorders. They have also been 
implicated in depression and other cognitive (e.g., memory impairment, dementia) 
and affective disturbances (e.g., anxiety) that show high co-morbidity with 
neurodegenerative diseases. As such, cytokines may hold great promise as 
serological biomarkers in PD, with potential applications ranging from early 
diagnosis and disease staging, to prognosis, drug discovery, and tracking the 
response to treatment. Subclassification or risk stratification in PD could be 
based (among other things) on reliably determined cytokine panel profiles or 
"signatures" of particular co-morbid disease states or at-risk groups (e.g., PD 
alone, PD with depression and/or dementia). Researchers and clinicians seeking 
to describe cytokine variations in health vs. disease will benefit greatly from 
technologies that allow a high degree of multiplexing and thus permit the 
simultaneous determination of a large roster of cytokines in single small-volume 
samples. The need for such highly paralleled assays is underscored by the fact 
that cytokines do not act in isolation but rather against a backdrop of 
complementary and antagonistic cytokine effects; ascribing valence to the 
actions of any one cytokine thus requires specific knowledge about the larger 
cytokine milieu. This chapter provides a technological overview of the major 
cytokine multiplex assay platforms before discussing the implications of such 
tools for biomarker discovery and related applications in PD and its depressive 
and cognitive co-morbidities.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-62703-071-7_7
PMID: 22933144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2915. Neurology. 2012 Sep 11;79(11):1161-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182698d4a. Epub 
2012 Aug 29.

Aβ-amyloid deposition in patients with Parkinson disease at risk for development 
of dementia.

Petrou M(1), Bohnen NI, Müller ML, Koeppe RA, Albin RL, Frey KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, 
USA. mpetrou@umich.edu

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to examine the relationship between 
corticostriatal Aβ-amyloid deposition and cognitive dysfunction in a cohort of 
patients with Parkinson disease (PD) at risk for dementia.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study of 40 patients with PD with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) or other known dementia risk factors. Subjects 
underwent dynamic Aβ-amyloid and vesicular monoamine transporter 2 PET imaging 
using [(11)C] Pittsburgh compound B (PiB) and [(11)C]dihydrotetrabenazine 
(DTBZ), respectively, and neuropsychological assessment. PiB and DTBZ PET data 
were analyzed using the Logan graphical method to determine cerebral PiB 
deposition relative to the cerebellar hemispheres and striatal DTBZ binding 
relative to occipital neocortex. Component z scores were calculated for 
individual cognitive domains (memory, visuospatial processing, working 
memory/attention, and executive function) and combined linearly for global 
estimation of cognition. Correlation of cognitive function and cortical PiB 
binding was investigated.
RESULTS: Elevated cerebral PiB binding at levels seen in patients with AD was 
infrequent (6 of 40 subjects). Mean cortical PiB binding in the entire cohort 
was 1.16 ± 0.16 (distribution volume ratio; range 0.96-1.78). A significant 
correlation was noted between cortical PiB binding and global composite 
cognitive function (r = -0.55, p < 0.005) as well as the Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale score (r = -0.54, p = 0.0004).
CONCLUSION: Elevated cerebral Aβ-amyloid deposition at levels seen in Alzheimer 
disease is uncommon in subjects with PD at risk for dementia. In our sample, the 
prevalence of markedly elevated PiB binding was significantly lower than that 
found in prior studies of cognitively normal elderly individuals. Neocortical 
PiB binding correlated robustly with measures of cognitive impairment in our 
cohort.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182698d4a
PMCID: PMC3525303
PMID: 22933741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2916. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2012;34(9):895-905. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2011.630654. 
Epub 2012 Sep 3.

Neuropsychological assessment of driving safety risk in older adults with and 
without neurologic disease.

Anderson SW(1), Aksan N, Dawson JD, Uc EY, Johnson AM, Rizzo M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroergonomics, Department of Neurology, University of Iowa 
Carver College of Medicine, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. steven-anderson@uiowa.edu

Decline in cognitive abilities can be an important contributor to the driving 
problems encountered by older adults, and neuropsychological assessment may 
provide a practical approach to evaluating this aspect of driving safety risk. 
The purpose of the present study was to evaluate several commonly used 
neuropsychological tests in the assessment of driving safety risk in older 
adults with and without neurological disease. A further goal of this study was 
to identify brief combinations of neuropsychological tests that sample 
performances in key functional domains and thus could be used to efficiently 
assess driving safety risk. A total of 345 legally licensed and active drivers 
over the age of 50, with no neurologic disease (N = 185), probable Alzheimer's 
disease (N = 40), Parkinson's disease (N = 91), or stroke (N = 29), completed 
vision testing, a battery of 10 neuropsychological tests, and an 18-mile drive 
on urban and rural roads in an instrumented vehicle. Performances on all 
neuropsychological tests were significantly correlated with driving safety 
errors. Confirmatory factor analysis was used to identify 3 key cognitive 
domains assessed by the tests (speed of processing, visuospatial abilities, and 
memory), and several brief batteries consisting of one test from each domain 
showed moderate corrected correlations with driving performance. These findings 
are consistent with the notion that driving places demands on multiple cognitive 
abilities that can be affected by aging and age-related neurological disease, 
and that neuropsychological assessment may provide a practical off-road window 
into the functional status of these cognitive systems.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2011.630654
PMCID: PMC3910382
PMID: 22943767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2917. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Jan;19(1):81-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.07.010. Epub 2012 Sep 1.

Characterising the uncommon corticobasal syndrome presentation of sporadic 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Lee W(1), Simpson M, Ling H, McLean C, Collins S, Williams DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, The Alfred Hospital, Commercial Road, Melbourne, 
Victoria 3004, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Corticobasal syndrome (CBS), which encompasses cortical sensory 
loss, alien limb, bradykinesia, rigidity, limb apraxia and dystonia, is the 
classic presentation of corticobasal degeneration (CBD). It may occur in other 
neurodegenerative disorders including sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD). 
Current CBD diagnostic criteria outline features of CBS but fail to distinguish 
CBD from other causative pathologies.
OBJECTIVES: To characterise the CBS presentation of sCJD (sCJD-CBS) in the 
context of existing CBD diagnostic criteria.
METHOD: Data of two new cases of sCJD-CBS and seven patients identified from the 
Australian National Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Registry database was reviewed. 
Additional data from 11 published cases was incorporated to illustrate the 
natural history of sCJD-CBS. Comparison was made with pathologically diagnosed 
CBD cases with ante-mortem CBS presentation (CBD-CBS).
RESULTS: sCJD-CBS accounts for 1.8% of all Australian sCJD cases. Compared to 
CBD-CBS, disease progression is more rapid in sCJD-CBS (median time to diagnosis 
48 vs.1.5 months, p < 0.001; and disease duration until death 68 vs. 5 months, p 
< 0.001). Although no clinical features separate the two, alien limb and 
myoclonus tend to occur early in sCJD-CBS following initial 'sensory' 
disturbance in the affected limb. Consistent with sCJD, distinctive diffusion 
weighted imaging (DWI) abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging may also 
occur in sCJD-CBS.
CONCLUSION: sCJD should be suspected in patients presenting with CBS when 
clinical progression is rapid and accompanied by DWI abnormalities, even without 
cerebrospinal fluid 14-3-3 protein detection and electroencephalographic 
periodic sharp wave complexes. We propose the addition of rapid (<12 months) 
progression to akinetic-mutism or death and DWI abnormalities as exclusions in 
future CBD diagnostic criteria.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.07.010
PMID: 22943965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2918. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Oct;33(10):542-51. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2012.07.002. 
Epub 2012 Aug 31.

Inflammation and neurodegeneration: the story 'retolled'.

Drouin-Ouellet J(1), Cicchetti F.

Author information:
(1)Axe Neurosciences, Centre de Recherche du CHUL, Québec, QC, G1V 4G2, Canada. 
janelle.drouin-ouellet@crchul.ulaval.ca

Toll-like receptors (TLRs) play a crucial role in innate immunity by recognizing 
conserved motifs predominantly found in microorganisms. Increasing evidence 
supports a role for TLRs in sterile inflammation as observed in 
neurodegenerative disorders. This includes work suggesting a contribution for 
these receptors to the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), and related disorders. In this review, the potential role of TLRs 
in the context of protein aggregation, neuronal degeneration, and genetic risk 
factors is addressed. In particular, we discuss the evidence derived from 
experimental models of both AD and PD which suggests that activation of TLRs can 
have beneficial and detrimental effects on pathological features such as protein 
aggregation and neuronal death. A deeper understanding of these dichotomous 
observations could be used for therapeutic benefit.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2012.07.002
PMID: 22944460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2919. CNS Drugs. 2012 Oct 1;26(10):841-70. doi: 10.2165/11640070-000000000-00000.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: epidemiology, pathology, diagnosis and 
management.

Seltman RE(1), Matthews BR.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) describes a spectrum of clinically, 
pathologically and genetically heterogeneous neurodegenerative disorders of 
unknown aetiology. FTLD spectrum disorders collectively represent a leading 
cause of early-onset dementia, with most cases presenting between 45 and 64 
years of age. FTLD is characterized by progressive changes in behaviour, 
executive dysfunction and/or language impairment and can be differentiated 
clinically into three frontotemporal dementia (FTD) syndromes as follows: (i) 
behavioural variant (bvFTD); (ii) semantic dementia (SD); and (iii) progressive 
nonfluent aphasia (PNFA). Additionally, there is a significant clinical, 
pathological and genetic overlap between FTD and motor neuron 
disease/amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (FTD-ALS) and the atypical parkinsonian 
syndromes, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal syndrome (CBS). 
bvFTD is characterized by progressive behavioural impairment and a decline in 
executive function with frontal lobe-predominant atrophy, SD by a loss of object 
knowledge with prominent anomia and asymmetrical atrophy of the anterior 
temporal lobes and PNFA by expressive or motor speech deficits with 
predominantly left peri-sylvian atrophy. Recent advances in molecular biology 
and immunohistochemical staining techniques have further classified the FTLD 
spectrum disorders based upon the predominant neuropathological protein into 
three main categories: (i) microtubule-associated protein tau (FTLD-TAU); (ii) 
TAR DNA-binding protein-43 (FTLD-TDP); and (iii) fused in sarcoma protein 
(FTLD-FUS). Up to 40% of FTD patients report a family history of 
neurodegenerative illness, and one-third to one-half of familial cases of FTD 
follow an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. Mutations in MAPT, PGRN, 
TARDBP, VCP and CHMP2B have been described, along with a recently identified 
C9ORF72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion. To date, there are no US FDA-approved 
treatments or disease-modifying therapies for FTD. Pharmacological strategies 
have focused on neurotransmitter replacement and modulation for the treatment of 
behavioural, motor and cognitive symptoms of FTD, and include selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), atypical antipsychotics, 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and glutamate NMDA receptor antagonists. At 
present, adequate management of FTD symptoms involves a combination of 
pharmacological therapy with behavioural, physical and environmental 
modification techniques.

DOI: 10.2165/11640070-000000000-00000
PMID: 22950490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2920. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2012 Dec;9(10):1149-67. doi: 10.2174/156720512804142868.

Apolipoprotein E4 serum concentration for increased sensitivity and specificity 
of diagnosis of drug treated Alzheimer's disease patients vs. drug treated 
parkinson's disease patients vs. age-matched normal controls.

Goldknopf IL(1), Park HR, Sabbagh M.

Author information:
(1)Power3 Medical Products, Inc., The Woodlands, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Inasmuch as Alzheimer's disease (AD) is difficult to diagnose, 
patients with suspected dementias are often given FDA approved medications, 
including donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine HCl, or a combination, prior to 
diagnosis, and some respond with improved cognition. The present study 
demonstrates how concentrations of a select group of serum protein biomarkers 
can provide the basis for sensitive and specific differential diagnosis of AD in 
drug treated patients. Optimization is addressed by taking into account whether 
the patients and controls have or do not have increased risk of AD die to the 
presence or absence of Apolipoprotein E4.
METHODS: For differential diagnosis of AD, prospectively collected newly drawn 
blood serum samples were obtained from drug treated Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease patients from a first (39 drug treated DTAD, and 31 age 
matched normal controls) and second medical center (56 drug treated DTPD, 47 
age-matched normal controls). Analytically validated quantitative 2D gel 
electrophoresis (%CV ≤ 20%; LOD ≥ 0.5 ng/spot, 300 μg/ml of blood serum) was 
employed with patient and control sera for differential diagnosis of AD. Protein 
quantitation was subjected to statistical analysis by single variable Dot, Box 
and Whiskers and Receiver Operator Characteristics (ROC) plots for individual 
biomarker performance, and multivariate linear discriminant analysis for joint 
performance of groups of biomarkers. Protein spots were identified and 
characterized by LC MS/MS of in-gel trypsin digests, amino acid sequence spans 
of the identified peptides, and the protein spot molecular weights and 
isoelectric points.
RESULTS: The single variable statistical profiles of 58 individual protein 
biomarker concentrations of the DTAD patient group differed from those of the 
normal and/or the disease control groups. Multivariate linear discriminant 
analysis of blood serum concentrations of the 58 proteins distinguished drug 
treated Alzheimer's disease (DTAD) patients from drug treated Parkinson's 
disease (DTPD) patients and age matched normal controls (collectively not-DTAD, 
DTAD Sensitivity 87.2%, Not-DTAD Specificity 87.2). Moreover, when the patients 
and controls were stratified into carriers or non-carriers of Alzheimer's high 
risk Apolipoprotein E 4 allele and/or the Apolipoprotein E4 protein, the DTAD, 
DTPD and control Apo E4 (+) profiles were more divergent from one another than 
the corresponding Apo E4 (-) profiles. Multivariate stepwise linear discriminant 
analysis selected 17 of the 58 biomarkers as optimal and complimentary for 
distinguishing Apo E4 (+) DTAD patients from Apo E4 (+) DTPD and Apo E4 (+) 
controls (collectively Apo E4 (+) not-DTAD, DTAD Sensitivity 100%, not-DTAD 
Specificity 100%) and 22 of the 58 biomarkers for distinguishing Apo E4 (-) DTAD 
patients from Apo E4 (-) DTPD and Apo E4 (-) controls (collectively Apo E4 (-) 
not-DTAD, DTAD Sensitivity 94.4%, not- DTAD Specificity 94.4%). Only 6 of the 
selected proteins were common to both the Apo E4 (+) and the Apo E4 (-) 
discriminant functions. Recombining of the results of Apo E4 (+) and Apo E4 (-) 
discriminations provided overall sensitivity for total DTAD of 97.4% and 
specificity for total not-DTAD of 95.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: These results can form the basis of a blood test for differential 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease patients already under treatment (DTAD) by anti 
dementia drugs, including donepezil, rivastigmine, memantine HCl, or a 
combination thereof. Also, the profile differences and the rise in specificity 
and sensitivity obtained by handling the Apo E4 (+) and Apo E4 (-) groups 
separately supports the concept that they are different patient and control 
populations in terms of the "normal" physiology, the pathophysiology of disease, 
and the response to drug treatment. Taking that into account enables increased 
sensitivity and specificity of differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.2174/156720512804142868
PMID: 22950864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2921. Neurology. 2012 Sep 25;79(13):1323-31. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31826c1acd. Epub 
2012 Sep 12.

Association of cognitive dysfunction with neurocirculatory abnormalities in 
early Parkinson disease.

Kim JS(1), Oh YS, Lee KS, Kim YI, Yang DW, Goldstein DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, The Catholic University of 
Korea, Seoul, Korea. neuronet@catholic.ac.kr

OBJECTIVE: Cognitive impairment and neurocirculatory abnormalities such as 
orthostatic hypotension (OH), supine hypertension (SH), and failure to decrease 
blood pressure at night (nondipping) occur relatively commonly in Parkinson 
disease (PD); however, whether cognitive dysfunction in early PD is related to 
neurocirculatory abnormalities has not been established. Cognitive dysfunction 
in PD is associated with white matter hyperintensities on MRI. We report results 
of an analysis of neuropsychological and hemodynamic parameters in patients with 
early PD.
METHODS: Among 87 patients, 25 had normal cognition, 48 had mild cognitive 
impairment, and 14 had dementia, based on comprehensive neuropsychological 
tests. Orthostatic vital signs and ambulatory 24-hour blood pressure monitoring 
were recorded, and brain magnetic resonance scans were obtained for all 
patients.
RESULTS: Cognitive impairment was associated with OH, SH, and white matter 
hyperintensities but not with nondipping. Dementia and white matter 
hyperintensities were common in SH. Of 13 patients with OH + SH, every one had 
mild cognitive impairment or dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive dysfunction is related to neurocirculatory abnormalities, 
especially OH + SH, in early PD, raising the possibility that early detection 
and effective treatment of those abnormalities might slow the rate of cognitive 
decline.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31826c1acd
PMCID: PMC3448741
PMID: 22972639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2922. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2012 Nov;33(11):602-10. doi: 10.1016/j.tips.2012.08.002. 
Epub 2012 Sep 12.

Target-based selection of flavonoids for neurodegenerative disorders.

Jones QR(1), Warford J, Rupasinghe HP, Robertson GS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, 1459 Oxford Street, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 4R2.

Habitual consumption of dietary flavonoids known to improve mitochondrial 
bioenergetics and inhibit various secondary sources of reactive oxygen species 
(ROS) reduces the risk for neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's 
disease (PD), stroke, and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Combining specific dietary 
flavonoids selected on the basis of oral bioavailability, brain penetration, and 
the inhibition of multiple processes responsible for excessive ROS production 
may be a viable approach for the prevention and treatment of neurodegenerative 
disorders. Inclusion of flavonoids that raise cAMP levels in the brain may be of 
additional benefit by reducing the production of proinflammatory mediators and 
stimulating the transcriptional machinery necessary for mitochondrial 
biosynthesis. Preclinical models suggest that flavonoids reduce hearing loss 
resulting from treatment with the chemotherapeutic drug cisplatin by opposing 
the excessive production of ROS and proinflammatory mediators implicated in PD, 
stroke, and AD. Flavonoid combinations optimized for efficacy in models of 
cisplatin-induced hearing loss (CIHL) may therefore have therapeutic utility for 
neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2012.08.002
PMID: 22980637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2923. Amyotroph Lateral Scler Frontotemporal Degener. 2013 Jan;14(1):26-9. doi: 
10.3109/17482968.2012.725415. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

No GGGGCC-hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 in parkinsonism patients in 
Sweden.

Akimoto C(1), Forsgren L, Linder J, Birve A, Backlund I, Andersson J, Nilsson 
AC, Alstermark H, Andersen PM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå University, Umeå, 
Sweden. chizuru.akimoto@neuro.umu.se

An intronic GGGGCC-hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72 was recently 
identified as a major cause of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and frontotemporal 
dementia. Some amyotrophic lateral sclerosis patients have signs of 
parkinsonism, and many parkinsonism patients develop dementia. In this study we 
examined if the hexanucleotide repeat expansion was present in parkinsonism 
patients, to clarify if there could be a relationship between the repeat 
expansion and disease. We studied the size of the hexanucleotide repeat 
expansion in a well defined population-based cohort of 135 Parkinson's disease 
patients and 39 patients with atypical parkinsonism and compared with 645 
Swedish control subjects. We found no correlation between Parkinson's disease or 
atypical parkinsonism and the size of the GGGGCC repeat expansion in C9ORF72. In 
conclusion, this GGGGCC-repeat expansion in C9ORF72 is not a cause of 
parkinsonism in the Swedish population.

DOI: 10.3109/17482968.2012.725415
PMID: 22985429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2924. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2012 Dec;27(8):614-9. doi: 
10.1177/1533317512460562. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Cognitive profile of the earliest stage of dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Petrova M(1), Raycheva M, Traykov L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University, Sofia, Bulgaria.

Recently, a strong interest has emerged in recognizing Parkinson's disease 
dementia (PDD) at a very early stage. However, the specific profile of the 
earliest stages of PDD is still unclear and a matter of considerable 
controversy. The objective of this study was to find out early 
neuropsychological markers for progression of dementia in this population. 
Fifty-eight patients with PDD were divided into 2 subgroups on the basis of the 
Mini-Mental State Examination: very mild and mild. The comparison with 26 normal 
controls shows that very mild PDD had deficits on attention/executive functions, 
naming, visuospatial/constructional abilities and retrieval of the episodic 
memory. Patients with mild PDD showed additional deficits on coding of episodic 
memory. Moreover, we found that in this early stage of PDD, the progression of 
dementia is mainly related to deterioration of attention/executive functions as 
well as retrieval and coding of episodic memory.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317512460562
PMCID: PMC10845543
PMID: 22992299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


2925. Neuropsychologia. 2012 Dec;50(14):3338-47. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.09.025. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

The influence of motor and cognitive impairment upon visually-guided saccades in 
Parkinson's disease.

Macaskill MR(1), Graham CF, Pitcher TL, Myall DJ, Livingston L, van Stockum S, 
Dalrymple-Alford JC, Anderson TJ.

Author information:
(1)New Zealand Brain Research Institute, Christchurch, New Zealand. 
michael.macaskill@nzbri.org

Studies of saccades in Parkinson's disease (PD) have seldom examined the 
influence of cognitive status, ranging from normal cognition, through mild 
cognitive impairment, to dementia. In a large and heterogeneous sample, we 
examined how motor and cognitive impairment was reflected in the performance of 
reflexive, visually-guided saccades. We examined 163 people with PD and 47 
similar-aged controls. Ninety three of the PD group had normal cognition (PDN), 
48 had mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), and 22 had dementia (PDD). 
Pseudo-random targets (amplitudes of 5, 10, 15 and 20 deg and 
inter-stimulus-intervals ranging from 550 to 1800 ms) were shown in 108 mixed 
randomised trials, incorporating gap, step, and overlap onset conditions. 
Analyses were conducted using multi-level regression modeling. Participants were 
first assessed by continuous measures (Unified PD Rating Scale motor score and 
the Montreal Cognitive Assessment). Prolonged latency was significantly related 
to both motor and cognitive impairment, with the cognitive effect being 
compounded by increasing age. Decreased saccade amplitude, meanwhile, was 
primarily related to motor impairment. When assessed by discrete cognitive 
categories, all of the PD groups showed reduced saccadic amplitude relative to 
controls. Saccadic latencies, meanwhile, were abnormally prolonged only in the 
PD-MCI and PDD groups (the control and PDN groups were similar to each other). 
Latency in the overlap task was particularly sensitive to increasing motor and 
cognitive impairment. We conclude that reflexive saccades in PD are subtly 
decreased in amplitude even early in the disease process. Prolonged saccade 
latency, meanwhile, tends to occur later in the disease process, in the presence 
of more substantial motor and cognitive impairment, and greater age. The 
progressive impairment of reflexive saccades, and the differential onset of 
amplitude and latency impairments, may make them a useful objective tool for 
assessing disease status.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropsychologia.2012.09.025
PMID: 23000134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2926. Aging (Albany NY). 2012 Sep;4(9):590-605. doi: 10.18632/aging.100486.

Plasma microRNA biomarkers for detection of mild cognitive impairment.

Sheinerman KS(1), Tsivinsky VG, Crawford F, Mullan MJ, Abdullah L, Umansky SR.

Author information:
(1)DiamiR, LLC, Princeton, NJ 08540, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 Jan 1;12(1):1-2.

Early stages of many neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, 
vascular and frontotemporal dementia, and Parkinson's disease, are frequently 
associated with Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). A minimally invasive screening 
test for early detection of MCI may be used to select optimal patient groups in 
clinical trials, to monitor disease progression and response to treatment, and 
to better plan patient clinical care. Here, we examined the feasibility of using 
pairs of brain-enriched plasma microRNA (miRNA), at least one of which is 
enriched in synapses and neurites, as biomarkers that could differentiate 
patients with MCI from age-matched controls. The identified biomarker pairs fall 
into two sets: the "miR-132 family" (miR-128/miR-491-5p, miR-132/miR-491-5p and 
mir-874/miR-491-5p) and the "miR-134 family" (miR-134/miR-370, 
miR-323-3p/miR-370 and miR-382/miR-370). The area under the Receiver-Operating 
Characteristic curve for the differentiation of MCI from controls using these 
biomarker pairs is 0.91-0.95, with sensitivity and specificity at 79%-100% 
(miR-132 family) and 79%-95% (miR-134 family), and p〈0.001. In a separate 
longitudinal study, the identified miRNA biomarker pairs successfully detected 
MCI in majority of patients at asymptomatic stage 1-5 years prior to clinical 
diagnosis. The reported biomarker pairs also appear useful for detecting 
age-related brain changes. Further testing in a larger study is necessary for 
validation of these results.

DOI: 10.18632/aging.100486
PMCID: PMC3492224
PMID: 23001356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Kira S. Sheinerman, Vladimir G. Tsivinsky, and 
Samuil R. Umansky are shareholders of DiamiR, LLC.


2927. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013 Mar;120(3):463-7. doi: 10.1007/s00702-012-0897-5. 
Epub 2012 Sep 22.

MAPT1 gene rs1052553 variant is unrelated with the risk for restless legs 
syndrome.

Roco A(1), Jiménez-Jiménez FJ, Alonso-Navarro H, Martínez C, Zurdo M, 
Turpín-Fenoll L, Millán J, Adeva-Bartolomé T, Cubo E, Navacerrada F, 
Rojo-Sebastián A, Rubio L, Calleja M, Plaza-Nieto JF, Pilo-de-la-Fuente B, 
Arroyo-Solera M, García-Martín E, Agúndez JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Extremadura, Cáceres, Spain.

Mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau gene (MAPT) can cause 
frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism linked to the chromosome 17, and are 
associated with the risk for progressive supranuclear palsy, Parkinson's 
disease, corticobasal degeneration, and multiple system atrophy. We tried to 
establish, whether MAPT H1 discriminating haplotype single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNP) (rs1052553) is associated with the risk for restless legs 
syndrome (RLS). We studied the allelic and genotype frequencies of the SNP 
rs1052553 in 205 patients with RLS and 324 healthy controls using TaqMan 
genotyping. rs1052553 genotype and allelic frequencies did not differ 
significantly between patients with RLS and controls, and were unrelated with 
the age at onset of RLS, gender, family history of RLS, and severity of RLS. The 
results of the present study suggest that the SNP rs1052553 is not related with 
the risk for RLS.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0897-5
PMID: 23001634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2928. Ugeskr Laeger. 2012 Sep 24;174(39):2293-7.

[Coffee can protect against disease].

[Article in Danish]

Hermansen K(1), Krogholm KS, Bech BH, Dragsted LO, Hyldstrup L, Jørgensen K, 
Larsen ML, Tjønneland AM.

Author information:
(1)Medicinsk Endokrinologisk Afdeling, Aarhus Universitetshospital, Aarhus C. 
kjeld.hermansen@ki.au.dk

A moderate daily intake of 3-4 cups of coffee has convincing protective effects 
against development of type 2 diabetes and Parkinson's disease. The literature 
also indicates that moderate coffee intake reduces the risk of stroke, the 
overall risk of cancer, Alzheimer's disease, suicide and depression. However, 
pregnant women, people suffering from anxiety disorder and persons with a low 
calcium intake should restrain from moderate or high intake of coffee due to 
uncertainty regarding potential negative effects on pregnancy, anxiety and risk 
of osteoporosis, respectively.

PMID: 23006223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2929. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Dec 15;323(1-2):16-24. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.08.028. Epub 
2012 Sep 23.

Evaluation of olfactory dysfunction in neurodegenerative diseases.

Barresi M(1), Ciurleo R, Giacoppo S, Foti Cuzzola V, Celi D, Bramanti P, Marino 
S.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Centro Neurolesi "Bonino-Pulejo", Messina, Italy.

It is known that the olfactory dysfunction is involved in various neurological 
diseases, such as Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, multiple sclerosis, 
Huntington's disease and motor neuron disease. In particular, the ability to 
identify and discriminate the odors, as well as the odor threshold, can be 
altered in these disorders. These changes often occur as early manifestation of 
the pathology and they are not always diagnosed on time. The aim of this review 
is to summarize the major neurological diseases which are preceded or 
accompanied by olfactory dysfunction. In addition, new instrumental approaches, 
such as psychophysical testing, olfactory event-related potentials (OERPs) and 
functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) measurements, supported by 
olfactometer for the stimuli delivery, and their combination in evaluation of 
olfactory function will be discussed. In particular, OERPs and fMRI might to be 
good candidates to become useful additional tools in clinical protocols for 
early diagnosis of neurological diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.08.028
PMID: 23010543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2930. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;33(2):495-505. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-121207.

Clinical and anatomical correlates of gait dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease.

Olazarán J(1), Hernández-Tamames JA, Molina E, García-Polo P, Dobato JL, 
Álvarez-Linera J, Martínez-Martín P; AD Research Unit Investigators.

Collaborators: Agüera-Ortiz L, Osa-Ruiz E, Léon-Salas B, Osorio R, Valentí M.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Disease Research Unit, Alzheimer Center Reina Sofia Foundation, 
CIEN Foundation, Carlos III Institute of Health, Madrid, Spain. 
jolazaran@fundacioncien.es

We conducted a cross-sectional study to investigate the clinical and anatomical 
correlates of gait dysfunction in advanced Alzheimer's disease (AD). A 
comprehensive clinical protocol that included cognitive, functional, behavioral, 
and motor variables was administered to patients with probable AD (n = 100), 
possible AD (n = 17), and AD with cerebrovascular disease (AD + CVD) (n = 27). 
Gait dysfunction was evaluated with the Rating Scale for Gait Evaluation in 
Cognitive Deterioration and magnetic resonance imaging was analyzed in 94 
patients (volumetry study) and 78 patients (diffusion tensor imaging study). 
Univariate correlations, multivariate regression, and statistical parametric 
mapping analyses were conducted in the total sample and in the subsample of 
patients with probable AD. Mean age was 82.5 (SD 6.3, range 56 to 98), 83.3% 
were female patients, and 95.1% displayed moderate to severe dementia. 
Parkinsonism, patient setting (nursing home), dementia severity, apathy, and 
(worse) cognitive performance significantly predicted gait dysfunction in the 
total sample (p < 0.05, R(2) = 0.58), whereas parkinsonism, patient setting, and 
limb weakness due to non-AD conditions predicted gait dysfunction in probable AD 
(p < 0.05, R(2) = 0.57). Gait dysfunction was related to atrophy in the motor 
cortex, the middle cingulate, the anterior insula, the right caudate (total 
sample only), and the anterior lobe of the cerebellum (p < 0.01, corrected). 
Significant correlations were also observed between gait dysfunction and damage 
in several white matter locations (p < 0.001, uncorrected). The present results 
are congruent with a model of multi-system gray matter degeneration, with 
progressive damage to critical regions (i.e., motor cortex, cingulate, insula, 
and cerebellum) producing gait dysfunction and, eventually, gait loss in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-121207
PMID: 23011219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2931. Mol Brain. 2012 Sep 26;5:34. doi: 10.1186/1756-6606-5-34.

Distinct mechanisms of axonal globule formation in mice expressing human wild 
type α-synuclein or dementia with Lewy bodies-linked P123H β-synuclein.

Sekigawa A(1), Fujita M, Sekiyama K, Takamatsu Y, Hatano T, Rockenstein E, La 
Spada AR, Masliah E, Hashimoto M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Sensory and Motor Systems, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Medical Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Axonopathy is critical in the early pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative diseases, including Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB). Axonal swellings such as globules and spheroids are a 
distinct feature of axonopathy and our recent study showed that transgenic (tg) 
mice expressing DLB-linked P123H β-synuclein (P123H βS) were characterized by 
P123H βS-immunoreactive axonal swellings (P123H βS-globules). Therefore, the 
objectives of this study were to evaluate α-synuclein (αS)-immunoreactive axonal 
swellings (αS-globules) in the brains of tg mice expressing human wild-type αS 
and to compare them with the globules in P123H βS tg mice.
RESULTS: In αS tg mice, αS-globules were formed in an age-dependent manner in 
various brain regions, including the thalamus and basal ganglia. These globules 
were composed of autophagosome-like membranous structures and were reminiscent 
of P123H βS-globules in P123H βS tg mice. In the αS-globules, frequent 
clustering and deformation of mitochondria were observed. These changes were 
associated with oxidative stress, based on staining of nitrated αS and 
4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (4-HNE). In accord with the absence of mitochondria in the 
P123H βS-globules, staining of nitrated αS and 4-HNE in these globules was 
weaker than that for αS-globules. Leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), the 
PARK8 of familial PD, was detected exclusively in αS-globules, suggesting a 
specific role of this molecule in these globules.
CONCLUSIONS: Lysosomal pathology was similarly observed for both αS- and P123H 
βS-globules, while oxidative stress was associated with the αS-globules, and to 
a lesser extent with the P123H βS-globules. Other pathologies, such as 
mitochondrial alteration and LRRK2 accumulation, were exclusively detected for 
αS-globules. Collectively, both αS- and P123H βS-globules were formed through 
similar but distinct pathogenic mechanisms. Our findings suggest that synuclein 
family members might contribute to diverse axonal pathologies.

DOI: 10.1186/1756-6606-5-34
PMCID: PMC3546907
PMID: 23013868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2932. J Toxicol Environ Health A. 2012;75(21):1253-68. doi: 
10.1080/15287394.2012.709412.

Evaluation of a prototype point-of-care instrument based on monochromatic x-ray 
fluorescence spectrometry: potential for monitoring trace element status of 
subjects with neurodegenerative disease.

McIntosh KG(1), Cusack MJ, Vershinin A, Chen ZW, Zimmerman EA, Molho ES, Celmins 
D, Parsons PJ.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Inorganic and Nuclear Chemistry, Wadsworth Center, New York 
State Department of Health, Albany, NY 12201, USA.

Assessment of trace elements such as Cu, Zn, and Se in patients with 
neurodegenerative disease, such as Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's disease 
(PD), may be useful in etiologic studies and in assessing the risk of developing 
these conditions. A prototype point-of-care (POC) instrument based on 
monochromatic x-ray fluorescence (M-XRF) was assembled and evaluated for the 
determination of Cu, Zn, and Se in whole blood, plasma, and urine. The prototype 
instrument was validated using certified reference materials for Cu and Zn in 
serum/plasma, and the reported bias and relative imprecision were <10%. The 
M-XRF prototype performance was further assessed using human specimens collected 
from AD and PD subjects, and was found to be satisfactory (<20% bias) for 
monitoring Cu and Zn levels in plasma and whole blood. However, the prototype 
M-XRF sensitivity was not sufficient for quantifying Cu, Zn, or Se in urine. 
Nonetheless, while validating the prototype instrument, body fluids (whole 
blood, plasma, and urine) were collected from 19 AD patients, 23 PD patients, 
and 24 controls specifically for trace element analysis using well-validated 
methods based on inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). This 
limited biomonitoring study provided robust data for up to 16 elements including 
Sb, As, Ba, Cd, Cs, Co, Cr, Cu, Hg, Pb, Mo, Se, Tl, Sn, Zn, and U in plasma, 
whole blood, and urine. The results did not indicate any significant differences 
in most trace elements studied between AD or PD patients compared to controls, 
although the sample size is limited. A statistically significant increase in 
plasma Se was identified for PD patients relative to AD patients, but this could 
be due to age differences.

DOI: 10.1080/15287394.2012.709412
PMID: 23030652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2933. Neurology. 2012 Nov 6;79(19):1944-50. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182735e9a. Epub 
2012 Oct 3.

GBA mutations increase risk for Lewy body disease with and without Alzheimer 
disease pathology.

Tsuang D(1), Leverenz JB, Lopez OL, Hamilton RL, Bennett DA, Schneider JA, 
Buchman AS, Larson EB, Crane PK, Kaye JA, Kramer P, Woltjer R, Kukull W, Nelson 
PT, Jicha GA, Neltner JH, Galasko D, Masliah E, Trojanowski JQ, Schellenberg GD, 
Yearout D, Huston H, Fritts-Penniman A, Mata IF, Wan JY, Edwards KL, Montine TJ, 
Zabetian CP.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System Seattle, WA, USA. dwt1@uw.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2012 Nov 6;79(19):1938-9.
    J Neurol. 2013 May;260(5):1441-4.

OBJECTIVES: Mutations in the GBA gene occur in 7% of patients with Parkinson 
disease (PD) and are a well-established susceptibility factor for PD, which is 
characterized by Lewy body disease (LBD) neuropathologic changes (LBDNCs). We 
sought to determine whether GBA influences risk of dementia with LBDNCs, 
Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathologic changes (ADNCs), or both.
METHODS: We screened the entire GBA coding region for mutations in controls and 
in subjects with dementia and LBDNCs and no or low levels of ADNCs (pure 
dementia with Lewy bodies [pDLB]), LBDNCs and high-level ADNCs (LBD-AD), and 
high-level ADNCs but without LBDNCs (AD).
RESULTS: Among white subjects, pathogenic GBA mutations were identified in 6 of 
79 pDLB cases (7.6%), 8 of 222 LBD-AD cases (3.6%), 2 of 243 AD cases (0.8%), 
and 3 of 381 controls (0.8%). Subjects with pDLB and LBD-AD were more likely to 
carry mutations than controls (pDLB: odds ratio [OR] = 7.6; 95% confidence 
interval [CI] = 1.8-31.9; p = 0.006; LBD-AD: OR = 4.6; CI = 1.2-17.6; p = 
0.025), but there was no significant difference in frequencies between the AD 
and control groups (OR = 1.1; CI = 0.2-6.6; p = 0.92). There was a highly 
significant trend test across groups (χ(2)(1) = 19.3; p = 1.1 × 10(-5)), with 
the likelihood of carrying a GBA mutation increasing in the following direction: 
control/AD < LBD-AD < pDLB.
CONCLUSIONS: GBA is a susceptibility gene across the LBD spectrum, but not in 
AD, and appears to convey a higher risk for PD and pDLB than for LBD-AD. PD and 
pDLB might be more similar to one another in genetic determinants and 
pathophysiology than either disease is to LBD-AD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182735e9a
PMCID: PMC3484986
PMID: 23035075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2934. Accid Anal Prev. 2012 Nov;49:287-92. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2012.02.003. Epub 2012 
Mar 2.

MMSE as a predictor of on-road driving performance in community dwelling older 
drivers.

Crizzle AM(1), Classen S, Bédard M, Lanford D, Winter S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational Therapy and Institute for Mobility, Activity and 
Participation, University of Florida, 101 S. Newell Drive, Gainesville, FL 
32610, USA. acrizzle@phhp.ufl.edu

Screening tools such as the MMSE have been used extensively in driving research 
studies to determine mild cognitive impairment or dementia. While some studies 
have shown the MMSE to correlate with driving performance, few studies have 
shown the predictive validity of the MMSE in determining on-road performance. In 
a sample of 168 community dwelling older adults, including 20 with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), the primary objective was to determine the validity of the MMSE to 
predict pass/fail outcomes of an on-road driving test using receiver operating 
characteristics curves. The area under the curve (AUC), an index of 
discriminability, for the total sample was .654, 95% CI=0.536-0.772, p=.009. 
Meanwhile, the AUC for the PD group was 0.791, 95% CI=0.587-0.996, p=.036. The 
total sample showed statistically significant yet poor predictive validity. 
However, the PD group showed statistically significant and good predictive 
validity of the MMSE to predict pass/fail outcomes on the road test, but caution 
is warranted as the confidence intervals are wide (due to small sample) and the 
positive and negative predictive values are less than desirable due to the 
associated error. The findings show that using the current cut-off point of ≤24 
on the MMSE is not adequately sensitive to predict on-road performance in both 
community dwelling older drivers and in drivers with PD. This study offers 
strong evidence to support the current best practice of not using the MMSE in 
isolation to predict on-road performance.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2012.02.003
PMID: 23036408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2935. Ann Neurol. 2012 Oct;72(4):587-98. doi: 10.1002/ana.23659. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Neuropathologic substrates of Parkinson disease dementia.

Irwin DJ(1), White MT, Toledo JB, Xie SX, Robinson JL, Van Deerlin V, Lee VM, 
Leverenz JB, Montine TJ, Duda JE, Hurtig HI, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, Morris K. Udall Parkinson's Disease Center of Excellence, 
Institute on Aging, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: A study was undertaken to examine the neuropathological substrates of 
cognitive dysfunction and dementia in Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: One hundred forty patients with a clinical diagnosis of PD and either 
normal cognition or onset of dementia 2 or more years after motor symptoms (PDD) 
were studied. Patients with a clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies 
were excluded. Autopsy records of genetic data and semiquantitative scores for 
the burden of neurofibrillary tangles, senile plaques, Lewy bodies (LBs), and 
Lewy neurites (LNs) and other pathologies were used to develop a multivariate 
logistic regression model to determine the independent association of these 
variables with dementia. Correlates of comorbid Alzheimer disease (AD) were also 
examined.
RESULTS: Niney-two PD patients developed dementia, and 48 remained cognitively 
normal. Severity of cortical LB (CLB)/LN pathology was positively associated 
with dementia (p < 0.001), with an odds ratio (OR) of 4.06 (95% confidence 
interval [CI], 1.87-8.81), as was apolipoprotein E4 (APOE4) genotype (p = 0.018; 
OR, 4.19; 95% CI, 1.28-13.75). A total of 28.6% of all PD cases had sufficient 
pathology for comorbid AD, of whom 89.5% were demented. The neuropathological 
diagnosis of PDD+AD correlated with an older age of PD onset (p = 0.001; OR, 
1.12; 95% CI, 1.04-1.21), higher CLB/LN burden (p = 0.037; OR, 2.48; 95% CI, 
1.06-5.82), and cerebral amyloid angiopathy severity (p = 0.032; OR, 4.16; 95% 
CI, 1.13-15.30).
INTERPRETATION: CLB/LN pathology is the most significant correlate of dementia 
in PD. Additionally, APOE4 genotype may independently influence the risk of 
dementia in PD. AD pathology was abundant in a subset of patients, and may 
modify the clinical phenotype. Thus, therapies that target α-synuclein, tau, or 
amyloid β could potentially improve cognitive performance in PD.

Copyright © 2012 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.23659
PMCID: PMC3484250
PMID: 23037886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2936. Neurodegener Dis. 2013;11(2):79-92. doi: 10.1159/000341998. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: the dual syndrome hypothesis.

Kehagia AA(1), Barker RA, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, UK.

Research into the heterogeneous nature of cognitive impairment documented in 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) has focused on disentangling deficits 
that vary between individuals, evolve and respond differentially to 
pharmacological treatments, and relate differentially to PD dementia (PDD). We 
summarise studies conducted in our laboratory over the last 2 decades, outlining 
the incremental development of our hypotheses, the starting point for which is 
our early work on executive deficits mirroring fronto-striatal dysfunction. We 
present subsequent findings linking these deficits to a model of dopaminergic 
function that conforms to an inverted curvilinear function. We review studies 
that investigated the range of dopamine-independent attentional and visuospatial 
memory deficits seen in PD, demonstrating that abnormalities in these domains 
more accurately predict PDD. We conclude with an exposition of the dual syndrome 
hypothesis, which distinguishes between dopaminergically mediated 
fronto-striatal executive impairments and a dementia syndrome with distinctive 
prodromal visuospatial deficits in which cholinergic treatments offer some 
clinical benefits.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000341998
PMCID: PMC5079071
PMID: 23038420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2937. BMJ. 2012 Sep 27;345:e6231. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e6231.

Benzodiazepine use and risk of dementia: prospective population based study.

Billioti de Gage S(1), Bégaud B, Bazin F, Verdoux H, Dartigues JF, Pérès K, 
Kurth T, Pariente A.

Author information:
(1)Université Bordeaux Segalen, F-33000 Bordeaux, France. 
sophie.billiotidegage@u-bordeaux2.fr

Comment in
    BMJ. 2012;345:e7984; author reply e7993.
    BMJ. 2012;345:e7986; author reply e7993.
    Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2012 Nov;137(46):2357.
    Praxis (Bern 1994). 2013 Jan 30;102(3):175.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the association between use of benzodiazepines and 
incident dementia.
DESIGN: Prospective, population based study.
SETTING: PAQUID study, France.
PARTICIPANTS: 1063 men and women (mean age 78.2 years) who were free of dementia 
and did not start taking benzodiazepines until at least the third year of 
follow-up.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Incident dementia, confirmed by a neurologist.
RESULTS: During a 15 year follow-up, 253 incident cases of dementia were 
confirmed. New use of benzodiazepines was associated with an increased risk of 
dementia (multivariable adjusted hazard ratio 1.60, 95% confidence interval 1.08 
to 2.38). Sensitivity analysis considering the existence of depressive symptoms 
showed a similar association (hazard ratio 1.62, 1.08 to 2.43). A secondary 
analysis pooled cohorts of participants who started benzodiazepines during 
follow-up and evaluated the association with incident dementia. The pooled 
hazard ratio across the five cohorts of new benzodiazepine users was 1.46 (1.10 
to 1.94). Results of a complementary nested case-control study showed that ever 
use of benzodiazepines was associated with an approximately 50% increase in the 
risk of dementia (adjusted odds ratio 1.55, 1.24 to 1.95) compared with never 
users. The results were similar in past users (odds ratio 1.56, 1.23 to 1.98) 
and recent users (1.48, 0.83 to 2.63) but reached significance only for past 
users.
CONCLUSIONS: In this prospective population based study, new use of 
benzodiazepines was associated with increased risk of dementia. The result was 
robust in pooled analyses across cohorts of new users of benzodiazepines 
throughout the study and in a complementary case-control study. Considering the 
extent to which benzodiazepines are prescribed and the number of potential 
adverse effects of this drug class in the general population, indiscriminate 
widespread use should be cautioned against.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.e6231
PMCID: PMC3460255
PMID: 23045258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the Unified Competing Interest form at http://www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf 
(available on request from the corresponding author) and declare: that this 
study has been funded only by academic research funds; no financial 
relationships with any organisation or company that might have an interest in 
the submitted work in the previous three years; no other relationships or 
activities that could appear to have influenced the submitted work. SBdG is a 
part time researcher in the INSERM 657 Unit, and her salary is paid by IRESP. BB 
has received investigator initiated research funding from the French Health 
Ministry (2011); he is chair of the scientific committee for two 
pharmacoepidemiological studies conducted by the contract research organisation 
LA-SER (London): one on medicines used in osteoarthritis, the other on the use 
of homeopathic remedies by French practitioners. HV has received funding from 
the French Association de Recherche sur le Cancer (ARC) for a research project 
on psychotropic drugs and breast cancer. J-FD has received grants from IPSEN and 
Novartis and honorariums from Merck, Serono, Novartis, and Ipsen. TK has 
received investigator initiated research funding from the French National 
Research Agency, the US National Institutes of Health, the Migraine Research 
Foundation, and the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation; he has received honorariums 
from Allergan, the American Academy of Neurology, and Merck for educational 
lectures and from MAP Pharmaceutical for contributing to a scientific advisory 
panel; he receives honorariums from the BMJ for editorial services. AP has 
received investigator initiated research funding from the Agence Française de 
Sécurité Sanitaire des Produits de Santé (AFSSAPS) and from IRESP; he has 
participated in research funded by the Fonds de la Recherche en Santé du Québec 
(FRSQ), the Réseau Québécois de Recherche sur l’Utilisation des Médicaments 
(RQRUM), the European Union (FP7 grants), the Innovative Medicines Initiative 
(IMI grant), and Sanofi-Aventis.


2938. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2013 Feb;39(2):90-108. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2012.01308.x.

Review: Axon pathology in age-related neurodegenerative disorders.

Adalbert R(1), Coleman MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Signalling Programme, The Babraham Institute, Babraham, Cambridge, UK.

'Dying back' axon degeneration is a prominent feature of many age-related 
neurodegenerative disorders and is widespread in normal ageing. Although the 
mechanisms of disease- and age-related losses may differ, both contribute to 
symptoms. Here, we review recent advances in understanding axon pathology in 
age-related neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's 
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and glaucoma. In particular, we highlight 
the importance of axonal transport, autophagy, traumatic brain injury and 
mitochondrial quality control. We then place these disease mechanisms in the 
context of changes to axons and dendrites that occur during normal ageing. We 
discuss what makes ageing such an important risk factor for many 
neurodegenerative disorders and conclude that the processes of normal ageing and 
disease combine at the molecular, cellular or systems levels in a range of 
disorders to produce symptoms. Pathology identical to disease also occurs at the 
cellular level in most elderly individuals. Thus, normal ageing and age-related 
disease are inextricably linked and the term 'healthy ageing' downplays the 
important contributions of cellular pathology. For a full understanding of 
normal ageing or age-related disease we must study both processes.

© 2012 The Authors. Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology © 2012 British 
Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2012.01308.x
PMID: 23046254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2939. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Nov 21;530(2):109-14. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.09.040. 
Epub 2012 Oct 6.

A novel PSEN1 H163P mutation in a patient with early-onset Alzheimer's disease: 
clinical, neuroimaging, and neuropathological findings.

Kim J(1), Bagyinszky E, Chang YH, Choe G, Choi BO, An SS, Kim S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University College of Medicine in 
Seoul National Bundang Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.

We report a novel presenilin 1 gene (PSEN1) mutation (H163P) in a patient with 
sporadic early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Clinical, molecular, and 
neuropathological examinations were performed on an index patient, who presented 
at the age of 34 years with depression and memory disturbances. At the age of 36 
years, she exhibited seizures and myoclonus, cerebellar ataxia, and 
Parkinsonism. A novel mutation at codon 163 was found in PSEN1, which was 
changed from histidine to proline. Severe atrophy was noted in the frontal and 
temporal lobes of the brain. A histopathological examination of the frontal 
cortex revealed senile plaques and severe neurofibrillary tangles. PSEN1 codon 
163 could be a mutational hot spot in early-onset Alzheimer's disease, and may 
result in a homogeneous phenotype similar to that of other patients with 
codon-163 mutations; thus, widening the spectrum of PSEN1 codon-163-linked 
phenotypes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.09.040
PMID: 23046926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2940. Sleep Med. 2013 Aug;14(8):763-7. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.09.001. Epub 2012 Oct 
8.

Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder as a biomarker for neurodegeneration: 
the past 10 years.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ronald.postuma@mcgill.ca

Since its original description, idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) has become a well-established risk factor for neurodegenerative 
disease. Studies from sleep centers have found that at least 40-65% of patients 
with idiopathic RBD will develop a defined neurodegenerative phenotype over 10 
years. This elevated risk of neurodegeneration has been recently confirmed in a 
population-based study of probable RBD. When a defined syndrome develops, it is 
almost always a 'synucleinopathy' (Parkinson's disease, Dementia with Lewy 
Bodies or multiple system atrophy). Often, manifestations of parkinsonism and 
cognitive impairment overlap. The ability of RBD to predict disease has major 
implications for development of neuroprotective therapy. First, RBD is a 
prodromal marker with a disease risk sufficiently high for design of 
neuroprotective trials. Second, study of idiopathic RBD allows prospective 
testing of other predictive markers of neurodegeneration. Third, it allows an 
unprecedented direct examination of the evolution of prodromal disease into 
defined neurodegenerative syndromes. This review summarizes what is known about 
the risk of neurodegeneration in idiopathic RBD, the utility of 
prodromal/predictive markers in synuclein-mediated neurodegeneration, and the 
evolution of motor and non-motor markers in prodromal stages.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.09.001
PMID: 23058689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2941. Front Genet. 2012 Sep 28;3:192. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00192. eCollection 2012.

Unraveling 50-Year-Old Clues Linking Neurodegeneration and Cancer to Cycad 
Toxins: Are microRNAs Common Mediators?

Spencer P(1), Fry RC, Kisby GE.

Author information:
(1)Global Health Center, Oregon Health and Science University Portland, OR, USA.

Recognition of overlapping molecular signaling activated by a chemical trigger 
of cancer and neurodegeneration is new, but the path to this discovery has been 
long and potholed. Six conferences (1962-1972) examined the puzzling neurotoxic 
and carcinogenic properties of a then-novel toxin [cycasin: methylazoxymethanol 
(MAM)-β-d-glucoside] in cycad plants used traditionally for food and medicine on 
Guam where a complex neurodegenerative disease plagued the indigenous 
population. Affected families showed combinations of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS), parkinsonism (P), and/or a dementia (D) akin to Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Modernization saw declining disease rates on Guam and remarkable 
changes in clinical phenotype (ALS was replaced by P-D and then by D) and in two 
genetically distinct ALS-PDC-affected populations (Kii-Japan, West 
Papua-Indonesia) that used cycad seed medicinally. MAM forms DNA lesions - 
repaired by O(6)-methylguanine methyltransferase (MGMT) - that perturb mouse 
brain development and induce malignant tumors in peripheral organs. The brains 
of young adult MGMT-deficient mice given a single dose of MAM show DNA 
lesion-linked changes in cell-signaling pathways associated with miRNA-1, which 
is implicated in colon, liver, and prostate cancers, and in neurological 
disease, notably AD. MAM is metabolized to formaldehyde, a human carcinogen. 
Formaldehyde-responsive miRNAs predicted to modulate MAM-associated genes in the 
brains of MGMT-deficient mice include miR-17-5p and miR-18d, which regulate 
genes involved in tumor suppression, DNA repair, amyloid deposition, and 
neurotransmission. These findings marry cycad-associated ALS-PDC with colon, 
liver, and prostate cancer; they also add to evidence linking changes in 
microRNA status both to ALS, AD, and parkinsonism, and to cancer initiation and 
progression.

DOI: 10.3389/fgene.2012.00192
PMCID: PMC3460211
PMID: 23060898


2942. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Dec 15;323(1-2):158-61. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.09.007. Epub 
2012 Oct 9.

Relationship of dementia and visual hallucinations in tremor and non-tremor 
dominant Parkinson's disease.

Rana AQ(1), Vaid HM, Edun A, Dogu O, Rana MA.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Clinic of Eastern Toronto, Canada. ranaaq@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVES: Both visual hallucinations and cognitive dysfunction are experienced 
by a significant number of patients with Parkinson's disease. There were three 
main objectives of this study: (1) to determine if there is a difference in the 
prevalence of dementia in patients with tremor versus non-tremor dominant 
Parkinson's; (2) to determine if there is a difference of prevalence of visual 
hallucinations in patients with tremor and non-tremor dominant Parkinson's 
disease; and (3) to determine if there is a relationship between visual 
hallucinations and dementia in Parkinson's disease patients.
BACKGROUND: Dementia and visual hallucinations are common non-motor symptoms of 
Parkinson's disease that affect a significant number of patients. Previous 
research has shown that visual hallucinations may be predictive of future onset 
of dementia. We wanted to compare the prevalence of these non-motor symptoms in 
tremor vs. non-tremor dominant Parkinson's disease, although previous research 
has shown that dementia may be more common in the akinetic rigid variant of 
Parkinson's disease without tremor. Visual hallucinations have not yet been 
studied in this way.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart analysis on 314 patients with 
Parkinson's disease in this study. Patients meeting the inclusion criteria were 
stratified into several categories based on the presence or absence of tremor 
dominant PD, akinetic rigid dominant PD, dementia and visual hallucinations. 
Nonparametric tests were used for performing statistical analyses. The Chi 
Squared test was used for the analysis of categorical variables.
RESULTS: Patients without tremor had a higher prevalence of dementia (29%) than 
those with tremor (14%). There was no difference in visual hallucinations in 
tremor versus non-tremor patients, although there was a significant trend 
between tremor and visual hallucinations in female patients. A significant 
correlation was found between dementia and visual hallucinations in the sample, 
however further investigation showed this was largely associated with female 
Parkinson's disease patients.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2012.09.007
PMID: 23062324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2943. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 May;34(5):1517.e1-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.013. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

Mutational analysis of TARDBP in Parkinson's disease.

van Blitterswijk M(1), van Es MA, Verbaan D, van Hilten JJ, Scheffer H, van de 
Warrenburg BP, Veldink JH, van den Berg LH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rudolf Magnus Institute of Neuroscience, University 
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the Netherlands.

Mutations in TAR DNA-binding protein (TARDBP) are associated with heterogenic 
phenotypes, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, 
and Parkinson's disease. In this study, we investigated the presence of TARDBP 
mutations in a cohort of 429 Dutch patients with Parkinson's disease. Though we 
detected 1 silent mutation, p.S332S, no missense mutations were present in our 
cohort. Our findings, therefore, demonstrate that TARDBP mutations do not appear 
to contribute to the pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease in The Netherlands.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.013
PMID: 23062702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2944. Neurologia. 2014 Nov-Dec;29(9):523-32. doi: 10.1016/j.nrl.2012.05.004. Epub 2012 
Oct 9.

Inappropriate treatments for patients with cognitive decline.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Robles Bayón A(1), Gude Sampedro F(2).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neurología Cognitiva, Hospital La Rosaleda, Santiago de Compostela, 
España. Electronic address: alfredorobles@hospitalrosaleda.com.
(2)Unidad de Epidemiología Clínica, Hospital Clínico Universitario, Santiago de 
Compostela, España.

INTRODUCTION: Some treatments are inappropriate for patients with cognitive 
decline. We analyse their use in 500 patients and present a literature review.
DEVELOPMENT: Benzodiazepines produce dependence, and reduce attention, memory, 
and motor ability. They can cause disinhibition or aggressive behaviour, 
facilitate the appearance of delirium, and increase accident and mortality rates 
in people older than 60. In subjects over 65, low systolic blood pressure is 
associated with cognitive decline. Maintaining this figure between 130 and 140 
mm Hg (145 in patients older than 80) is recommended. Hypocholesterolaemia < 160 
mg/dl is associated with increased morbidity and mortality, aggressiveness, and 
suicide; HDL-cholesterol<40 mg/dl is associated with memory loss and increased 
vascular and mortality risks. Old age is a predisposing factor for developing 
cognitive disorders or delirium when taking opioids. The risks of prescribing 
anticholinesterases and memantine to patients with non-Alzheimer dementia that 
is not associated with Parkinson disease, mild cognitive impairment, or 
psychiatric disorders probably outweigh the benefits. Anticholinergic drugs 
acting preferentially on the peripheral system can also induce cognitive side 
effects. Practitioners should be aware of steroid-induced dementia and 
steroid-induced psychosis, and know that risk of delirium increases with 
polypharmacy. Of 500 patients with cognitive impairment, 70.4% were on multiple 
medications and 42% were taking benzodiazepines. Both conditions were present in 
74.3% of all suspected iatrogenic cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Polypharmacy should be avoided, if it is not essential, especially 
in elderly patients and those with cognitive impairment. Benzodiazepines, 
opioids and anticholinergics often elicit cognitive and behavioural disorders. 
Moreover, systolic blood pressure must be kept above 130 mm Hg, total 
cholesterol levels over 160 mg/dl, and HDL-cholesterol over 40 mg/dl in this 
population.

Copyright © 2012 Sociedad Española de Neurología. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nrl.2012.05.004
PMID: 23062764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2945. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Apr;34(4):1311.e3-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.002. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Screening for C9orf72 repeat expansions in parkinsonian syndromes.

Yeh TH(1), Lai SC, Weng YH, Kuo HC, Wu-Chou YH, Huang CL, Chen RS, Chang HC, 
Traynor B, Lu CS.

Author information:
(1)Section of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial 
Hospital at Linkou Medical Center and Chang Gung University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

Parkinsonism might precede, coincide, or follow the behavioral or 
language-predominant cognitive impairments characteristic of frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD). In this study, we analyze the hexanucleotide repeat expansions 
within C9orf72 gene in various parkinsonian syndromes because it is a recently 
identified important genetic cause of FTD. The expanded hexanucleotide repeat is 
only identified in our familial FTD patients but not in patients with 
predominant parkinsonism. The lack of association between abnormal C9orf72 
repeat expansion and parkinsonian syndromes might imply pathogenic mechanisms 
other than tau or Lewy body pathology.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.09.002
PMCID: PMC4022748
PMID: 23063644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement: All authors declare that 
they have no conflicts of interest.


2946. Osteoporos Int. 2013 Jan;24(1):321-8. doi: 10.1007/s00198-012-2184-6. Epub 2012 
Oct 16.

Characteristics of patients who suffer major osteoporotic fractures despite 
adhering to alendronate treatment: a National Prescription registry study.

Abrahamsen B(1), Rubin KH, Eiken PA, Eastell R.

Author information:
(1)Odense Patient data Exploratory Network (OPEN), Institute of Clinical 
Research, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. 
b.abrahamsen@physician.dk

Antiresorptive treatment reduces the risk of fractures, but most patients remain 
at elevated risk. We used health registers to identify predictors of new major 
osteoporotic fractures in patients adhering to alendronate. Risk factors showed 
a different pattern than in the general population and included dementia, ulcer 
disease, and Parkinson's disease.
INTRODUCTION: Antiresorptives reduce the excess risk of fractures in patients 
with osteoporosis, but most patients remain at elevated risk. In some countries, 
patients must sustain fractures while on bisphosphonate (BP) treatment to 
qualify for more expensive treatment. It is unclear if patients who fracture on 
BP can be viewed as a distinct subgroup.
METHODS: The National Prescription registry was used to identify 38,088 new 
alendronate users. The outcome was major osteoporotic fractures 6+ months after 
filling the first prescription in patients with a medication possession ratio > 
80 %.
RESULTS: One thousand and seventy-two (5.5 %) patients sustained major 
osteoporotic fractures. The risk increased with age and was lower in men. The 
most important risk factor was the number of comedications (hazard ratio (HR) 
1.04, 95 % CI 1.03-1.06, for each drug). Dementia (HR 1.81, 95 % CI 1.18-2.78), 
prior fracture (one: HR 1.17, 95 % CI 1.02-1.34; multiple: HR 1.34, 95 % CI 
1.08-1.67), and ulcer disease (HR 1.45, 95 % CI 1.04-2.03) also increased the 
risk. Diabetes did not influence fracture risk, nor did rheumatic disorders. The 
risk was lower in glucocorticoid users (HR 0.78, 95 % CI 0.65-0.93).
CONCLUSION: Risk factors while adhering to BP show a somewhat different pattern 
than that of the general population and FRAX. Ulcer disease and dementia may 
impair the ability to use the medications correctly. Though this is an 
observational study and associations may not be causal, it may be prudent to 
include dementia, ulcer disease, and Parkinson's disease to capture the risk of 
fractures on treatment. Lower risk in patients treated with glucocorticoids and 
in men probably reflects a lower treatment threshold related to guidelines.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-012-2184-6
PMID: 23070480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2947. Early-Onset Familial Alzheimer Disease – RETIRED CHAPTER, FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY.

Bird TD(1).

In: Adam MP, Feldman J, Mirzaa GM, Pagon RA, Wallace SE, Bean LJH, Gripp KW, 
Amemiya A, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet]. Seattle (WA): University of 
Washington, Seattle; 1993–2024.
1999 Sep 24 [updated 2012 Oct 18].

Author information:
(1)Seattle VA Medical Center, Departments of Neurology and Medicine, University 
of Washington, Seattle, Washington

NOTE: THIS PUBLICATION HAS BEEN RETIRED. THIS ARCHIVAL VERSION IS FOR HISTORICAL 
REFERENCE ONLY, AND THE INFORMATION MAY BE OUT OF DATE.
CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Alzheimer disease (AD) is characterized by adult-onset 
progressive dementia associated with cerebral cortical atrophy, beta-amyloid 
plaque formation, and intraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles. AD typically begins 
with subtle memory failure that becomes more severe and is eventually 
incapacitating. Other common findings include confusion, poor judgment, language 
disturbance, agitation, withdrawal, hallucinations, seizures, Parkinsonian 
features, increased muscle tone, myoclonus, incontinence, and mutism. Familial 
AD (FAD) characterizes families that have more than one member with AD and 
usually implies multiple affected persons in more than one generation. 
Early-onset FAD (EOFAD) refers to families in which onset is consistently before 
age 60 to 65 years and often before age 55 years.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: EOFAD is diagnosed in families with multiple affected 
individuals with mean age of onset before 65 years and/or with a documented 
pathogenic variant in one of the genes known to be associated with EOFAD. The 
three clinically indistinguishable subtypes of EOFAD based on the underlying 
genetic mechanism are: Alzheimer disease type 1 (AD1), caused by mutation of APP 
(10%-15% of EOFAD); Alzheimer disease type 3 (AD3), caused by mutation of PSEN1, 
(30%-70% of EOFAD); and Alzheimer disease type 4 (AD4), caused by mutation of 
PSEN2 (<5% of EOFAD). Kindreds with autosomal dominant EOFAD with no 
identifiable pathogenic variants in PSEN1, PSEN2, or APP have been described; 
thus, it is likely that variants in additional genes are causative.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: Supportive; symptoms of depression, 
aggression, sleep disturbance, seizures, and hallucinations are managed on an 
individual basis; affected individuals eventually require assisted 
living/nursing home care; agents that increase cholinergic activity, such as 
Aricept® (donepezil), Exelon® (rivastigmine), and Reminy® (galatamine), show 
modest but variable benefit; memantine, an NMDA receptor antagonist, is approved 
for use in AD; physical and occupational therapy help manage activities of daily 
living. Surveillance: Monthly monitoring to identify and manage secondary 
complications. Agents/circumstances to avoid: Sudden changes in environment; 
over-sedation.
GENETIC COUNSELING: EOFAD is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. Most 
individuals with EOFAD had an affected parent; occasionally, neither parent is 
identified as having had the disease, but a second-degree relative (e.g., an 
uncle, aunt, and/or grandparent) has or had EOFAD. Each child of an individual 
with EOFAD has a 50% chance of inheriting the pathogenic variant and developing 
EOFAD. Prenatal testing for pregnancies at increased risk for is possible if the 
pathogenic variant in the family is known; however, prenatal testing for 
adult-onset disorders is uncommon.

Copyright © 1993-2024, University of Washington, Seattle. GeneReviews is a 
registered trademark of the University of Washington, Seattle. All rights 
reserved.

PMID: 20301414


2948. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Feb;19(2):198-201. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.09.013. Epub 2012 Oct 18.

Analysis of the C9orf72 repeat in Parkinson's disease, essential tremor and 
restless legs syndrome.

Dejesus-Hernandez M(1), Rayaprolu S, Soto-Ortolaza AI, Rutherford NJ, Heckman 
MG, Traynor S, Strongosky A, Graff-Radford N, Van Gerpen J, Uitti RJ, Shih JJ, 
Lin SC, Wszolek ZK, Rademakers R, Ross OA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, 4500 San Pablo Road, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

The hexanucleotide expanded repeat (GGGGCC) in intron 1 of the C9orf72 gene is 
recognized as the most common genetic form of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
(ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). However, as part of the clinical 
phenotype, some patients present with parkinsonism. The present study 
investigated the potential expansion or association of the C9orf72 repeat length 
with susceptibility to Parkinson's disease and related disorders, essential 
tremor and restless legs syndrome. One restless legs syndrome patient was shown 
to harbor a repeat expansion, however on clinical follow-up this patient was 
observed to have developed frontotemporal dementia. There was no evidence of 
association of repeat length on disease risk or age-at-onset for any of the 
three disorders. Therefore the C9orf72 hexanucleotide repeat expansion appears 
to be specific to TDP-43 driven amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and dementia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.09.013
PMCID: PMC3570692
PMID: 23084342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement RR and MD-J have a patent 
on the discovery of the hexanucleotide repeat expansion in C9ORF72. All other 
authors report no conflict of interest.


2949. Hum Mutat. 2013 Feb;34(2):296-300. doi: 10.1002/humu.22241. Epub 2012 Nov 27.

Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome: mutations in ROGDI and evidence of genetic 
heterogeneity.

Tucci A(1), Kara E, Schossig A, Wolf NI, Plagnol V, Fawcett K, Paisán-Ruiz C, 
Moore M, Hernandez D, Musumeci S, Tennison M, Hennekam R, Palmeri S, Malandrini 
A, Raskin S, Donnai D, Hennig C, Tzschach A, Hordijk R, Bast T, Wimmer K, Lo CN, 
Shorvon S, Mefford H, Eichler EE, Hall R, Hayes I, Hardy J, Singleton A, 
Zschocke J, Houlden H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Reta Lila Weston Research Laboratories 
and MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.

Kohlschütter-Tönz syndrome (KTS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder 
characterized by amelogenesis imperfecta, psychomotor delay or regression and 
seizures starting early in childhood. KTS was established as a distinct clinical 
entity after the first report by Kohlschütter in 1974, and to date, only a total 
of 20 pedigrees have been reported. The genetic etiology of KTS remained elusive 
until recently when mutations in ROGDI were independently identified in three 
unrelated families and in five likely related Druze families. Herein, we report 
a clinical and genetic study of 10 KTS families. By using a combination of whole 
exome sequencing, linkage analysis, and Sanger sequencing, we identify novel 
homozygous or compound heterozygous ROGDI mutations in five families, all 
presenting with a typical KTS phenotype. The other families, mostly presenting 
with additional atypical features, were negative for ROGDI mutations, suggesting 
genetic heterogeneity of atypical forms of the disease.

© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22241
PMCID: PMC3902979
PMID: 23086778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2950. Clin Biochem. 2013 Apr;46(6):480-6. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2012.10.012. Epub 
2012 Oct 23.

Translational proteomics in Alzheimer's disease and related disorders.

Ghidoni R(1), Paterlini A, Benussi L.

Author information:
(1)Proteomics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, 
Brescia, Italy. rghidoni@fatebenefratelli.it

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and its related syndromes--especially frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), Lewy body dementia (LBD) and dementias associated with 
cerebrovascular disease--are the principal causes of dementia. Until a recent 
period, the diagnosis of AD and its related disorders relied almost exclusively 
on the combination of a neurological examination and the use neuropsychological 
tests. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) dosage of neuropathologically AD-associated 
proteins has already been incorporated into the neurochemical diagnosis of AD, 
attesting the relevance of translational research. The analysis of the human 
proteome has made considerable advances in the last years and is prepared to 
overcome several obstacles for its routine application. In this review we 
discuss i) how biomarkers are modernizing the diagnosis of AD and related 
disorders, ii) the different sources of samples used for clinically oriented 
analysis highlighting the different challenges and approaches associated with 
these iii) studies investigating changes in circulating proteome in subjects at 
risk for dementia. There is urgent need for more large-scale longitudinal 
studies to establish the analytical and global proteome intraindividual 
variability for contemporary proteomics platforms. In addition, combing 
proteomics and endophenotypes such as imaging or other biomarkers is of 
paramount importance.

Copyright © 2012 The Canadian Society of Clinical Chemists. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2012.10.012
PMID: 23089105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2951. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Dec;18 Suppl 3:S15-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.06.015. Epub 2012 Oct 22.

Pre-death grief in Parkinson's caregivers: a pilot survey-based study.

Carter JH(1), Lyons KS, Lindauer A, Malcom J.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Oregon Health & Science University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson 
Park Rd., Portland, OR 97239, USA. carterju@ohsu.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the evidence for pre-death grief in caregivers (CGs) of 
persons with Parkinson's disease (PD) and to compare non-motor PD symptoms 
(cognitive decline, depression, hallucinations) versus motor symptoms 
(fluctuations of mobility) for associations with CG grief reactions.
BACKGROUND: Prolonged grief in response to loss has been associated with 
negative outcomes and decreased well-being in caregivers (i.e. spouse or adult 
child) of relatives with dementia. In Parkinson's disease (PD) the negative 
impact of providing care has been referred to as caregiver strain. Grief has not 
been explored in PD caregivers, and understanding grief may offer new insights 
for future intervention.
METHODS: Volunteer caregivers (n = 74) filled out the Marwit and Meuser 
Caregiver Grief Inventory (MM-CGI-SF) which measures 3 types (i.e. subscales) of 
grief: Personal Sacrifice and Burden, Heartfelt Sadness and Longing, Worry and 
Felt Isolation. This scale also provided a total grief score. Volunteer 
caregivers also responded to self-reported UPDRS questions about the motor and 
non-motor symptoms of their PD relative (i.e. spouse or parent). T-tests were 
used to correlate CG subscales of grief with patient variables. A hierarchical 
regression analysis was used to determine the predictive contribution of motor 
and nonmotor symptoms to grief.
RESULTS: Grief based on the total score was found in 17% of CGs. Grief was 
significantly higher in CG's whose relative had more severe symptoms. The type 
of grief experienced was similar across all three subscales. Hierarchical 
regression analysis revealed that nonmotor symptoms explained slightly more of 
the variance (14-23%) than motor symptoms (11-17%).
CONCLUSIONS: This study revealed that pre-death grief is a significant finding 
in PD caregivers. The severity of symptoms and the presence of nonmotor 
symptoms, especially cognitive decline, predict caregivers who are at greatest 
risk of prolonged grief; however it should be kept in mind that motor symptoms 
also contribute.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.06.015
PMID: 23089242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2952. Environ Res. 2013 Jan;120:96-101. doi: 10.1016/j.envres.2012.08.014. Epub 2012 
Oct 22.

Occupational pesticide exposure and screening tests for neurodegenerative 
disease among an elderly population in Costa Rica.

Steenland K(1), Wesseling C, Román N, Quirós I, Juncos JL.

Author information:
(1)Rollins School of Public Health, Emory University, 1518 Clifton Road, 
Atlanta, USA. nsteenl@emory.edu

BACKGROUND: Pesticides have been associated with Parkinson's disease (PD) in 
many studies, and with Alzheimer's disease (AD) in a few.
METHODS: We conducted screening tests for neurologic disease and occupational 
pesticide use in a population-based sample of 400 elderly subjects at two 
government-run clinics in Costa Rica; 361 subjects who failed the initial screen 
were given both the mini-mental states exam (MMSE) and a modified version of a 
10-item united Parkinson's disease rating motor subscale (UPDRS). Among subjects 
who failed either test, 144 were then examined by a neurologist.
RESULTS: Past occupational pesticide exposure was reported by 18% of subjects. 
Exposed subjects performed worse on the MMSE than the non-exposed (mean 24.5 
versus 25.9, p=0.01, adjusted for age, sex, and education). The exposed had 
significantly elevated risks of abnormal scores on two UPDRS items, 
tremor-at-rest (OR 2.58, 1.28-5.23), and finger-tapping (OR=2.94, 95% CI 
1.03-8.41). Thirty-three (23%) of those examined by the neurologist were 
diagnosed with possible/probable PD, 3-4 times the expected based on 
international data; 85% of these cases had not been previously diagnosed. Among 
subjects who took the UPDRS, the exposed had an increased risk of PD (OR=2.57, 
95% CI 0.91-7.26). No excess risk was found for a diagnosis of AD or mild 
cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Elderly subjects with past occupational pesticide exposure 
performed significantly worse on screening tests for dementia and PD, and had an 
increased risk of an eventual PD diagnosis. Screening may be particularly 
appropriate among elderly subjects with past pesticide exposure.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.envres.2012.08.014
PMID: 23092715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2953. Eur J Neurol. 2013 Apr;20(4):647-54. doi: 10.1111/ene.12015. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Prevalence and prognostic impact of comorbidities in amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Körner S(1), Kollewe K, Ilsemann J, Müller-Heine A, Dengler R, Krampfl K, Petri 
S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. 
Koerner.Sonja@mh-hannover.de

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by 
rapidly progressive paralysis of striated muscles due to the loss of upper and 
lower motor neurons. The disease leads to death within 2-5 years, mainly due to 
respiratory failure. The pathogenesis of ALS is still unexplained for the most 
part. In this study, we aimed to determine the prevalence of different 
cardiovascular, metabolic, and neuropsychiatric comorbidities in a large ALS 
cohort and to evaluate their influence on the disease course.
METHODS: A cohort of 514 patients with ALS of our ALS outpatient clinic was 
investigated retrospectively with reference to known prognostic factors and 
comorbidities. The prevalence of concomitant diseases was compared with the data 
from the German general population. Uni- and multivariate survival analyses were 
performed using the Cox proportional hazards model and Kaplan-Meier analysis.
RESULTS: The prevalence of cardiovascular diseases and cardiovascular risk 
factors was significantly lower in patients with ALS compared to the German 
general population, whilst the prevalence of dementia, parkinsonism, and 
depressive symptoms was significantly higher in the ALS cohort. None of the 
investigated comorbidities had an influence on the disease course or on the 
survival of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Persons with cardiovascular diseases or risk factors seem to be at 
lower risk of ALS. Although these diseases are apparently somehow protective 
regarding ALS susceptibility, their presence did not modify disease progression 
and survival in patients with ALS. Our study further confirms the well-known 
continuum between ALS and dementia. It also suggests a link with other 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease.

© 2012 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.12015
PMID: 23094606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2954. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012 Nov;60(11):2127-36. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04209.x. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Gait and cognition: a complementary approach to understanding brain function and 
the risk of falling.

Montero-Odasso M(1), Verghese J, Beauchet O, Hausdorff JM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, Schulich School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Western University, London, Ontario, Canada. 
mmontero@uwo.ca

Until recently, clinicians and researchers have performed gait assessments and 
cognitive assessments separately when evaluating older adults, but increasing 
evidence from clinical practice, epidemiological studies, and clinical trials 
shows that gait and cognition are interrelated in older adults. Quantifiable 
alterations in gait in older adults are associated with falls, dementia, and 
disability. At the same time, emerging evidence indicates that early 
disturbances in cognitive processes such as attention, executive function, and 
working memory are associated with slower gait and gait instability during 
single- and dual-task testing and that these cognitive disturbances assist in 
the prediction of future mobility loss, falls, and progression to dementia. This 
article reviews the importance of the interrelationship between gait and 
cognition in aging and presents evidence that gait assessments can provide a 
window into the understanding of cognitive function and dysfunction and fall 
risk in older people in clinical practice. To this end, the benefits of 
dual-task gait assessments (e.g., walking while performing an 
attention-demanding task) as a marker of fall risk are summarized. A potential 
complementary approach for reducing the risk of falls by improving certain 
aspects of cognition through nonpharmacological and pharmacological treatments 
is also presented. Untangling the relationship between early gait disturbances 
and early cognitive changes may be helpful in identifying older adults at risk 
of experiencing mobility decline, falls, and progression to dementia.

© 2012, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2012, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.04209.x
PMCID: PMC3498517
PMID: 23110433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Dr. Montero Odasso’s 
program in “Gait and Brain” function is supported in part by grants from the 
Canadian Institutes for Health and Research - Institute of Aging (CIHR-IA), the 
Drummond Foundation, the Physician Services Incorporated Foundation of Canada 
(PSI) and the Ontario Ministry of Research and Innovation. He is the first 
recipient of the Schulich Clinician-Scientist Award and recipient of the CIHR 
New Investigator Award (2011–2016). Dr. Verghese is supported in part by grants 
from the National Institute on Aging (RO1 AG025119 and POI AGO03949). Prof. 
Beauchet serves as a consultant for Ipsen Pharma, serves on a scientific 
advisory board for Groupe Korian, and serves as an editor for Annales de 
Gérontologie. He has no relevant financial interest in this manuscript. Dr. 
Hausdorff is supported in part by grants from the National Institute on Aging, 
the Israel Science Foundation, the Israel Ministry of Health, and the Michael J 
Fox Foundation for Parkinson Research.


2955. Psychiatr Danub. 2012 Oct;24 Suppl 3:S331-5.

Psychiatric disorders in neurology.

Sinanović O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Clinical Centre Tuzla, Psychiatry and 
Medical Psychology, School of Medicine, University of Tuzla, 75000 Tuzla, Bosnia 
and Herzegovina. osman.sinanovic@ukctuzla.ba

Psychiatric disorders (PDs) in neurology are more frequent then it verified in 
routine exam, not only in the less developed but also in large and very 
developed neurological departments. Furthermore, psychiatric symptoms (PSs) in 
neurological disorders (NDs) among primary health care physicians and other 
specialties are often neglected. Anxiety and depression are most common, but 
hallucinations, delusions, obsessive-compulsive disorder and delirium or 
confusional state are also frequent comorbidity in many neurological conditions 
such as stroke, epilepsy, multiple sclerosis (MS), Parkinson disease (PD). 
Depression and NDs also have a bidirectional relationship, as not only are 
patients, for example with stroke at greater risk of developing depression, but 
patients with depression have a two-fold greater risk of developing a stroke, 
even after controlling for other risk factors. Dementia or cognitive impairment 
are part of clinical picture of PD, stroke patients, patients with MS, 
Huntington disease etc. The prototype of dementia in PD and other NDs is a 
dysexecutive syndrome with impaired attention, executive functions and 
secondarily impaired memory. So-called "functional" (or psychogenic or 
hysterical/conversion) symptoms are relatively infrequent in "neurological" 
conditions, but very often unrecognized and not properly treated. Treatment of 
PSs in neurology, basically are not different then treatment of these symptoms 
in psychiatry and should be include pharmacotherapy and psychiatry. This 
presentation gives an overview of frequency and type of PSs underlying necessity 
to recognize these disorders in every day routine exam and properly treatment.

PMID: 23114812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2956. Neurology. 2012 Dec 11;79(24):2302-6. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318278b658. Epub 
2012 Oct 31.

Hippocampal perfusion predicts impending neurodegeneration in REM sleep behavior 
disorder.

Dang-Vu TT(1), Gagnon JF, Vendette M, Soucy JP, Postuma RB, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine, Hôpital du Sacré-Cœur de 
Montréal, Canada. tt.dangvu@concordia.ca

Comment in
    Neurology. 2012 Dec 11;79(24):2296-7.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (IRBD) are at 
risk for developing Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
We aimed to identify functional brain imaging patterns predicting the emergence 
of PD and DLB in patients with IRBD, using SPECT with (99m)Tc-ethylene 
cysteinate dimer (ECD).
METHODS: Twenty patients with IRBD were scanned at baseline during wakefulness 
using (99m)Tc-ECD SPECT. After a follow-up of 3 years on average, patients were 
divided into 2 groups according to whether or not they developed defined 
neurodegenerative disease (PD, DLB). SPECT data analysis comparing regional 
cerebral blood flow (rCBF) between groups assessed whether specific brain 
perfusion patterns were associated with subsequent clinical evolution. 
Regression analysis between rCBF and clinical markers of neurodegeneration 
(motor, color vision, olfaction) looked for neural structures involved in this 
process.
RESULTS: Of the 20 patients with IRBD recruited for this study, 10 converted to 
PD or DLB during the follow-up. rCBF at baseline was increased in the 
hippocampus of patients who would later convert compared with those who would 
not (p < 0.05 corrected). Hippocampal perfusion was correlated with motor and 
color vision scores across all IRBD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: (99m)Tc-ECD SPECT identifies patients with IRBD at risk for 
conversion to other neurodegenerative disorders such as PD or DLB; disease 
progression in IRBD is predicted by abnormal perfusion in the hippocampus at 
baseline. Perfusion within this structure is correlated with clinical markers of 
neurodegeneration, further suggesting its involvement in the development of 
presumed synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318278b658
PMCID: PMC3578380
PMID: 23115214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2957. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 May;34(5):1519.e1-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.10.001. Epub 2012 Oct 30.

Parkinson disease is not associated with C9ORF72 repeat expansions.

Harms MB(1), Neumann D, Benitez BA, Cooper B, Carrell D, Racette BA, Perlmutter 
JS, Goate A, Cruchaga C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, Saint 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hexanucleotide expansions in the C9ORF72 gene are frequently found in patients 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia or both, some of 
whom exhibit concurrent extrapyramidal symptoms. To determine if repeat 
expansions are a cause of Parkinson's disease (PD), we used repeat-primed 
polymerase chain reaction to investigate the frequency of C9ORF72 repeat 
expansions in a cohort of 478 patients with PD and 662 control subjects. Three 
control subjects were found to be expansion carriers, and no expansions were 
found among patients, suggesting that C9ORF72 expansions are not a common cause 
of PD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.10.001
PMCID: PMC3566343
PMID: 23116878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURE STATEMENT The authors disclose no 
conflicts of interest.


2958. Int J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;2012:910757. doi: 10.1155/2012/910757. Epub 2012 Oct 
18.

Cognitive profiles in Parkinson's disease and their relation to dementia: a 
data-driven approach.

Liepelt-Scarfone I(1), Gräber S, Fruhmann Berger M, Feseker A, Baysal G, Csoti 
I, Godau J, Gaenslen A, Huber H, Srulijes K, Brockmann K, Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegeneration, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tuebingen, Hoppe-Seyler Str. 3, 72076 Tuebingen, Germany 
; German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 72076 Tuebingen, Germany.

Parkinson's disease is characterized by a substantial cognitive heterogeneity, 
which is apparent in different profiles and levels of severity. To date, a 
distinct clinical profile for patients with a potential risk of developing 
dementia still has to be identified. We introduce a data-driven approach to 
detect different cognitive profiles and stages. Comprehensive neuropsychological 
data sets from a cohort of 121 Parkinson's disease patients with and without 
dementia were explored by a factor analysis to characterize different cognitive 
domains. Based on the factor scores that represent individual performance in 
each domain, hierarchical cluster analyses determined whether subgroups of 
Parkinson's disease patients show varying cognitive profiles. A six-factor 
solution accounting for 65.2% of total variance fitted best to our data and 
revealed high internal consistencies (Cronbach's alpha coefficients >0.6). The 
cluster analyses suggested two independent patient clusters with different 
cognitive profiles. They differed only in severity of cognitive impairment and 
self-reported limitation of activities of daily living function but not in motor 
performance, disease duration, or dopaminergic medication. Based on a 
data-driven approach, divers cognitive profiles were identified, which separated 
early and more advanced stages of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease 
without dementia. Importantly, these profiles were independent of motor 
progression.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/910757
PMCID: PMC3483831
PMID: 23119224


2959. Arch Med Res. 2012 Nov;43(8):645-54. doi: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.10.012. Epub 
2012 Nov 7.

Role of tau protein in neuronal damage in Alzheimer's disease and Down syndrome.

Cárdenas AM(1), Ardiles AO, Barraza N, Baéz-Matus X, Caviedes P.

Author information:
(1)Centro Interdisciplinario de Neurociencia de Valparaíso, Universidad de 
Valparaíso, Valparaíso, Chile. ana.cardenas@uv.cl

Neurodegenerative disorders constitute a growing concern worldwide. Their 
incidence has increased steadily, in particular among the elderly, a high-risk 
population that is becoming an important segment of society. Neurodegenerative 
mechanisms underlie many ailments such as Parkinson's disease, Huntington's 
disease, Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Down syndrome (DS, trisomy 21). 
Interestingly, there is increasing evidence suggesting that many such diseases 
share pathogenic mechanisms at the cellular and subcellular levels. These 
include altered protein misfolding, impaired autophagy, mitochondrial 
dysfunction, membrane damage, and altered axonal transport. Regarding AD and DS, 
the first common link comes from observations that DS patients undergo AD-like 
pathology early in adulthood. Also, the gene encoding for the amyloid precursor 
protein is present in human autosome 21 and in murine chromosome 16, an animal 
model of DS. Important functions related to preservation of normal neuronal 
architecture are impaired in both conditions. In particular, the stable assembly 
of microtubules, which is critical for the cytoskeleton, is impaired in AD and 
DS. In this process, tau protein plays a pivotal role in controlling microtubule 
stability. Abnormal tau expression and hyperphosphorylation are common features 
in both conditions, yet the mechanisms leading to these phenomena remain 
obscure. In the present report we review possible common mechanisms that may 
alter tau expression and function, in particular in relation to the effect of 
certain overexpressed DS-related genes, using cellular models of human DS. The 
latter contributes to the identification of possible therapeutic targets that 
could aid in the treatment of both AD and DS.

Copyright © 2012 IMSS. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arcmed.2012.10.012
PMID: 23142525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2960. Mov Disord. 2013 Feb;28(2):176-82. doi: 10.1002/mds.25247. Epub 2012 Nov 9.

Cumulative exposure to lead and cognition in persons with Parkinson's disease.

Weuve J(1), Press DZ, Grodstein F, Wright RO, Hu H, Weisskopf MG.

Author information:
(1)Rush Institute for Healthy Aging, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois 60612, USA. jennifer_weuve@rush.edu

Dementia is an important consequence of Parkinson's disease (PD), with few known 
modifiable risk factors. Cumulative exposure to lead, at levels experienced in 
the community, may exacerbate PD-related neural dysfunction, resulting in 
impaired cognition. Among 101 persons with PD ("cases") and, separately, 50 
persons without PD ("controls"), we evaluated cumulative lead exposure, gauged 
by tibia and patella bone lead concentrations, in relation to cognitive 
function, assessed using a telephone battery developed and validated in a 
separate sample of PD patients. We also assessed the interaction between lead 
and case-control status. After multivariable adjustment, higher tibia bone lead 
concentration among PD cases was associated with worse performance on all of the 
individual telephone tests. In particular, tibia lead levels corresponded to 
significantly worse performance on a telephone analog of the Mini-Mental State 
Examination and tests of working memory and attention. Moreover, higher tibia 
bone lead concentration was associated with significantly worse global composite 
score encompassing all the cognitive tests (P = 0.04). The magnitude of 
association per standard deviation increment in tibia bone lead level was 
equivalent to the difference in global scores among controls in our study, who 
were approximately 7 years apart in age. The tibia lead-cognition association 
was notably stronger within cases than within controls (P(difference) = 0.06). 
Patella bone lead concentration was not consistently associated with performance 
on the tests. These data provide evidence suggesting that cumulative exposure to 
lead may result in worsened cognition among persons with PD.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorders Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25247
PMCID: PMC3581753
PMID: 23143985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2961. PLoS One. 2012;7(11):e48783. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048783. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Differential sialylation of serpin A1 in the early diagnosis of Parkinson's 
disease dementia.

Jesse S(1), Lehnert S, Jahn O, Parnetti L, Soininen H, Herukka SK, Steinacker P, 
Tawfik S, Tumani H, von Arnim CA, Neumann M, Kretzschmar HA, Kulaksiz H, Lenter 
M, Wiltfang J, Ferger B, Hengerer B, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm, Germany.

The prevalence of Parkinson's disease (PD) increases with age. Up to 50% of PD 
show cognitive decline in terms of a mild cognitive impairment already in early 
stages that predict the development of dementia, which can occur in up to 80% of 
PD patients over the long term, called Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). So 
far, diagnosis of PD/PDD is made according to clinical and neuropsychological 
examinations while laboratory data is only used for exclusion of other diseases. 
The aim of this study was the identification of possible biomarkers in 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of PD, PDD and controls (CON) which predict the 
development of dementia in PD. For this, a proteomic approach optimized for CSF 
was performed using 18 clinically well characterized patients in a first step 
with subsequent validation using 84 patients. Here, we detected differentially 
sialylated isoforms of Serpin A1 as marker for differentiation of PD versus PDD 
in CSF. Performing 2D-immunoblots, all PDD patients could be identified 
correctly (sensitivity 100%). Ten out of 24 PD patients showed Serpin A1 
isoforms in a similar pattern like PDD, indicating a specificity of 58% for the 
test-procedure. In control samples, no additional isoform was detected. On the 
basis of these results, we conclude that differentially sialylated products of 
Serpin A1 are an interesting biomarker to indicate the development of a dementia 
during the course of PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0048783
PMCID: PMC3493604
PMID: 23144969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have the 
following interest: Martin Lenter, Boris Ferger and Bastian Hengerer are 
employed by CNS Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim GmbH & Co. The rights of 
the study-data belong to the Landesstiftung Baden-Württemberg (P-LS-Prot/42)as a 
patent (482-36 US, Attorney Docket No.50818/002001 and 492-37, Attorney Docket 
No.50818/003001). There are no further products in development or marketed 
products to declare. This does not alter the authors‚ adherence to all the PLOS 
ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


2962. Psychiatry Res. 2013 Aug 30;213(2):92-8. doi: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.06.001. 
Epub 2012 Nov 11.

Predicting dementia development in Parkinson's disease using Bayesian network 
classifiers.

Morales DA(1), Vives-Gilabert Y, Gómez-Ansón B, Bengoetxea E, Larrañaga P, 
Bielza C, Pagonabarraga J, Kulisevsky J, Corcuera-Solano I, Delfino M.

Author information:
(1)Computational Intelligence Group, Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Campus 
de Montegancedo, 28660 Boadilla del Monte, Madrid 28660, Spain. 
dinora.morales@fi.upm.es

Parkinson's disease (PD) has broadly been associated with mild cognitive 
impairment (PDMCI) and dementia (PDD). Researchers have studied surrogate, 
neuroanatomic biomarkers provided by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) that may 
help in the early diagnosis of this condition. In this article, four 
classification models (naïve Bayes, multivariate filter-based naïve Bayes, 
filter selective naïve Bayes and support vector machines, SVM) have been applied 
to evaluate their capacity to discriminate between cognitively intact patients 
with Parkinson's disease (PDCI), PDMCI and PDD. For this purpose, the MRI 
studies of 45 subjects (16 PDCI, 15 PDMCI and 14 PDD) were acquired and 
post-processed with Freesurfer, obtaining 112 variables (volumes of subcortical 
structures and thickness of cortical parcels) per subject. A multivariate 
filter-based naïve Bayes model was found to be the best classifier, having the 
highest cross-validated sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. Additionally, the 
most relevant variables related to dementia in PD, as predicted by our 
classifiers, were cerebral white matter, and volumes of the lateral ventricles 
and hippocampi.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2012.06.001
PMID: 23149030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2963. Subcell Biochem. 2013;61:507-25. doi: 10.1007/978-94-007-4525-4_22.

Epigenetics in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.

Marques S(1), Outeiro TF.

Author information:
(1)Cell and Molecular Neuroscience Unit, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, Av. 
Prof. Egas Moniz, 1649-028, Lisboa, Portugal.

Neurodegenerative disorders, such as Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease, are 
highly complex, due to their multifactorial origin, not only depending on 
genetic but also on environmental factors. Several genetic risk factors have 
already been associated with both the diseases, however, the precise way through 
which the environment contributes to neurodegeneration is still 
unclear.Recently, epigenetic mechanisms, such as DNA methylation, chromatin 
remodeling or miRNAs, which may induce alterations in genes expression, have 
started to be implicated in both AD and PD. Epigenetic modulation is present 
since pre-natal stages and throughout lifetime, and depends on lifestyle 
conditions and environmental exposures, and consequently could represent the 
missing link between risk factors and the development of sporadic disorders. 
This chapter will discusses the role of epigenetics in AD and PD.

DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-4525-4_22
PMID: 23150265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2964. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 May;9(3):318-25. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.11.009. Epub 
2012 Nov 13.

Alzheimer's disease pathology does not mediate the association between 
depressive symptoms and subsequent cognitive decline.

Royall DR(1), Palmer RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio, TX, USA. royall@uthscsa.edu

BACKGROUND: Depressive symptoms in nondemented individuals appear to hasten the 
progression from mild cognitive impairment to clinical Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and double the risk of incident AD. However, the mechanism(s) by which 
depression might affect this risk has not been well established. The purpose of 
this analysis was to test the hypothesis that AD pathology mediates depression's 
apparent effect on the risk of dementia conversion using longitudinally 
collected psychometric testing and autopsy data from the Honolulu-Asia Aging 
Study.
METHODS: Latent factor variables representing AD, cortical Lewy body (CLB), and 
ischemic neuropathology were tested as potential mediators of the association 
between the Center for Epidemiological Studies depression scale (CES-D) score 
and the 10-year prospective rate of cognitive decline, adjusted for baseline 
cognition, age, education, total number of medications, and brain weight at 
autopsy.
RESULTS: CES-D scores, neurofibrillary tangle counts, CLB counts, and ischemic 
lesions each made significant independent contributions to cognitive decline. 
However, CES-D scores were not significantly associated with any pathological 
variable; thus the pathological variables were not mediators of the effect of 
CES-D scores on cognitive decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Subsyndromal depressive symptoms are significantly associated with 
subsequent cognitive decline. Although the effect is relatively modest, it is 
stronger than that of amyloid-related neuropathologies and independent of that 
of neurofibrillary tangles, cortical Lewy bodies, and ischemic lesions. Our 
results argue against the role of AD-related neuropathology as a mediator of 
depression's effect on cognitive decline, but cannot rule out a significant 
mediation effect in a subset of cases, perhaps with more severe baseline 
depressive symptoms.

Copyright © 2013 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.11.009
PMCID: PMC4459124
PMID: 23154050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None.


2965. J Neuroimaging. 2014 Mar-Apr;24(2):149-54. doi: 
10.1111/j.1552-6569.2012.00774.x. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy and iodine-123 ioflupane single 
photon emission computed tomography in Lewy body diseases: complementary or 
alternative techniques?

Treglia G(1), Cason E, Cortelli P, Gabellini A, Liguori R, Bagnato A, Giordano 
A, Fagioli G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Nuclear Medicine, Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Rome, 
Italy.

PURPOSE: To compare myocardial sympathetic imaging using 
(123)I-Metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy and striatal dopaminergic 
imaging using (123)I-Ioflupane (FP-CIT) single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) in patients with suspected Lewy body diseases (LBD).
METHODS: Ninety-nine patients who performed both methods within 2 months for 
differential diagnosis between Parkinson's disease (PD) and other parkinsonism 
(n = 68) or between dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and other dementia (n = 31) 
were enrolled. Sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, positive and negative 
predictive values of both methods were calculated.
RESULTS: For (123) I-MIBG scintigraphy, the overall sensitivity, specificity, 
accuracy, positive and negative predictive values in LBD were 83%, 79%, 82%, 
86%, and 76%, respectively. For (123)I-FP-CIT SPECT, the overall sensitivity, 
specificity, accuracy, positive and negative predictive values in LBD were 93%, 
41%, 73%, 71%, and 80%, respectively. There was a statistically significant 
difference between these two methods in patients without LBD, but not in 
patients with LBD.
CONCLUSIONS: LBD usually present both myocardial sympathetic and striatal 
dopaminergic impairments. (123)I-FP-CIT SPECT presents high sensitivity in the 
diagnosis of LBD; (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy may have a complementary role in 
differential diagnosis between PD and other parkinsonism. These scintigraphic 
methods showed similar diagnostic accuracy in differential diagnosis between DLB 
and other dementia.

Copyright © 2012 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2012.00774.x
PMID: 23163913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2966. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 Jul;9(4):414-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.07.003. Epub 
2012 Nov 16.

Impact of molecular imaging on the diagnostic process in a memory clinic.

Ossenkoppele R(1), Prins ND, Pijnenburg YA, Lemstra AW, van der Flier WM, 
Adriaanse SF, Windhorst AD, Handels RL, Wolfs CA, Aalten P, Verhey FR, Verbeek 
MM, van Buchem MA, Hoekstra OS, Lammertsma AA, Scheltens P, van Berckel BN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. r.ossenkoppele@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: [(11)C]Pittsburgh compound B ([(11)C]PIB) and 
[(18)F]-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose ([(18)F]FDG) PET measure fibrillar amyloid-β 
load and glucose metabolism, respectively. We evaluated the impact of these 
tracers on the diagnostic process in a memory clinic population.
METHODS: One hundred fifty-four patients underwent paired dynamic [(11)C]PIB and 
static [(18)F]FDG PET scans shortly after completing a standard dementia 
screening. Two-year clinical follow-up data were available for 39 patients. 
Parametric PET images were assessed visually and results were reported to the 
neurologists responsible for the initial diagnosis. Outcome measures were 
(change in) clinical diagnosis and confidence in that diagnosis before and after 
disclosing PET results.
RESULTS: [(11)C]PIB scans were positive in 40 of 66 (61%) patients with a 
clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 5 of 18 (28%) patients with 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 4 of 5 (80%) patients with Lewy body dementia, 
and 3 of 10 (30%) patients with other dementias. [(18)F]FDG uptake patterns 
matched the clinical diagnosis in 38 of 66 (58%) of AD patients, and in 6 of 18 
(33%) FTD patients. PET results led to a change in diagnosis in 35 (23%) 
patients. This only occurred when prior diagnostic certainty was <90%. 
Diagnostic confidence increased from 71 ± 17% before to 87 ± 16% after PET (p < 
.001). Two-year clinical follow-up (n = 39) showed that [(11)C]PIB and 
[(18)F]FDG predicted progression to AD for patients with mild cognitive 
impairment, and that the diagnosis of dementia established after PET remained 
unchanged in 96% of patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In a memory clinic setting, combined [(11)C]PIB and [(18)F]FDG PET 
are of additional value on top of the standard diagnostic work-up, especially 
when prior diagnostic confidence is low.

Copyright © 2013 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.07.003
PMID: 23164552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2967. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2012 Dec;25(4):222-6. doi: 
10.1177/0891988712464819. Epub 2012 Nov 21.

Caregiver burden in Parkinson disease with dementia compared to Alzheimer 
disease in Korea.

Shin H(1), Youn J, Kim JS, Lee JY, Cho JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Eulji General Hospital, Eulji University School of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We compared caregiver burden in Parkinson disease with dementia (PDD) to that in 
Alzheimer disease (AD) and examined the factors contributing to the burden in 
PDD. Totally, 42 patients with PDD and 109 patients with AD and their caregivers 
participated in this study. The caregiver burden was measured using the Burden 
Interview (BI). Scores of Barthel activities of daily living (BADLs), 
Mini-Mental State Examination, Clinical Dementia Rating of patients, and score 
of Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression scale, and Euro-quality of life 
of the caregivers were examined. The Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale 
(UPDRS) and Hoehn and Yahr stage of the patients were administered to assess 
burden relating to parkinsonism on PDD. We used multiple linear regression to 
assess the predictors. The BI of caregivers was higher in PDD (47.9, Standard 
deviation [SD]: 3.8) than in AD (36.3, SD:2.1). In the AD group, the BI was 
predicted by cognitive function ((β±SE: -0.8±0.4, P value=04) and basic ADL 
status of patients (β±SE: -1.3±0.1, P<.001), depressive symptoms (β±SE: 1.1±0.1, 
P<.001), and poor quality of life (β±SE: -0.2±0.1, P=.017) in caregivers. In PDD 
group, BI was predicted only by scores of Part 1 on the UPDRS (β±SE: 2.9±1.3, 
P=.03) of patients and depressive symptoms (β±SE: 1.1±0.2, P<.001) of the 
caregivers. We concluded the caregiver burden is higher in PDD than in AD and 
factors predicting burden are different in AD and PDD. In patients with PDD, the 
neuropsychiatric problems are the major contributor to caregiver burden.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988712464819
PMID: 23172764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2968. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec 7;91(6):1144-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.10.019. Epub 
2012 Nov 21.

Exome sequencing reveals de novo WDR45 mutations causing a phenotypically 
distinct, X-linked dominant form of NBIA.

Haack TB(1), Hogarth P, Kruer MC, Gregory A, Wieland T, Schwarzmayr T, Graf E, 
Sanford L, Meyer E, Kara E, Cuno SM, Harik SI, Dandu VH, Nardocci N, Zorzi G, 
Dunaway T, Tarnopolsky M, Skinner S, Frucht S, Hanspal E, Schrander-Stumpel C, 
Héron D, Mignot C, Garavaglia B, Bhatia K, Hardy J, Strom TM, Boddaert N, 
Houlden HH, Kurian MA, Meitinger T, Prokisch H, Hayflick SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, 85748 Munich, 
Germany.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2013 Jul;28(8):1051-2.
    Mov Disord. 2013 Jul;28(8):1050.

Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA) is a group of genetic 
disorders characterized by abnormal iron deposition in the basal ganglia. We 
report that de novo mutations in WDR45, a gene located at Xp11.23 and encoding a 
beta-propeller scaffold protein with a putative role in autophagy, cause a 
distinctive NBIA phenotype. The clinical features include early-onset global 
developmental delay and further neurological deterioration (parkinsonism, 
dystonia, and dementia developing by early adulthood). Brain MRI revealed 
evidence of iron deposition in the substantia nigra and globus pallidus. Males 
and females are phenotypically similar, an observation that might be explained 
by somatic mosaicism in surviving males and germline or somatic mutations in 
females, as well as skewing of X chromosome inactivation. This clinically 
recognizable disorder is among the more common forms of NBIA, and we suggest 
that it be named accordingly as beta-propeller protein-associated 
neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.10.019
PMCID: PMC3516593
PMID: 23176820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2969. Rev Esp Med Nucl Imagen Mol. 2013 Mar;32(2):77-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.remn.2012.03.012. Epub 2012 May 18.

[Utility of early imaging of myocardial innervation scintigraphy in the 
diagnosis of Lewy Body Dementia].

[Article in Spanish]

Camacho V(1), Estorch M, Marquié M, Domènech A, Flotats A, Fernández A, Duch J, 
Geraldo LL, Deportos J, Artigas C, Lleó A, Carrió I.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Nuclear, Hospital de Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España. mcamachom@santpau.cat

The importance of accurate and early diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) lies in its pharmacological management. Delayed imaging of cardiac 
(123)I-MIBG scintigraphy allows differentiation between DLB and other 
neurodegenerative diseases with cognitive impairment. The aim of this study was 
to assess the utility of early imaging of cardiac (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy for 
differentiating DLB from others neurodegenerative disease with cognitive 
impairment.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: We assess retrospectively 106 patients (51 men, mean age 
78 years) with cognitive impairment that underwent a cardiac (123)I-MIBG study. 
Planar images were acquired in anterior view of the thorax 15min (early) and 4h 
(delayed) after tracer administration. The heart-to-mediastinum ratios (HMR) at 
15m (HMR15m) and at 4h (HMR4h) were obtained.
RESULTS: After four years, 52 patients were diagnosed of DLB.HMR15m and HMR4h 
were significantly inferior in DLB respect to the others neurodegenerative 
diseases (1,27±0,15 vs 1,76±0,15,p<0,05) and (1,14±0,13 vs 1,68±0,19,p<0.01), 
respectively. The ROC analysis showed a HMR15m cut off point of 1.56 to 
differentiated DLB from the other dementias with a sensitivity and a specificity 
of 98%.
CONCLUSIONS: Early imaging of cardiac (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy can help to 
differentiate DLB from other neurodegenerative diseases with cognitive 
impairment.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier España, S.L. y SEMNIM. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.remn.2012.03.012
PMID: 23177334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2970. Osteoporos Int. 2013 Jul;24(7):2079-97. doi: 10.1007/s00198-012-2221-5. Epub 
2012 Nov 22.

Anti-osteoporotic therapy in Denmark--predictors and demographics of poor refill 
compliance and poor persistence.

Hansen C(1), Pedersen BD, Konradsen H, Abrahamsen B.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit of Nursing, Institute of Clinical Research, Faculty of Health 
Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Campusvej 55, 5230 Odense M, Denmark. 
chansen@health.sdu.dk

In this study of 100,949 new users of oral bisphosphonates age ≥ 35 years, 
"early quitters" were found to differ from others with poor refill compliance in 
terms of socioeconomic, demographic, and treatment-related characteristics. New 
risk factors for poor compliance and persistence were identified.
INTRODUCTION: Poor compliance with anti-osteoporotic therapy is an on-going 
worldwide challenge. In this study, we hypothesized that "early quitters" differ 
in socioeconomics, demographics, co-medications, and comorbid conditions from 
other patients with low compliance.
METHODS: The study was a register-based nationwide cohort study of 
anti-osteoporotic therapy comprising 100,949 men and women. Statistical analysis 
including backward stepwise logistic regression analysis was used to explain 
causes of treatment failure and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis to estimate 
persistence of treatment.
RESULTS: It was noted that 56.6 % of the patients were persistent and compliant, 
4.7 % of the patients were persistent but "low compliant" while 38.7 % of the 
patients were "early quitters". "Early quitters" were found to differ in 
socioeconomics from "low compliant" patients. Differences concerning increased 
risk of "early quitters" were associated with high household income, subjects' 
age 71.9-79 years, living in the countryside or village, prior treatment with 
analgesics and anti-parkinson drugs, and dementia. Differences concerning 
decreased risk of "early quitters" were associated with male, living in an 
apartment, children living at home, living close to a university hospital, 
anti-osteoporotic therapy other than alendronate, number of drugs especially 
above three, pulmonary disease, collagen disease.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest a need for improved support for patients to 
facilitate the interpretation of the disease and the perception of the benefits 
and risks of treatment-to reduce the risk of "early quitters". We were able to 
identify new risk groups that may be candidates for targeted actions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-012-2221-5
PMID: 23179576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2971. Anal Bioanal Chem. 2013 Feb;405(4):1283-92. doi: 10.1007/s00216-012-6550-1. Epub 
2012 Nov 21.

Strategy for quantifying trace levels of BMAA in cyanobacteria by LC/MS/MS.

Jiang L(1), Johnston E, Aberg KM, Nilsson U, Ilag LL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Analytical Chemistry, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden. 
liying.jiang@anchem.su.se

The cyanobacterial neurotoxin β-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) is an amino acid 
that is putatively associated with the pathology of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/Parkinsonism-dementia complex (ALS-PDC) disease. It raises serious 
health risk concerns since cyanobacteria are ubiquitous thus making human 
exposure almost inevitable. The identification and quantification of BMAA in 
cyanobacteria is challenging because it is present only in trace amounts and 
occurs alongside structurally similar compounds such as BMAA isomers. This work 
describes an enhanced liquid chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry platform 
that can distinguish BMAA from its isomers β-amino-N-methyl-alanine, 
N-(2-aminoethyl) glycine (AEG), and 2,4-diaminobutyric acid, thus ensuring 
confident identification of BMAA. The method's sensitivity was improved fourfold 
by a post-column addition of acetonitrile. The instrument and method limits of 
detection were shown to be 4.2 fmol/injection (or 0.5 pg/one column) and 0.1 
μg/g dry weight of cyanobacteria, respectively. The quantification method uses 
synthesized deuterated BMAA as an internal standard and exhibits good linearity, 
accuracy, and precision. Matrix effects were also investigated, revealing an ion 
enhancement of around 18 %. A lab-cultured cyanobacterial sample (Leptolyngbya 
PCC73110) was analyzed and shown to contain about 0.73 μg/g dry weight BMAA. The 
isomer AEG, whose chromatographic properties closely resemble those of BMAA, was 
also detected. These results highlight the importance of distinguishing BMAA 
from its isomers for reliable identification as well as providing a sensitive 
and accurate quantification method for measuring trace levels of BMAA in 
cyanobacterial samples.

DOI: 10.1007/s00216-012-6550-1
PMID: 23180086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2972. J Neurol. 2013 Apr;260(4):1031-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6752-7. Epub 2012 Nov 
21.

MM2 subtype of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease may underlie the clinical 
presentation of progressive supranuclear palsy.

Petrovic IN(1), Martin-Bastida A, Massey L, Ling H, O'Sullivan SS, Williams DR, 
Holton JL, Revesz T, Ironside JW, Lees AJ, Silveira-Moriyama L.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, 1 Wakefield St, London, WC1N 1PJ, UK. igor.n.petrovic@gmail.com

The classical presentation of sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD) is rapid 
progressive dementia often associated with myoclonus and ataxia followed by 
death in less than a year from diagnosis. The few patients in the literature who 
presented with parkinsonism and who were suspected to have progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) all ran a malignant course and most of them died within 
3 years of diagnosis. We screened the Queen Square Brain Bank database and, 
among 213 patients with a clinical diagnosis of PSP, we found ten patients with 
3 years or less disease duration, including one patient with CJD pathology. We 
report this patient and review other similar cases from the literature. Ten 
additional cases with similar presentation were identified in the literature. 
The mean disease duration was 24.2 months. The classical clinical, radiological 
and laboratory findings for sCJD were absent in the majority of these cases. 
Clinical presentation of these patients consists of: early falls, prominent 
dementia, early vertical supranuclear gaze palsy and symmetric akinetic 
syndrome. In the patients who were subtyped at post-mortem, all four represented 
the MM2 subtype of sCJD. A rapidly progressive course of PSP with early falls, 
cognitive impairments and vertical supranuclear gaze palsy should raise 
suspicion of underlying sCJD pathology regardless of absence of supportive 
findings on ancillary tests. This case and the literature support the notion 
that biochemical properties of the prion protein can influence the clinical 
presentation of sCJD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-012-6752-7
PMID: 23180183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2973. Alzheimers Dement. 2013 Jan;9(1):76-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.02.007. Epub 
2012 Nov 22.

Vascular disease and dementias: paradigm shifts to drive research in new 
directions.

Kling MA(1), Trojanowski JQ, Wolk DA, Lee VM, Arnold SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. mitchel.kling@uphs.upenn.edu

Vascular disease was once considered the principal cause of aging-related 
dementia. More recently, however, research emphasis has shifted to studies of 
progressive neurodegenerative disease processes, such as those giving rise to 
neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and Lewy bodies. Although these 
studies have led to critical insights and potential therapeutic strategies, 
interest in the role of systemic and cerebrovascular disease mechanisms waned 
and has received relatively less attention and research support. Recent studies 
suggest that vascular disease mechanisms play an important role in the risk for 
aging-related cognitive decline and disorders. Vascular disease frequently 
coexists with cognitive decline in aging individuals, shares many risk factors 
with dementias considered to be of the "Alzheimer type," and is observed more 
frequently than expected in postmortem material from individuals manifesting 
"specific" disease stigmata, such as abundant plaques and tangles. Considerable 
difficulties have emerged in attempting to classify dementias as being related 
to vascular versus neurodegenerative causes, and several systems of criteria 
have been used. Despite multiple attempts, a lack of consensus remains regarding 
the optimal means of incorporating vascular disease into clinical diagnostic, 
neurocognitive, or neuropathologic classification schemes for dementias. We 
propose here an integrative, rather than a strictly taxonomic, approach to the 
study and elucidation of how vascular disease mechanisms contribute to the 
development of dementias. We argue that, instead of discriminating between, for 
example, "Alzheimer's disease," "vascular dementia," and other diseases, there 
is a greater need to focus clinical and research efforts on elucidating specific 
pathophysiologic mechanisms that contribute to dementia phenotypes and 
neuropathologic outcomes. We outline a multitiered strategy, beginning with 
clinical and public health interventions that can be implemented immediately, 
enhancements to ongoing longitudinal studies to increase their informative 
value, and new initiatives to capitalize on recent advances in systems biology 
and network medicine. This strategy will require funding from multiple public 
and private sources to support collaborative and interdisciplinary research 
efforts to take full advantage of these opportunities and realize their societal 
benefits.

Copyright © 2013 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2012.02.007
PMCID: PMC3640817
PMID: 23183137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2974. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Mar;19(3):379-81. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.10.001. Epub 2012 Nov 24.

Unilateral spatial neglect and alien limb phenomenon may be early features of 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Zannino S, Liguori C, Albanese M, Placidi F, Izzi F, Palmieri MG, Marciani MG, 
Mercuri NB, Romigi A.

Comment in
    Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Mar;19(3):378.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2012.10.001
PMID: 23183328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2975. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 2012 Dec;45(8):761-71; quiz 772-3. doi: 
10.1007/s00391-012-0399-y.

[Guideline-based diagnosis of dementia etiology].

[Article in German]

Hofmann W(1).

Author information:
(1)FEK Friedrich-Ebert-Krankenhaus Neumünster GmbH, Friesenstr. 11, 24534, 
Neumünster. werner.hofmann@fek.de

Dementia encompasses a variety of underlying conditions among which Alzheimer's 
disease represents the most common cause and in addition, vascular and 
Parkinson's disease dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies and frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration. All the current guidelines specify a two-step procedure for the 
diagnostics of dementia. The first step entails performing a comprehensive 
description, diagnosis and confirmation of the syndrome. The presented article 
focuses on the second step: diagnosis of the etiology. This review gives an 
overview of the current diagnostic approaches including the new proposals of the 
biomarker in cerebrospinal fluid.

DOI: 10.1007/s00391-012-0399-y
PMID: 23184302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2976. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):851-4. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.851.

[Neuropathology of mild cognitive impairment].

[Article in Japanese]

Takao M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology (The Brain Bank for Aging Research), Tokyo 
Metropolitan Geriatric Hospital and Institute of Gerontology.

The concept of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is clinical condition between 
normal cognition and dementia. Annual rate of conversion from MCI to dementia is 
estimated as 10-15%. It must be emphasized that all MCI will not be potential 
patients of dementing illness. Most studies have been focused on amnestic-MCI as 
preclinical condition of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Along with the increase 
number of analyses, MCI is divided in four categories according to clinical 
presentation such as amnestic-MCI, amnestic-MCI with multiple domains, non 
amnestic-MCI with single domain and non amnestic-MCI with multiple domains. In 
general, the underlying disease of amnestic-MCI with multiple domains may be AD, 
cerebrovascular disorders (CVDs), metabolic disease or depression. Non 
amnestic-MCI may be frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy body, CVDs and 
metabolic disorders. In fact, neuropathologic evidence of MCI revealed the 
presence of various types of pathologic change. Those pathologic changes include 
an accumulation of tau, amyloid beta, α-synuclein, TDP-43 and FUS protein with 
various degrees. It is not unusual condition that several different types of 
pathology are observed in a single individual. Besides neurodegenerative 
pathology, CVDs and hippocampus sclerosis significantly contribute the cognitive 
condition of MCI. To realize the complexity of neuropathologic alterations of 
MCI is important for early intervention of dementia indivisuals.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.851
PMID: 23196441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2977. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):965-7. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.965.

[Depression, motor function and cognitive function in epidemiological study].

[Article in Japanese]

Wada K(1), Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Brain and Neurosciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University.

With the striking increase in the number of elderly people in Japan, dementia 
has not only become a medical but also a social issue. Recently we have reported 
a crude prevalence of dementia in Ama-cho, a rural island town to be 16.4% in 
elderly people aged 65 years or older. Observational studies have identified a 
wide range of potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia, including 
cardiovascular risk factors, depression and low level of physical or mental 
activity. Several studies have demonstrated an association between mild 
parkinsonian signs (MPS) and incident dementia. We have reported a crude 
prevalence of subjects with MPS to be 22.1% in elderly people aged 60 years or 
older in Ama-cho. The actigraphic activity counts measured by Actiwatch were 
significantly reduced in the subjects with severe MPS-severe and a close 
relationship between MPS and depression was shown in this cohort. Each of 
depression, motor dysfunction and cognitive dysfunction might affect each other 
in development of dementia, and was associated with organic changes of brain 
accompany with modifiable risk factors for dementia. Randomized control trials 
of multimodal risk factor reduction strategies to prevent dementia are needed.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.965
PMID: 23196484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2978. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):1098-9. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.1098.

[The indication of DBS in Parkinson' disease (from a neurological standpoint)].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamada H(1).

Author information:
(1)Yokohama Neurology Clinic.

Deep brain stimulation of subthalamic nucleus (STN-DBS) is currently the most 
common therapeutic surgical treatment for patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) 
who have failed medical management. The percentage improvement in Unified 
Parkinson's disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) part II (activities of daily living) 
and III (motor) scores was more than 50%. Furthermore, levodopa-induced 
dyskinesias are dramatically improved because STN stimulation permits an 
approximately 50% reduction in antiparkinsonian treatment. How should we decide 
an appropriate candidate for DBS? It seems that there is a little difference 
about indication of DBS between neurosurgeons and neurologists. Since the 
efficacy of DBS is the improvement in dopaminergic drug-sensitive motor 
symptoms, we offer surgery to patients only when medical therapy has failed; (1) 
severe motor fluctuations, (2) severe dyskinesia, (3) tremor uncontrollable by 
medications, (4) painful dystonia, (5) side-effect for medication (drug-induced 
psychosis, nausea, vomitting). Taking account of contraindications is important 
to get successful outcome of the surgery. Dementia, cognitive deficits and 
psychosis (not drug-induced) are not improved by DBS. When patients are not able 
to see experienced doctors who manage in programming and dealing with 
postoperative problems, they are not appropriate candidates. Though benefit to 
mobility is evident, a risk-benefit assessment should to be made for each 
patient.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.1098
PMID: 23196528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2979. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):1390-2. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.1390.

[Hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with neuroaxonal spheroids (HDLS) in 
early-onset dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Tamaoka A(1), Mochizuki A, Ishii A, Yamaguchi T, Akamatsu M, Takuma H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Division of Clinical Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, 
University of Tsukuba.

By reviewing and collating data in a 2-step postal survey sent to all of the 
institutions for individuals with dementia in Ibaraki prefecture requesting 
information on early-onset dementia (EOD) cases, 617 subjects with EOD were 
identified. The estimated prevalence of EOD in the target population was 42.3 
per 100,000. Of the illness causing EOD, vascular dementia was the most frequent 
followed by Alzheimer's disease, head trauma, dementia with Lewy 
body/Parkinson's disease with dementia, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, and 
other causes. On the other hand, hereditary diffuse leucoencephalopathy with 
spheroids (HDLS) is an autosomal-dominant central nervous system white matter 
disease with variable phenotypes. The onset of symptoms is usually in the fourth 
or fifth decade, progressing to dementia with death within 6 years. Recently, 
several mutations of the colony stimulating factor 1 receptor encoded by CSF1R 
segregating HDLS were identified. Since clinical presentations varied 
substantially within and across families with HDLS, CSF1R mutation carriers may 
be present in clinical series of Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration, corticobasal syndrome, multiple sclerosis, CADASIL, Parkinson's 
disease and ischemic stroke with additional white matter changes, all causing 
EOD. In the differential diagnosis of EOD, we should always consider HDLS and if 
necessary perform CSF1R gene analysis.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.1390
PMID: 23196629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2980. EPMA J. 2011 Dec;2(4):451-8. doi: 10.1007/s13167-011-0096-8. Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder as a long-term predictor of 
neurodegenerative disorders.

Fulda S(1).

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Kraepelinstraße 2-10, 80804 Munich, 
Germany.

REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia characterized by 
dream-enacting behavior and loss of muscle atonia during REM sleep. Idiopathic 
RBD occurs in the absence of any neurological disease or other possible cause, 
is male-predominant and its clinical course is generally chronic progressive. 
Secondary RBD may be related to neurodegenerative disorders such as multiple 
system atrophy, Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia. Recent long-term 
prospective studies have shown that 30% to 65% of patients with idiopathic RBD 
will eventually develop a neurodegenerative disorder with the rate of emergence 
depending on the length of the follow-up period. RBD may therefore be one of the 
earliest signs of and/or a long-term predictor for neurodegenerative disorders. 
Because RBD antecedes the development of these disorders by several years or 
decades, its recognition may enable the delay or prevention of neurodegenerative 
disorders through the early application of neuroprotective or disease-modifying 
therapies in the future.

DOI: 10.1007/s13167-011-0096-8
PMCID: PMC3405405
PMID: 23199180


2981. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2012;34(5-6):312-8. doi: 10.1159/000345537. Epub 
2012 Dec 3.

Spectroscopic changes associated with mild cognitive impairment and dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Pagonabarraga J(1), Gómez-Ansón B, Rotger R, Llebaria G, García-Sánchez C, 
Pascual-Sedano B, Gironell A, Delfino M, Ruscalleda J, Kulisevsky J.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.

Frontal subcortical cognitive defects are predominant in Parkinson's disease 
(PD). Temporal lobe dysfunction seems more relevant for progression to dementia. 
We aimed to study the relative importance of temporal lobe defects versus 
executive impairment in the progression to dementia in PD by using proton 
magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS). The (1)H-MRS features of PD patients 
with intact cognition (PD-CgInt; n = 16), mild cognitive impairment (MCI; n = 
15) and dementia (PDD; n = 15) were compared, to delineate the metabolic 
alterations correlating with cognitive status. Metabolite concentrations were 
acquired from voxels localized to the hippocampus and dorsolateral prefrontal 
cortex (DL-PFC). Cognitive status was established following the Movement 
Disorder Society PDD criteria, administering the Clinical Dementia Rating Scale 
and Mattis Dementia Rating Scale. The Parkinson's Disease Cognitive Rating Scale 
(PD-CRS) was used to correlate (1)H-MRS with neuropsychology. N-acetylaspartate 
(NAA) concentrations in the right DL-PFC were decreased in PD-MCI compared with 
PD-CgInt patients (p = 0.002), and correlated with frontal subcortical tasks. 
Decreased NAA concentrations in the left hippocampus in PDD compared to PD-MCI 
(p = 0.03) correlated with confrontation naming. The present findings support 
that executive impairment is related to dorsolateral prefrontal dysfunction from 
the early stages, while progression to dementia is linked to the additional 
impairment of temporal lobe structures. The PD-CRS was able to capture the 
differential impairment of prefrontal versus temporal cortical areas.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000345537
PMID: 23208306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2982. Brain. 2013 Jan;136(Pt 1):43-64. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws307. Epub 2012 Dec 2.

The spectrum of disease in chronic traumatic encephalopathy.

McKee AC(1), Stern RA, Nowinski CJ, Stein TD, Alvarez VE, Daneshvar DH, Lee HS, 
Wojtowicz SM, Hall G, Baugh CM, Riley DO, Kubilus CA, Cormier KA, Jacobs MA, 
Martin BR, Abraham CR, Ikezu T, Reichard RR, Wolozin BL, Budson AE, Goldstein 
LE, Kowall NW, Cantu RC.

Author information:
(1)United States Department of Veterans Affairs, VA Boston Healthcare System, 
Boston, MA 02130, USA. ann.mckee@va.gov

Erratum in
    Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):e255.

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy is a progressive tauopathy that occurs as a 
consequence of repetitive mild traumatic brain injury. We analysed post-mortem 
brains obtained from a cohort of 85 subjects with histories of repetitive mild 
traumatic brain injury and found evidence of chronic traumatic encephalopathy in 
68 subjects: all males, ranging in age from 17 to 98 years (mean 59.5 years), 
including 64 athletes, 21 military veterans (86% of whom were also athletes) and 
one individual who engaged in self-injurious head banging behaviour. Eighteen 
age- and gender-matched individuals without a history of repetitive mild 
traumatic brain injury served as control subjects. In chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy, the spectrum of hyperphosphorylated tau pathology ranged in 
severity from focal perivascular epicentres of neurofibrillary tangles in the 
frontal neocortex to severe tauopathy affecting widespread brain regions, 
including the medial temporal lobe, thereby allowing a progressive staging of 
pathology from stages I-IV. Multifocal axonal varicosities and axonal loss were 
found in deep cortex and subcortical white matter at all stages of chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy. TAR DNA-binding protein 43 immunoreactive inclusions 
and neurites were also found in 85% of cases, ranging from focal pathology in 
stages I-III to widespread inclusions and neurites in stage IV. Symptoms in 
stage I chronic traumatic encephalopathy included headache and loss of attention 
and concentration. Additional symptoms in stage II included depression, 
explosivity and short-term memory loss. In stage III, executive dysfunction and 
cognitive impairment were found, and in stage IV, dementia, word-finding 
difficulty and aggression were characteristic. Data on athletic exposure were 
available for 34 American football players; the stage of chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy correlated with increased duration of football play, survival 
after football and age at death. Chronic traumatic encephalopathy was the sole 
diagnosis in 43 cases (63%); eight were also diagnosed with motor neuron disease 
(12%), seven with Alzheimer's disease (11%), 11 with Lewy body disease (16%) and 
four with frontotemporal lobar degeneration (6%). There is an ordered and 
predictable progression of hyperphosphorylated tau abnormalities through the 
nervous system in chronic traumatic encephalopathy that occurs in conjunction 
with widespread axonal disruption and loss. The frequent association of chronic 
traumatic encephalopathy with other neurodegenerative disorders suggests that 
repetitive brain trauma and hyperphosphorylated tau protein deposition promote 
the accumulation of other abnormally aggregated proteins including TAR 
DNA-binding protein 43, amyloid beta protein and alpha-synuclein.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws307
PMCID: PMC3624697
PMID: 23208308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2983. Brain Nerve. 2012 Dec;64(12):1365-75.

[Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Wada K(1), Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Brain and Neurosciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

Parkinson's disease (PD), a neurodegenerative disease, has been traditionally 
defined by its characteristic motor symptoms. Non-motor symptoms, including mood 
disorder, psychosis, sleep disturbance, autonomic dysfunction, and cognitive 
impairment, have being recently recognized as symptoms of PD. Cognitive 
impairment or dementia is one of the critical symptoms during the advanced 
stages of PD and is associated with increased disability and reduced quality of 
life of both patients and caregivers. The point prevalence of dementia in PD is 
about 30%, and its incidence rate in PD patients is 4-6 times higher than that 
in age-matched controls. The term mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has been 
adopted to describe the potential prodromal stage of dementia in PD, which has 
been gaining increasing attention. Several studies have reported the clinical 
features, epidemiology, biomarkers, and neuropathology of MCI in PD; however, 
neither the precise definitions nor the employed criteria were consistent across 
these studies. Recently, the Movement Disorder Society Task Force proposed new 
diagnostic criteria for MCI in PD to allow clinicians to identify PD patients 
with increased risk of dementia. Further studies are needed to validate the 
proposed criteria in daily clinical practice.

PMID: 23209063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2984. Transl Neurodegener. 2012 Jan 13;1(1):5. doi: 10.1186/2047-9158-1-5.

Neuroimaging in the early diagnosis of neurodegenerative disease.

Stoessl AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Pacific Parkinson's Research Centre, University of British Columbia & 
Vancouver Coastal Health, 2221 Wesbrook Mall, Vancouver, BC, V6T 2B5, Canada. 
jstoessl@mail.ubc.ca.

Functional imaging may be useful for both the early diagnosis as well as 
preclinical detection of neurodegenerative disease. Additionally, while 
structural imaging has traditionally been regarded as a tool to exclude 
alternate diagnoses, recent advances in magnetic resonance show promise for 
greater diagnostic specificity. The role of MR and radionuclide imaging in early 
diagnosis and preclinical detection of dementia and parkinsonism are reviewed 
here.

DOI: 10.1186/2047-9158-1-5
PMCID: PMC3506998
PMID: 23211024


2985. Int Psychogeriatr. 2013 May;25(5):843-9. doi: 10.1017/S1041610212002189. Epub 
2012 Dec 5.

Capgras syndrome in Dementia with Lewy Bodies.

Thaipisuttikul P(1), Lobach I, Zweig Y, Gurnani A, Galvin JE.

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Center on Brain Aging, Alzheimer Disease Center, New York 
University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Capgras syndrome is characterized by the recurrent, transient belief 
that a person has been replaced by an identical imposter. We reviewed clinical 
characteristics of Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) patients with Capgras 
syndrome compared to those without Capgras.
METHODS: We identified 55 consecutive DLB patients (11 cases with Capgras 
syndrome (DLB-C) and 44 cases without evidence of Capgras (DLB). Semi-structured 
interviews with the patient and an informant, neurological exams, and 
neuropsychological testing were performed. Caregivers were assessed for 
caregiver burden and depression. Primary comparisons were made between DLB-C and 
DLB. Exploratory analyses using stepwise logistic regression and bootstrap 
analyses were performed to determine clinical features associated with Capgras.
RESULTS: DLB-C patients experienced more visual hallucinations and self-reported 
anxiety, had higher scores on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, and were less 
likely to be treated with cholinesterase inhibitors at time of initial 
evaluation. Extrapyramidal symptoms and depression were not associated with 
Capgras. Caregivers of DLB-C patients had higher caregiver burden. DLB-C was 
associated with self-reported anxiety (OR = 10.9; 95% CI = 2.6-47.6). In a 
bootstrap analysis, clinical findings that were predictors of Capgras included 
visual hallucinations (log(OR) = 18.3; 95% CI = 17.9-19.3) and anxiety (log(OR) 
= 2.9; 95% CI = 0.31-20.2).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that Capgras syndrome is common in DLB and 
usually occurs in the presence of anxiety and visual hallucinations, suggesting 
related etiopathogenesis. Early appreciation of Capgras syndrome may afford the 
opportunity to alleviate caregiver burden and improve patient and caregiver 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610212002189
PMCID: PMC4004517
PMID: 23211760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2986. J Neurol. 2013 Apr;260(4):1099-103. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6767-0. Epub 2012 
Dec 2.

The applause sign in cortical and cortical-subcortical dementia.

Isella V(1), Rucci F, Traficante D, Mapelli C, Ferri F, Appollonio IM.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Section, University of Milan Bicocca, Monza, Italy. 
valeria.isella@unimib.it

The "applause sign" is a motor perseveration described in focal and 
neurodegenerative disorders and characterized by fronto-subcortical dysfunction. 
Most previous formal investigations focused on Parkinson's disease or 
progressive supranuclear palsy. We assessed the prevalence of the applause sign 
in patients affected by Alzheimer's disease (AD), Lewy body dementia (LBD), 
corticobasal syndrome (CBS), and posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), with the aim 
to verify its contribution to the differential diagnosis. We enrolled 20 
patients with AD, 20 with LBD, 16 with CBS, and ten with PCA, and 30 healthy 
controls. The three clap test (TCT) was used to elicit the applause sign, and 
was scored by raters blinded to the diagnosis. Correlation with motor 
(extrapyramidal) and cognitive measures was also performed. A maximum 40 % 
prevalence of a positive applause sign was found in the two parkinsonian 
syndromes, which could be discriminated from the two cortical groups with a 
positive predictive value of 82 % and a negative predictive value of 55 %. 
According to our findings, a diagnosis of LBD or CBS, rather than of AD or PCA, 
is highly probable in the presence of an abnormal TCP, but cannot be ruled out 
based on a negative result. No relevant correlates emerged that could clarify 
the origin and nature of the applause sign.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-012-6767-0
PMID: 23212756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2987. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2012 Dec;10(6):381-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.11.001.

Atypical antipsychotic use and parkinsonism in dementia: effects of drug, dose, 
and sex.

Marras C(1), Herrmann N, Anderson GM, Fischer HD, Wang X, Rochon PA.

Author information:
(1)Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Centre, Toronto Western 
Hospital, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. cmarras@uhnres.utoronto.ca

BACKGROUND: Differences between atypical antipsychotics in their potential to 
cause parkinsonism and risk factors for antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism are 
not well established. There is a particular paucity of information on this in 
real-world use of these drugs, outside of clinical trial settings.
OBJECTIVE: We compared the incidence of parkinsonism after new treatment with 
risperidone, olanzapine, or quetiapine in patients with dementia and examined 
the effects of dose and sex on the risk of parkinsonism.
METHODS: Administrative data from Ontario, Canada between 2002 and 2010 were 
used to compare the incidence of a diagnostic code for parkinsonism or 
prescription of an anti-Parkinson medication among patients with dementia who 
were newly prescribed quetiapine, olanzapine, or risperidone.
RESULTS: From 15,939 person-years of observation, 421 patients developed 
parkinsonism. Using low-dose risperidone as the reference group, the adjusted 
hazard ratios for developing parkinsonism were 0.49 (95% CI, 0.07-3.53) for 
low-dose olanzapine and 1.18 (95% CI, 0.84-1.66) for low-dose quetiapine. 
Comparing across drugs within the most commonly prescribed dose ranges, the 
incidence of parkinsonism was higher in the medium-dose olanzapine group 
compared with the low-dose risperidone group (hazard ratio 1.66; 95% CI 
23-2.23). The adjusted hazard ratio for developing parkinsonism for men 
(compared with women) was 2.29 (95% CI, 1.88- 2.79).
CONCLUSIONS: We found no evidence that the risk of drug-induced parkinsonism in 
older adults with dementia was different among quetiapine, olanzapine, or 
risperidone, challenging the notion that the drugs differed in their propensity 
to cause parkinsonism. Men appeared to be at higher risk of parkinsonism as a 
adverse event than women.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier HS Journals, Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2012.11.001
PMID: 23217531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2988. Sleep Med. 2013 Feb;14(2):131-5. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.10.011. Epub 2012 Dec 
3.

Clinical significance of REM sleep behavior disorder in Parkinson's disease.

Nomura T(1), Inoue Y, Kagimura T, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Brain and Neurosciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Japan.

Comment in
    Sleep Med. 2013 Feb;14(2):129-30.

OBJECTIVE: Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) may be a risk 
factor for dementia development in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD); 
however, the role of subclinical RBD remains unknown. Patients with PD and 
clinical RBD, subclinical RBD, or with normal REM sleep were examined in a cross 
sectional study and a longitudinal follow-up.
METHODS: Interviews regarding RBD symptoms and polysomnographies were performed 
on 82 PD patients divided into RBD subcategories based on the presence/absence 
of REM sleep without atonia (RWA) and/or RBD symptoms. Descriptive variables 
were compared and patients were followed-up longitudinally for 21.4±10.8months.
RESULTS: The existence of RBD, but not subclinical RBD, was associated with 
orthostatic hypotension and levodopa dose equivalents (LDEs) in patients with 
PD. Kaplan-Myer curves indicated that the occurrence of dementia in the PD group 
with clinical RBD was significantly faster than in the PD group with normal REM 
sleep (p=0.013). A Cox hazard regression analysis revealed that development to 
PD with dementia was only significantly associated with the presence of clinical 
RBD (hazard ratio: 14.1, p=0.017).
CONCLUSION: Clinical RBD symptoms, but not subclinical RBD, were associated with 
the development of dementia in PD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.10.011
PMID: 23218532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2989. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2013;961:213-22. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4756-6_18.

Genetically modified mice as a strategy to unravel the role played by the 
Na(+)/Ca (2+) exchanger in brain ischemia and in spatial learning and memory 
deficits.

Molinaro P(1), Cataldi M, Cuomo O, Viggiano D, Pignataro G, Sirabella R, Secondo 
A, Boscia F, Pannaccione A, Scorziello A, Sokolow S, Herchuelz A, Di Renzo G, 
Annunziato L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Federico II University of Naples, Naples, Italy.

Because no isoform-specific blocker of NCX has ever been synthesized, a more 
selective strategy to identify the role of each antiporter isoform in the brain 
was represented by the generation of knockout and knockin mice for the different 
isoforms of the antiporter.Experiments performed in NCX2 and NCX3 knockout mice 
provided evidence that these two isoforms participate in spatial learning and 
memory consolidation, although in an opposite manner. These new data from 
ncx2-/- and ncx3-/- mice may open new experimental avenues for the development 
of effective therapeutic compounds that, by selectively inhibiting or activating 
these molecular targets, could treat patients affected by cognitive impairment 
including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, Huntington's diseases, and infarct 
dementia.More importantly, knockout and knockin mice also provided new relevant 
information on the role played by NCX in maintaining the intracellular Na(+) and 
Ca(2+) homeostasis and in protecting neurons during brain ischemia. In 
particular, both ncx2-/- and ncx3-/- mice showed an increased neuronal 
vulnerability after the ischemic insult induced by transient middle cerebral 
artery occlusion.As the ubiquitous deletion of NCX1 brings about to an early 
death of embryos because of a lack of heartbeat, this strategy could not be 
successfully pursued. However, information on the role of NCX1 in normal and 
ischemic brain could be obtained by developing conditional knockout mice lacking 
NCX1 in the brain. Preliminarily results obtained in these conditional mice 
suggest that also NCX1 protects neurons from ischemic cell death.Overall, the 
use of genetic-modified mice for NCX1, NCX2, and NCX3 represents a fruitful 
strategy to characterize the physiological role exerted by NCX in CNS and to 
identify the isoforms of the antiporter as potential molecular targets for 
therapeutic intervention in cerebral ischemia.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4614-4756-6_18
PMID: 23224882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2990. Mov Disord. 2013 Feb;28(2):232-236. doi: 10.1002/mds.25248. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

The glucocerobrosidase E326K variant predisposes to Parkinson's disease, but 
does not cause Gaucher's disease.

Duran R(#)(1), Mencacci NE(#)(1)(2), Angeli AV(3), Shoai M(1), Deas E(1), 
Houlden H(1), Mehta A(4), Hughes D(4), Cox TM(5), Deegan P(5), Schapira AH(6), 
Lees AJ(1), Limousin P(3), Jarman PR(3), Bhatia KP(3), Wood NW(1), Hardy J(1), 
Foltynie T(3).

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Laboratories and Departments of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, London, UK.
(2)Department of Neurology and Laboratory of Neuroscience, "Dino Ferrari" 
Center, Universitá degli Studi di Milano, IRCCS Istituto Auxologico Italiano, 
Milan, Italy.
(3)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL Institute 
of Neurology, London, UK.
(4)Lysosomal Storage Disorders Unit, Department of Haematology, UCL Medical 
School, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(5)Lysosomal Diseases Unit, Addenbrookes Hospital, and Department of Medicine, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(6)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Institute of Neurology, UCL Medical 
School, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(#)Contributed equally

BACKGROUND: Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the acid 
beta-glucocerebrosidase (GBA1) gene, responsible for the recessive lysosomal 
storage disorder, Gaucher's disease (GD), are the strongest known risk factor 
for Parkinson's disease (PD). Our aim was to assess the contribution of GBA1 
mutations in a series of early-onset PD.
METHODS: One hundred and eighty-five PD patients (with an onset age of ≤50) and 
283 age-matched controls were screened for GBA1 mutations by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We show that the frequency of GBA1 mutations is much higher in this 
patient series than in typical late-onset patient cohorts. Furthermore, our 
results reveal that the most prevalent PD-associated GBA1 mutation is E326K, a 
variant that does not, when homozygous, cause GD.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm recent reports that the mutation, E326K, 
predisposes to PD and suggest that, in addition to reduced GBA1 activity, other 
molecular mechanisms may contribute to the development of the disease.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorders Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25248
PMCID: PMC4208290
PMID: 23225227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2991. Mov Disord. 2013 Feb;28(2):169-75. doi: 10.1002/mds.25286. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

β-Amyloid in Lewy body disease is related to Alzheimer's disease-like atrophy.

Shimada H(1), Shinotoh H, Hirano S, Miyoshi M, Sato K, Tanaka N, Ota T, Fukushi 
K, Irie T, Ito H, Higuchi M, Kuwabara S, Suhara T.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Imaging Center, Molecular Neuroimaging Program, National Institute 
of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan.

The aim of this study was to investigate whether amyloid deposition is 
associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD)-like cortical atrophy in Lewy body (LB) 
disease (LBD). Participants included 15 LBD with dementia patients (8 with 
dementia with Lewy bodies [DLB] and 7 with Parkinson's disease [PD] with 
dementia [PDD]), 13 AD patients, and 17 healthy controls. Age, gender, and 
Mini-Mental State Examination scores were matched between patient groups. All 
subjects underwent PET scans with [(11)C]Pittsburgh Compound B to measure brain 
amyloid deposition as well as three-dimensional T1-weighted MRI. Gray-matter 
volumes (GMVs) were estimated by voxel-based morphometry. Volumes-of-interest 
analyses were also performed. Forty percent of the 15 DLB/PDD patients were 
amyloid positive, whereas all AD patients and none of the healthy controls were 
amyloid positive. Amyloid-positive DLB/PDD and AD patients showed very similar 
patterns of cortical atrophy in the parahippocampal area and lateral temporal 
and parietal cortices, with 95.2% of cortical atrophy distribution being 
overlapped. In contrast, amyloid-negative DLB/PDD patients had no significant 
cortical atrophy. Compared to healthy controls, parahippocampal GMVs were 
reduced by 26% in both the amyloid-positive DLB/PDD and AD groups and by 10% in 
the amyloid-negative DLB/PDD group. The results suggest that amyloid deposition 
is associated with AD-like atrophy in DLB/PDD patients. Early intervention 
against amyloid may prevent or delay AD-like atrophy in DLB/PDD patients with 
amyloid deposition.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorders Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25286
PMID: 23225334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2992. J Hand Ther. 2013 Apr-Jun;26(2):148-54; quiz 155. doi: 
10.1016/j.jht.2012.11.001. Epub 2012 Dec 8.

Management of upper extremity dysfunction in people with Parkinson disease and 
Huntington disease: facilitating outcomes across the disease lifespan.

Quinn L(1), Busse M, Dal Bello-Haas V.

Author information:
(1)School of Healthcare Studies, Cardiff University, Ty Dewi Sant, Heath Park, 
Cardiff CF14 4XN, Wales, UK. QuinnL1@cardiff.ac.uk

Parkinson Disease (PD) and Huntington Disease (HD) are degenerative neurological 
diseases, which can result in impairments and activity limitations affecting the 
upper extremities from early in the disease process. The progressive nature of 
these diseases poses unique challenges for therapists aiming to effectively 
maximize physical functioning and minimize participation restrictions in these 
patient groups. Research is underway in both diseases to develop effective 
disease-modifying agents and pharmacological interventions, as well as 
mobility-focused rehabilitation protocols. Rehabilitation, and in particular 
task-specific interventions, has the potential to influence the upper extremity 
functional abilities of patients with these degenerative conditions. However to 
date, investigations of interventions specifically addressing upper extremity 
function have been limited in both PD, and in particular HD. In this paper, we 
provide an update of the known pathological features of PD and HD as they relate 
to upper extremity function. We further review the available literature on the 
use of outcome measures, and the clinical management of upper extremity function 
in both conditions. Due to the currently limited evidence base in both diseases, 
we recommend utilization of a clinical management framework specific for 
degenerative conditions that can serve as a guideline for disease management.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jht.2012.11.001
PMID: 23231827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2993. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2013 Jul;115(7):1094-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2012.11.005. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Prevalence of cerebrovascular lesions in patients with Lewy body dementia: a 
neuropathological study.

De Reuck J(1), Deramecourt V, Cordonnier C, Leys D, Pasquier F, Maurage CA.

Author information:
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, UDSL, EA 1056, F-59000 Lille, France. 
dereuck.j@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The co-existence of vascular pathology in patients with Lewy body 
dementia (LBD) is still a matter of debate. This study analyses the prevalence 
and the severity of cerebrovascular lesions in post-mortem brains of patients 
with LBD.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty brains of demented patients with autopsy-proven 
Lewy body disease were compared to 14 brains of age-matched controls.
RESULTS: Associated Alzheimer disease (AD) features, stages I-IV, were present 
in 70% of the LBD brains and in 7% of the controls (P<0.001). Cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy (CAA) was only present in 30% and lipohyalinosis in 10%. A 
semi-quantitative analysis, performed on a coronal section of a whole cerebral 
hemisphere and on a horizontal section through the pons and the cerebellum, 
revealed significantly more mini-bleeds in the LBD brains (P=0.007), 
predominantly in the cerebral cortex (P=0.03). Other cerebrovascular lesions 
were only rarely observed. Comparison of the LDB brains, with and without 
moderate AD features and CAA, showed no difference in the severity of the 
cerebrovascular lesions including mini-bleeds.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of mini-bleeds in LBD brains appears to be 
independent from the co-existence of moderate AD pathology and CAA. It is more 
probably due to disturbances of the blood-brain barrier, related to the 
neurodegenerative process itself.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2012.11.005
PMID: 23237637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2994. Mov Disord. 2013 Mar;28(3):296-301. doi: 10.1002/mds.25213. Epub 2012 Dec 12.

β-Amyloid and postural instability and gait difficulty in Parkinson's disease at 
risk for dementia.

Müller ML(1), Frey KA, Petrou M, Kotagal V, Koeppe RA, Albin RL, Bohnen NI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48105, 
USA. mtmuller@med.umich.edu

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2013 Mar;28(3):263-4.

Although motor impairments in Parkinson's disease (PD) are attributed to 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation, postural instability and gait difficulty 
(PIGD) features are less responsive to dopaminergic medications. PIGD features 
are a risk factor also for the development of dementia in PD (PDD). These 
observations suggest that nondopaminergic mechanisms may contribute to axial 
motor impairments. The aim was to perform a correlative PET study to examine the 
relationship between neocortical β-amyloid deposition ([(11)C]-Pittsburgh 
Compound B), nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation 
([(11)C]-dihydrotetrabenazine), and PIGD feature severity in PD patients at risk 
for dementia. This was a cross-sectional study of 44 PD patients (11 female and 
33 male; 69.5 ± 6.6 years of age; 7.0 ± 4.8 years motor disease duration; mean H 
& Y stage: 2.7 ± 0.5) who underwent PET, motor feature severity assessment using 
the Movement Disorder Society revised UPDRS, and the Dementia Rating Scale 
(DRS). Linear regression (R(2)(adj) = 0.147; F(4,39) = 2.85; P = 0.036) showed 
that increased PIGD feature severity was associated with increased neocortical 
[(11)C]-Pittsburgh Compound B binding (β = 0.346; t(39) = 2.13; P = 0.039) while 
controlling for striatal [(11)C]-dihydrotetrabenazine binding, age, and DRS 
total score. Increased neocortical β-amyloid deposition, even at low-range 
levels, is associated with higher PIGD feature severity in PD patients at risk 
for dementia. This finding may explain why the PIGD motor phenotype is a risk 
factor for the development of PDD.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorders Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25213
PMCID: PMC3680885
PMID: 23239424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Relevant conflicts of interest/financial 
disclosures: The authors have no relevant financial or conflict of interest to 
disclose.


2995. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Jan;72(1):8-17. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31827ae56e.

Essential tremor followed by progressive supranuclear palsy: postmortem reports 
of 11 patients.

Louis ED(1), Babij R, Ma K, Cortés E, Vonsattel JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

For many years, clinicians have commented on the development of signs of 
parkinsonism among their essential tremor (ET) patients, but the links between 
ET and parkinsonism are not well understood. We report 11 (12.4%) of 89 ET 
patients who were prospectively collected at the Essential Tremor Centralized 
Brain Repository during the course of its first 9 years. All patients had 
long-standing ET (median duration, 38 years); there was a 5- to 49-year latency 
from the onset of ET to the development of either parkinsonism or 
dementia.Despite the presence of parkinsonism or dementia during life, none had 
been diagnosed clinically with progressive supranuclear palsy(PSP). All 11 
received the postmortem diagnosis of PSP. The prevalence of PSP in this ET 
sample (12.4%) is clearly larger than the population prevalence of PSP 
(0.001%-0.0065%). It is also 2 to 5 times the proportion of normal cases with 
incidental PSP in 2 previous autopsy series. This case series raises the 
questions of an association between ET and PSP, whether ET patients are at an 
increased risk of developing PSP, and what the proportion of ET patients who 
develop presumed Parkinson disease or Alzheimer disease in life actually have 
PSP (i.e. ET + PSP).

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31827ae56e
PMCID: PMC3530166
PMID: 23242279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2996. Neurology. 2013 Jan 1;80(1):85-91. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827b1a07. Epub 2012 
Dec 12.

Amyloid is linked to cognitive decline in patients with Parkinson disease 
without dementia.

Gomperts SN(1), Locascio JJ, Rentz D, Santarlasci A, Marquie M, Johnson KA, 
Growdon JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether amyloid burden, as indexed by Pittsburgh 
compound B (PiB) retention, identifies patients with Parkinson disease with mild 
cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) compared to those with normal cognition (PD-nl). A 
related aim is to determine whether amyloid burden predicts cognitive decline in 
a cohort of subjects with PD without dementia.
METHODS: In this prospective cohort study, we examined 46 subjects with PD 
without dementia, of whom 35 had normal cognition and 11 met criteria for PD-MCI 
at study baseline. All subjects underwent standardized neurologic and 
neuropsychological examinations and PiB PET at baseline, and clinical 
examinations were conducted annually for up to 5 years.
RESULTS: At baseline, precuneus PiB retention did not distinguish PD-MCI from 
PD-nl. Subjects with PD-MCI declined more rapidly than PD-nl subjects on 
cognitive tests of memory, executive function, and activation retrieval. Of the 
35 PD-nl subjects, 8 progressed to PD-MCI and 1 to dementia; of the 11 PD-MCI 
subjects, 5 converted to dementia. Both higher PiB retention and a diagnosis of 
PD-MCI predicted a greater hazard of conversion to a more severe diagnosis. 
Baseline PiB retention predicted worsening in executive function over time. The 
APOE ε4 allele also related to worsening in executive function, as well as 
visuospatial function, activation retrieval, and performance on the Mini-Mental 
State Examination. In contrast to its relation to cognitive decline, PiB 
retention did not affect progression of motor impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: At baseline measurements, amyloid burden does not distinguish 
between cognitively impaired and unimpaired subjects with PD without dementia, 
but our data suggest that amyloid contributes to cognitive, but not motor, 
decline over time.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31827b1a07
PMCID: PMC3589197
PMID: 23243071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2997. Geriatr Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2012 Dec;10(4):437-44. doi: 
10.1684/pnv.2012.0371.

[Decision-making in normal and pathological aging].

[Article in French]

Jacus JP(1), Bayard S, Raffard S, Bonnoron S, Gély-Nargeot MC.

Author information:
(1)Consultation mémoire, CH du val d'Ariège, Foix, France.

Decision making is a complex ability that is likely to be damaged in numerous 
psychiatric and neurologic disorders and also during the aging process. It 
therefore implies a large interconnection of cortical and subcortical structures 
that are directly impacted by the neuroanatomical and neurochemical 
modifications that occur during the usual or the pathologic aging. Two decision 
modalities have been isolated, depending on whether the decision making is 
performed under explicit knowledge of the risks taken or not. In the first case, 
the decision is taken based on success probabilities and also as a result of 
preliminary reinforcements (decision under risk). This modality is linked to the 
executive functions and its neural substrate would be the cognitive frontal 
striatal loops. In the second case, the decision is exclusively based on 
preliminary reinforcements (decision under ambiguity) and would be partially 
independent of cognitive functions. Its neural substrate would be the limbic 
frontal striatal loops. Nevertheless, the comparison of these hypothesis with 
the clinical data raises a certain number of controversies. Only the decision 
making under ambiguity appears to be responsive to the effects of usual aging, 
suggesting there would be a premature aging of the limbic loops. In Parkinson's 
disease, controversies appear to know whether the primitive decision impairment 
concerns the modality under risk or the one under ambiguity, as well as the 
question of the frontal striatal loops primitively damaged in this pathology 
pending. Furthermore, the cortical neurodegenerative diseases seem to 
demonstrate that the decision under ambiguity may be impacted by the cognitive 
functions, challenging the assumed independency between these two processes. On 
basis of some studies, the authors suggest to reconsider the links between the 
decision making, in particular the under ambiguity one and the cognitive 
functions, questioning how executive functions contribute to this decision 
modality.

DOI: 10.1684/pnv.2012.0371
PMID: 23250024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2998. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;34(3):673-9. doi: 10.3233/JAD-121384.

Cerebrospinal fluid levels of heart fatty acid binding protein are elevated 
prodromally in Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia.

Olsson B(1), Hertze J, Ohlsson M, Nägga K, Höglund K, Basun H, Annas P, Lannfelt 
L, Andreasen N, Minthon L, Zetterberg H, Blennow K, Hansson O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, the Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, Sweden. bob.olsson@medic.gu.se

Heart fatty acid binding protein (HFABP) is expressed in the brain and is 
elevated in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients with several forms of 
neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease 
with dementia, Lewy body dementia, vascular dementia (VaD), and 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease. However, whether HFABP in CSF is a stable biomarker 
or if it can help predict conversion from mild cognitive impairment (MCI) to AD 
or VaD has not been well studied. To address the role of HFABP in 
neurodegeneration, we analyzed CSF levels of HFABP in 96 AD patients and 65 
controls and also in 170 patients with MCI with an average follow up time of 5.7 
years. For the stability analysis, two CSF samples were collected from 52 AD 
patients with a six month interval in between. HFABP levels in CSF were very 
stable over the six month period (r = 0.93, p < 0.001). Furthermore, the CSF 
levels of HFABP were significantly elevated in AD compared with controls after 
adjustments for age and gender (p < 0.001). They were also elevated in the 
patients with MCI that subsequently converted to AD or VaD compared with those 
that remained stable (p < 0.001 and p < 0.05, respectively). However, ROC curve 
analysis showed that HFABP had lesser predictive value in determining conversion 
from MCI to AD and VaD than Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau. In conclusion, HFABP seems 
to be a stable CSF biomarker that reflects neuronal cell death in several 
neurodegenerative disorders, including early stages of AD and VaD.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-121384
PMID: 23254629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2999. Orv Hetil. 2012 Dec 30;153(52):2060-9. doi: 10.1556/OH.2012.29461.

[The Parkinson puzzle].

[Article in Hungarian]

Guseo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Fejér Megyei Szent György Kórház Idegosztály Székesfehérvár Cserkész u. 
dr@guseo.hu

Parkinson's disease is one of the most frequent progressive degenerative 
disorders with unknown origin of the nervous system. The commutation of the 
disease on Guam led to the discovery of a neurotoxin which was also found in 
other continents. This neurotoxin was identified in the common cyanobacteria 
(blue-green algae). Early clinical observations suggested some loose 
correlations with gastric and duodenal ulcer and Parkinson's disease, while 
recent studies revealed a toxin, almost identical to that found in cyanobacteria 
in one strain of Helicobacter pylori, which proved to cause Parkinson like 
symptoms in animals. Therefore, it cannot be ruled out that there is a slowly 
progressive poisoning in Parkinson's disease. The disease specific 
alpha-sinuclein inclusions can be found in nerve cells of the intestinal mucosa 
far before the appearance of clinical symptoms indicating that the disease may 
start in the intestines. These results are strengthened by the results of 
Borody's fecal transplants, after which in Parkinson patients showed a 
symptomatic improvement. Based on these observations the Parkinson puzzle is 
getting complete. Although these observations are not evidence based, they may 
indicate a new way for basic clinical research, as well as a new way of thinking 
for clinicians. These new observations in psycho-neuro-immunology strengthen the 
fact that immunological factors may also play a critical factor facilitating 
local cell necrosis which may be influenced easily.

DOI: 10.1556/OH.2012.29461
PMID: 23261994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3000. Neuroscience. 2013 Mar 1;232:90-105. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.12.018. 
Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Decreased parkin solubility is associated with impairment of autophagy in the 
nigrostriatum of sporadic Parkinson's disease.

Lonskaya I(1), Hebron ML(1), Algarzae NK(1), Desforges N(1), Moussa CE(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Laboratory for Dementia and Parkinsonism, 
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Laboratory for Dementia and Parkinsonism, 
Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA. Electronic 
address: cem46@georgetown.edu.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a motor disorder that involves death of dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Parkin is an autosomal recessive 
gene that is mutated in early onset PD. We investigated the role of parkin and 
autophagic clearance in postmortem nigrostriatal tissues from 22 non-familial 
sporadic PD patients and 15 control samples. Parkin was insoluble with altered 
cytosolic expression in the nigrostriatum of sporadic PD. Parkin insolubility 
was associated with lack of degradation of ubiquitinated proteins and 
accumulation of α-Synuclein and parkin in autophagosomes, suggesting autophagic 
defects in PD. To test parkin's role in mediating autophagic clearance, we used 
lentiviral gene transfer to express human wild type or mutant parkin (T240R) 
with α-Synuclein in the rat striatum. Lentiviral expression of α-Synuclein led 
to accumulation of autophagic vacuoles, while co-expression of parkin with 
α-Synuclein facilitated autophagic clearance. Subcellular fractionation showed 
accumulation of α-Synuclein and tau hyper-phosphorylation (p-Tau) in 
autophagosomes in gene transfer models, similar to the effects observed in PD 
brains, but parkin expression led to protein deposition into lysosomes. However, 
parkin loss of function mutation did not affect autophagic clearance. Taken 
together, these data suggest that functional parkin regulates autophagosome 
clearance, while decreased parkin solubility may alter normal autophagy in 
sporadic PD.

Copyright © 2012 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.12.018
PMCID: PMC3618990
PMID: 23262240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest whatsoever in association with this manuscript.