1401. J Neurol. 2006 Jul;253(7):935-41. doi: 10.1007/s00415-006-0138-7. Epub 2006 Mar 
6.

Prevalence of primitive reflexes and the relationship with cognitive change in 
healthy adults: a report from the Maastricht Aging Study.

van Boxtel MP(1), Bosma H, Jolles J, Vreeling FW.

Author information:
(1)Brain and Behaviour Institute Maastricht University, Department of Psychiatry 
and Neuropsychology, 616, 6200, MD Maastricht, The Netherlands. 
martin.vanboxtel@np.unimaas.nl

OBJECTIVES: Primitive reflexes (PR) generally disappear early in life but may 
reappear later, in which case they are often associated with chronic 
neurological conditions, such as dementia or Parkinson's disease. Studies have 
shown that the presence of PRs may be indicative of both the severity and rate 
of progression of these diseases and may be the result of disinhibition of 
cortical networks. The association between PRs and cognitive function in usual 
ageing is unclear. We investigated whether the occurrence, amplitude, and 
persistence of four nociceptive (glabbelar tap, palmomental, pollicomental, and 
snout reflexes), three prehensile reflexes (suck, palmar grasp, and rooting), 
and two other reflexes (mouth open finger-spread and nuchocephalic reflexes) 
were related to performance in specific cognitive domains in normal ageing 
individuals.
METHODS: Four-hundred and seventy normal aging participants (25-82 years) in the 
Maastricht Aging Study (MAAS), were included in the study. They were 
neurologically and cognitively screened at baseline and were retested after 3 
(only individuals aged 50 years and older at baseline) and 6 years.
RESULTS: The prevalence of most PRs increased with age: 47% of men aged 25-45 
years had at least one PR, compared with 73% of men aged 65-85 year (p = 0.002). 
In women these percentages were 51 and 75, respectively (p=0.008). The 
prevalence, amplitude, and persistence of PRs were unrelated to cognition at 
baseline or at the 3- or 6-year follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of particularly nociceptive reflexes rises 
substantially with increasing age in normal individuals. However, the presence 
of PRs cannot be considered to be a marker of cognitive decline in normal aging 
individuals.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-006-0138-7
PMID: 16511641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1402. J Nucl Med. 2006 Mar;47(3):384-92.

Dual-tracer dopamine transporter and perfusion SPECT in differential diagnosis 
of parkinsonism using template-based discriminant analysis.

Van Laere K(1), Casteels C, De Ceuninck L, Vanbilloen B, Maes A, Mortelmans L, 
Vandenberghe W, Verbruggen A, Dom R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Gasthuisberg and K.U. 
Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. koen.vanlaere@uz.kuleuven.ac.be

Clinical differential diagnosis in parkinsonism can be difficult especially at 
early stages. We investigated whether combined perfusion and dopamine 
transporter (DAT) imaging can aid in the differential diagnosis of parkinsonian 
disorders: idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD), progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP), multiple system atrophy (MSA), dementia with Lewy bodies (LBD), and 
essential tremor (ET).
METHODS: One hundred twenty-nine patients were studied, retrospectively (69 
males; 24 MSA, 12 PSP, 8 LBD, 27 ET, and 58 IPD; mean disease duration, 3.5 +/- 
3.7 y). Diagnosis was based on established clinical criteria after follow-up of 
5.5 +/- 3.8 y in a university specialist movement disorders clinic. Group 
characterization was done using a categoric voxel-based design and, second, a 
predefined volume-of-interest approach along Brodmann areas (BA) and subcortical 
structures, including striatal asymmetry and anteroposterior indices. Stepwise 
forward discriminant analysis was performed with cross-validation (CV) using the 
leave-one-out technique.
RESULTS: Characteristic patterns for perfusion and DAT were found for all 
pathologies. In the parkinson-plus group, MSA, PSP, and LBD could be 
discriminated in 100% (+CV) of the cases. When including IPD, discrimination 
accuracy was 82.4% (99% without CV). 
2beta-Carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane imaging as a single technique 
was able to discriminate between ET and neurodegenerative forms with an accuracy 
of 93.0% (+CV); inclusion of perfusion information augmented this slightly to 
97.4% (+CV).
CONCLUSION: Dual-tracer DAT and perfusion SPECT in combination with 
discrimination analysis allows an automated, accurate differentiation between 
the most common forms of parkinsonism in a clinically relevant setting.

PMID: 16513606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1403. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2006 Apr;21(3):203-10. doi: 10.1016/j.acn.2005.12.005. 
Epub 2006 Mar 3.

Predicting global and specific neurological impairment with sensory-motor 
functioning.

Volpe AG(1), Davis AS, Dean RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Educational Psychology, Teachers College Room 515, Ball State 
University, Muncie, IN 47306, USA.

The present study assessed the ability of the Dean-Woodcock Sensory-Motor 
Battery (DWSMB) to distinguish between normal subjects and neurologically 
impaired individuals. Scores from the subtests of the DWSMB for 250 normal and 
250 neurologically impaired individuals were randomly assigned to two equal 
groups to allow for cross-validation. The DWSMB was able to correctly identify 
92.8% of the cases, identifying 94.4% of the normal population and 91.2% of the 
neurologically impaired subjects. The cross-validation correctly identified 
87.2% of the total cases, identifying 91.2% of the normal subjects and 83.2% of 
the neurologically impaired subjects. An additional discriminant analysis 
indicated that the DWSMB correctly identified the following cases: 44.9% 
cardio-vascular accidents, 66.7% multiple sclerosis, 40% seizures, 42% traumatic 
brain injuries, 62.7% dementia, and 54.5% Parkinson's disease. The results add 
to the validity of the DWSMB by providing evidence of its ability to 
differentiate between neurologically impaired and normal individuals.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acn.2005.12.005
PMID: 16517117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1404. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 21;281(16):10816-24. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M509079200. Epub 
2006 Mar 3.

Oxidative damage of DJ-1 is linked to sporadic Parkinson and Alzheimer diseases.

Choi J(1), Sullards MC, Olzmann JA, Rees HD, Weintraub ST, Bostwick DE, Gearing 
M, Levey AI, Chin LS, Li L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory 
University School of Medicine, Atlanta, Georgia 30322, USA.

Mutations in DJ-1 cause an autosomal recessive, early onset familial form of 
Parkinson disease (PD). However, little is presently known about the role of 
DJ-1 in the more common sporadic form of PD and in other age-related 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer disease (AD). Here we report that 
DJ-1 is oxidatively damaged in the brains of patients with idiopathic PD and AD. 
By using a combination of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass 
spectrometry, we have identified 10 different DJ-1 isoforms, of which the acidic 
isoforms (pI 5.5 and 5.7) of DJ-1 monomer and the basic isoforms (pI 8.0 and 
8.4) of SDS-resistant DJ-1 dimer are selectively accumulated in PD and AD 
frontal cortex tissues compared with age-matched controls. Quantitative Western 
blot analysis shows that the total level of DJ-1 protein is significantly 
increased in PD and AD brains. Mass spectrometry analyses reveal that DJ-1 is 
not only susceptible to cysteine oxidation but also to previously unsuspected 
methionine oxidation. Furthermore, we show that DJ-1 protein is irreversibly 
oxidized by carbonylation as well as by methionine oxidation to methionine 
sulfone in PD and AD. Our study provides new insights into the oxidative 
modifications of DJ-1 and indicates association of oxidative damage to DJ-1 with 
sporadic PD and AD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M509079200
PMCID: PMC1850953
PMID: 16517609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1405. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2006 Mar;6(2):169-76. doi: 10.1007/s11910-996-0041-8.

Excessive daytime sleepiness and unintended sleep in Parkinson's disease.

Rye DB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, 101 Woodruff 
Circle, WMRB-Suite 6000, PO Drawer V, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA. drye@emory.edu

Patients with Parkinson's disease and parkinsonian syndromes (eg, dementia with 
Lewy body disease, multisystem atrophy, and Shy-Drager syndrome) suffer from 
daytime sleepiness. This sleepiness is common and very real, often approaching 
levels observed in the prototypical disorder of sudden-onset sleep, namely 
narcolepsy/cataplexy. Physicians need to be vigilant in assessing parkinsonian 
patients for sleepiness because treatment can dramatically enhance quality of 
life and prevent the significant morbidity and mortality that attends daytime 
sleepiness. Male patients with advanced disease, cognitive impairment, 
drug-induced psychosis, and orthostatic hypotension are most at risk for 
developing pathologic sleepiness. Because primary sleep disorders can coexist 
with parkinsonism (eg, sleep apnea, insufficient or interrupted sleep), these 
potential causes should be carefully assessed with polysomnography and treated 
appropriately. Dopaminomimetics exacerbate sleepiness in a small subset of 
patients in a dose-dependent fashion. Nonetheless, the primary pathologies 
involved in parkinsonism appear to be the greatest contributors to daytime 
sleepiness. Sleepiness in parkinsonism, especially a narcolepsy-like phenotype, 
may necessitate treatment with wake-promoting agents such as bupropion, 
modafinil, or traditional psychostimulants.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-996-0041-8
PMID: 16522272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1406. Mov Disord. 2006 Jul;21(7):930-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.20837.

Predictors of weight loss in Parkinson's disease.

Uc EY(1), Struck LK, Rodnitzky RL, Zimmerman B, Dobson J, Evans WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52242, USA. ergun-uc@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2007 Feb 15;22(3):436-7.

The objective of this study was to examine the change of body weight (BW) among 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and controls over years and determine the 
predictors of weight loss among PD patients. Studies on weight loss in PD 
studies are cross-sectional, have a short follow-up, or lack in clinical detail. 
We examined the percentage of BW change over years among 49 PD patients and 78 
controls. The controls were from another study on longitudinal evolution of BW 
and body composition in the elderly. We determined the BW, Hoehn and Yahr (HY) 
stage, and dyskinesia status of 49 consecutive nondemented PD patients with 
symptom duration of 6.1 +/- 0.7 years (mean +/- SEM) and ascertained their BW at 
the time of diagnosis and 2.4 +/- 0.2 years before the diagnosis from medical 
records. We collected data again 7.2 +/- 0.5 years after the first visit. The PD 
group lost 7.7% +/- 1.5% of BW over the entire symptomatic period (13.1 +/- 0.8 
years), while the control group lost only 0.2% +/- 0.7% of BW over 9.9 +/- 0.1 
years; weight loss was clinically significant (>5%) in 55.6% of PD patients vs. 
20.5% of the controls (both P values < 0.001, adjusted for sex, baseline age, 
and observation period duration). PD patients lost weight in both the early and 
advanced phases. While worsening of parkinsonism was the most important factor, 
age at diagnosis, emergence of visual hallucinations, and possibly dementia were 
also associated with weight loss. We demonstrated significant weight loss in PD 
patients compared to controls over approximately 1 decade. Neurodegeneration 
involving both motor and nonmotor systems may be associated with weight loss in 
PD.

(c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20837
PMID: 16534756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1407. Lakartidningen. 2006 Feb 15-21;103(7):451-5.

[Dementia--common, difficult to treat complication in Parkinson disease. Early 
diagnosis valuable--cholinesterase inhibitors can give better quality of life].

[Article in Swedish]

Lökk J(1), Winblad B.

Author information:
(1)Neurotecinstitutionen, Karolinska institutet. johan.lokk@karolinska.se

PMID: 16535872 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1408. Traffic. 2006 Apr;7(4):408-15. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2006.00396.x.

Amyloid precursor protein and Notch intracellular domains are generated after 
transport of their precursors to the cell surface.

Kaether C(1), Schmitt S, Willem M, Haass C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Adolf-Butenandt-Institute, Laboratory for 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, 
80336 München, Germany.

Alzheimer's disease is characterized by brain deposition of extracellular 
amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta)-containing plaques. The cellular site of 
gamma-secretase activity, which releases Abeta and the corresponding amyloid 
precursor protein intracellular domain (AICD), remains controversial. Proposed 
cleavage sites range from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), the Golgi apparatus, 
and the cell surface to endosomal compartments. We now used C99-green 
fluorescent protein (GFP), a fluorescent reporter substrate for gamma-secretase 
activity and monitored AICD production in living cells. C99-GFP is efficiently 
cleaved by gamma-secretase, and AICD-GFP is released into the cytosol. 
Inhibiting gamma-secretase results in accumulation of C99-GFP in early 
endosomes. By blocking selective transport steps along the secretory pathway, we 
demonstrate that gamma-secretase does not cleave its substrates in the ER, the 
Golgi/trans-Golgi network, or in secretory vesicles. In contrast, inhibition of 
endocytosis did not inhibit cleavage of C99-GFP. Similar results were obtained 
for another gamma-secretase substrate, NotchDeltaE. Our results suggest that 
intracellular domains are generated by gamma-secretase at the plasma membrane 
and/or early endosomes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0854.2006.00396.x
PMID: 16536739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1409. Prev Chronic Dis. 2006 Apr;3(2):A34. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

Dementia and its implications for public health.

Chapman DP(1), Williams SM, Strine TW, Anda RF, Moore MJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Adult and Community Health, Centers for Disease Control and 
Prevention, 4770 Buford Hwy NE, Mail Stop K-67, Atlanta, GA 30341, USA. 
dpc2@cdc.gov

INTRODUCTION: With the aging of the U.S. population, a better understanding of 
the presentation and impact of dementia is essential to the future of public 
health. Dementia refers not to a single disorder but to a number of syndromes 
characterized by diverse behavioral, cognitive, and emotional impairments. 
Because dementia is costly in terms of both personal suffering and economic 
loss, an understanding of its prevalence, risk factors, and potential 
interventions is emerging as an increasingly important facet of public health 
and health care delivery. Recent advances in the understanding of its 
presentation, course, and relevant interventions have taken place.
METHODS: We identified articles for review primarily by conducting a Medline 
search using the subject headings dementia, mild cognitive impairment, 
Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, and Lewy body 
dementia. Other relevant studies were elicited through a Medline search using 
the subject headings mental disorders and stigma.
RESULTS: Dementia represents a diverse category of syndromes characterized by 
deficits in memory, cognitive function, and behavior. Symptoms associated with 
dementia appear to be distributed along a continuum, with even subsyndromal 
presentations affecting the health of older adults and meriting intervention. To 
promote cognitive functioning and independence among older adults, public health 
interventions need to facilitate both early detection and treatment of dementia. 
The availability of adult day care and respite services is important in 
maintaining the health and quality of life of individuals caring for older 
adults with dementia. Recent advances in the treatment of dementia may slow the 
course of cognitive decline, thereby enhancing the quality of life of older 
individuals as well as decreasing costs associated with institutional care.
CONCLUSION: Despite the growing availability of pharmacologic and psychosocial 
interventions that are potentially helpful to people with dementia and their 
caregivers, the majority of older adults with dementia do not receive 
appropriate treatment. With the aging of the U.S. population, efforts to foster 
recognition of dementia and its treatments and to destigmatize them are emerging 
as an increasingly important facet of public health intervention.

PMCID: PMC1563968
PMID: 16539775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1410. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Apr;77(4):468-73. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2005.074070.

Predictors of falls and fractures in bradykinetic rigid syndromes: a 
retrospective study.

Williams DR(1), Watt HC, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, University College London 
W1T 4JF, UK.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2011 Nov;82(11):1185.

BACKGROUND: Falls and fractures contribute to morbidity and mortality in 
bradykinetic rigid syndromes.
METHODS: The authors performed a retrospective case notes review at the Queen 
Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders and systematically explored the 
relation between clinical features and falls and fractures in 782 pathologically 
diagnosed cases (474 with Parkinson's disease (PD); 127 progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP); 91 multiple system atrophy (MSA); 46 dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB); 27 vascular parkinsonism; nine Alzheimer's disease; eight corticobasal 
degeneration).
RESULTS: Falls were recorded in 606 (77.5%) and fractures in 134 (17.1%). In PD, 
female gender, symmetrical onset, postural instability, and autonomic 
instability all independently predicted time to first fall. In PD, PSP, and MSA 
latency to first fall was shortest in those with older age of onset of disease. 
Median latency from disease onset to first fall was shortest in Richardson's 
syndrome (12 months), MSA (42), and PSP-parkinsonism (47), and longest in PD 
(108). In all patients fractures of the hip were more than twice as common as 
wrist and forearm fractures. Fractures of the skull, ribs, and vertebrae 
occurred more frequently in PSP than in other diseases.
CONCLUSION: Measures to prevent the morbidity associated with falls and 
fractures in bradykinetic rigid syndromes may be best directed at patients with 
the risk factors identified in this study.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2005.074070
PMCID: PMC2077491
PMID: 16543524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none declared


1411. Consult Pharm. 2005 Jun;20(6):468-79. doi: 10.4140/tcp.n.2005.468.

Unique problems of dementia in the younger patient.

Bryan G, Martin CM.

While dementia is often thought of as a problem unique to the elderly patient, 
nearly one in ten patients with dementia is younger than 65. The etiologies of 
dementia in this population are varied, including a genetically inherited form 
of Alzheimer's disease, as well as dementia related to other problems such as 
Parkinson's disease, Down syndrome, and cerebrovascular disease. Health care 
practitioners may have difficulty diagnosing early onset dementia because the 
diagnostic tools and the disease manifestation differ from those of the elderly 
patient. In addition, treatment of early-onset dementia can also pose unique 
challenges related to the speed of progression of the disease, depression, and 
behavioral disturbances, which often plague younger patients with dementia.

DOI: 10.4140/tcp.n.2005.468
PMID: 16548645


1412. Neurobiol Aging. 2007 Mar;28(3):414-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.02.005. Epub 2006 Mar 24.

Brain ferritin iron may influence age- and gender-related risks of 
neurodegeneration.

Bartzokis G(1), Tishler TA, Lu PH, Villablanca P, Altshuler LL, Carter M, Huang 
D, Edwards N, Mintz J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095, USA. gbar@ucla.edu <gbar@ucla.edu>

BACKGROUND: Brain iron promotes oxidative damage and protein oligomerization 
that result in highly prevalent age-related proteinopathies such as Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB). Men 
are more likely to develop such diseases at earlier ages than women but brain 
iron levels increase with age in both genders. We hypothesized that brain iron 
may influence both the age- and gender-related risks of developing these 
diseases.
METHODS: The amount of iron in ferritin molecules (ferritin iron) was measured 
in vivo with MRI by utilizing the field dependent relaxation rate increase 
(FDRI) method. Ferritin iron was measured in four subcortical nuclei [caudate 
(C), putamen (P), globus pallidus (G), thalamus (T)], three white matter regions 
[frontal lobe (Fwm), genu and splenium of the corpus callosum (Gwm, Swm)] and 
hippocampus (Hipp) in 165 healthy adults aged 19-82.
RESULTS: There was a high correlation (r>0.99) between published post-mortem 
brain iron levels and FDRI. There were significant age-related changes in 
ferritin iron (increases in Hipp, C, P, G, and decreases in Fwm). Women had 
significantly lower ferritin iron than men in five regions (C, T, Fwm, Gwm, 
Swm).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first demonstration of gender differences in brain 
ferritin iron levels. It is possible that brain iron accumulation is a risk 
factor that can be modified. MRI provides the opportunity to assess brain iron 
levels in vivo and may be useful in targeting individuals or groups for 
preventive therapeutic interventions.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2006.02.005
PMID: 16563566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1413. Nat Chem Biol. 2006 May;2(5):249-53. doi: 10.1038/nchembio782. Epub 2006 Mar 26.

Elevated levels of oxidized cholesterol metabolites in Lewy body disease brains 
accelerate alpha-synuclein fibrilization.

Bosco DA(1), Fowler DM, Zhang Q, Nieva J, Powers ET, Wentworth P Jr, Lerner RA, 
Kelly JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry and the Skaggs Institute of Chemical Biology, The 
Scripps Research Institute, 10550 N. Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 
92037, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Chem Biol. 2006 Jun;2(6):346.

Oxidative stress, inflammation and alpha-synuclein overexpression confer risk 
for development of alpha-synucleinopathies-neurodegenerative diseases that 
include Parkinson disease and Lewy body dementia. Dopaminergic neurons undergo 
degeneration in these diseases and are particularly susceptible to oxidative 
stress because dopamine metabolism itself creates reactive oxygen species. 
Intraneuronal deposition of alpha-synuclein as amyloid fibrils or Lewy bodies is 
the hallmark of these diseases. Herein, we demonstrate that concentrations of 
oxidative cholesterol metabolites derived from reactive oxygen species are 
elevated in the cortices of individuals with Lewy body dementia relative to 
those of age-matched controls, and we show that these metabolites accelerate 
alpha-synuclein aggregation in vitro. The increase in the production of these 
cytotoxic cholesterol metabolites is also observed in a dopaminergic cell line 
that overexpresses alpha-synuclein. By extension, these data lead to the 
hypothesis that oxidative stress produces cholesterol aldehydes that enable 
alpha-synuclein aggregation, leading to a pathologic cycle.

DOI: 10.1038/nchembio782
PMID: 16565714 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1414. Folia Neuropathol. 2006;44(1):12-6.

No association between the brain-derived neurotrophic factor 196 G>A or 270 C>T 
polymorphisms and Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease.

Saarela MS(1), Lehtimaki T, Rinne JO, Huhtala H, Rontu R, Hervonen A, Roytta M, 
Ahonen JP, Mattila KM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Atherosclerosis Genetics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Center for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere University, Tampere, Finland.

The brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) promotes survival, differentiation 
and maintenance of neurons in the central nervous system. BDNF 196 G>A and 270 
C>T polymorphisms have previously been associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and with Parkinson's disease (PD). To study the role of BDNF 196 G>A and 270 C>T 
polymorphisms in Finnish AD and PD patients we genotyped BDNF 196 G>A and 270 
C>T polymorphisms in 97 sporadic AD patients, 52 PD patients and 101 control 
subjects with polymerase chain reaction. No associations were found between the 
genotypes studied and AD or PD in Finnish patients. Moreover, no interaction 
between either BDNF polymorphism and the epsilon 4 allele of apolipoprotein E 
was found. In conclusion, it seems that the BDNF gene does not contribute 
significantly to the risk of AD or PD in Finnish patients.

PMID: 16565926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1415. Neurology. 2006 Mar 28;66(6):796-7. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000209264.61035.bb.

REM sleep behavior disorder: a possible early marker for synucleinopathies.

Boeve BF, Saper CB.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2006 Dec 12;67(11):2090; author reply 2090-1.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2006 Mar 28;66(6):845-51.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000209264.61035.bb
PMID: 16567693 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1416. Biol Psychiatry. 2006 May 15;59(10):908-18. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.12.017. 
Epub 2006 Apr 11.

Imaging in Parkinson's disease: the role of monoamines in behavior.

Brooks DJ(1), Piccini P.

Author information:
(1)MRC Clinical Sciences Centre and Division of Neuroscience, Faculty of 
Medicine, Imperial College London, United Kingdom. david.brooks@csc.mrc.ac.uk

Positron emission tomography (PET) and single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) can measure striatal dopamine (DA) terminal function in vivo 
as reflected by DA storage capacity and transporter binding. In Parkinson's 
disease (PD) posterior dorsal putamen DA terminals are initially targeted, the 
anterior putamen and head of caudate subsequently becoming affected. In 
contrast, dopaminergic function in pallidal, amygdala, and cingulate regions is 
upregulated in early PD and only later becomes reduced. Rigidity and 
bradykinesia in PD have been shown to correlate with loss of putamen 
dopaminergic function, whereas performance on executive and working memory tasks 
correlates with integrity of caudate dopaminergic terminals. 11C-RTI32 PET, a 
marker of noradrenergic and dopaminergic transporter binding, can be used to 
assess noradrenergic along with dopaminergic terminal function. Serotonergic 
transporter binding can be assessed with 11C-DASB PET and 123I-beta CIT SPECT, 
whereas HT1A binding can be measured with 11C-WAY100635 PET. With these 
modalities, the relationship between mood, noradrenergic and serotonergic 
function can be examined in PD. The functional effects of focal DA replacement 
on DA storage capacity and patterns of brain activation via implantation of 
fetal midbrain cells or glial derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) infusion into 
putamen of PD patients has been examined with PET. Both approaches lead to 
consistently increased levels of putamen 18F-dopa uptake, and cell implantation 
can restore levels of frontal activation. Clinical outcome, however, has proved 
to be variable and off-medication dyskinesias are an unwanted side effect in 
transplanted cases. Dopamine release after pharmacological challenges or during 
behavioral tasks can be assessed indirectly by studying changes in receptor 
availability to PET radioligands. Stereotyped sequential movements are 
associated with striatal DA release, and this increases with more complex 
behaviors and the presence of financial incentives, which also increase frontal 
DA levels. Parkinson patients release less putamen DA than healthy control 
subjects during stereotyped finger movements. Interestingly, those PD patients 
who develop a dopa dependency syndrome, craving their medication, generate 
significantly greater levels of ventral striatal DA compared with similarly 
disabled patients without such a psychological dependency. In the future, 
functional imaging is likely to throw light on the roles of peptide transmission 
in regulating mood and behavior as non-peptide analogue ligands become 
available. Novel markers of amyloid plaque load will also help clarify the 
etiology of dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.12.017
PMID: 16581032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1417. PLoS Med. 2006 Apr;3(4):e140. doi: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030140. Epub 2006 Apr 
11.

Cholinesterase inhibitors: drugs looking for a disease?

Maggini M(1), Vanacore N, Raschetti R.

Author information:
(1)National Center for Epidemiology, National Institute of Health, Rome, Italy. 
mmaggini@iss.it

Maggini and colleagues examine the evidence on cholinesterase inhibitors for 
treating dementia. "What seemed a biologically plausible intervention," they 
say, "has not led to a proven, real improvement in patients' well-being."

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030140
PMCID: PMC1434488
PMID: 16597173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors' research is 
often funded by the Italian National Health Service and by the Italian Medicines 
Agency, which is the authority responsible for drug reimbursement procedures 
(including costs connected to the prescribing of acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors). The authors themselves have no role in decisions concerning such 
reimbursement.


1418. Arch Neurol. 2006 Apr;63(4):584-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.4.584.

Motor score of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale as a good predictor of 
Lewy body-associated neuronal loss in the substantia nigra.

Greffard S(1), Verny M, Bonnet AM, Beinis JY, Gallinari C, Meaume S, Piette F, 
Hauw JJ, Duyckaerts C.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Center, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Assistance Publique des 
Hôpitaux de Paris, 47 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris CEDEX 13, France.

BACKGROUND: How well the motor symptoms assessed by the motor section of the 
Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS3) reflect the neuronal loss 
observed in the substantia nigra is not known.
OBJECTIVE: To study the relationships among the motor symptoms assessed by the 
UPDRS3, Lewy body-associated neuronal loss in the substantia nigra, and duration 
of disease.
DESIGN: Longitudinal, prospective, clinicopathological study.
SETTING: Long-term care facility of a university hospital.
PATIENTS: Eighteen elderly patients with a parkinsonian syndrome, studied 
prospectively but selected post mortem on the basis of the presence of Lewy 
bodies, and 5 age-matched control subjects.
METHODS: One map of a section of the substantia nigra, indicating the location 
of all the nucleolated neuronal profiles, was drawn for each case. Neuronal 
density was estimated using a tessellation method. The relationship between time 
and neuronal loss and between neuronal loss and motor symptoms (assessed by the 
UPDRS3) was studied by means of regression analysis, using linear and 
exponential models.
RESULTS: The neuronal density was linearly linked with the UPDRS3 score (r = 
-0.83 [P<.001]). Each point added to the UPDRS3 score corresponded to an 
estimated loss of 25 neurons/mm(3). The density of neuronal profiles in the 
substantia nigra decreased exponentially with time (r = -0.73 [P<.001]). 
Extrapolation of the curve suggested a presymptomatic phase of 5 years.
CONCLUSION: The UPDRS3 score is linearly linked to neuronal density, which, in 
Lewy body diseases, decreases exponentially with time at a similar pace in this 
series of elderly patients and in the younger patients described in the 
literature.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.63.4.584
PMID: 16606773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1419. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2006 May;19(3):294-8. doi: 
10.1097/01.yco.0000218601.17722.5b.

Depression in neurological disorders: an update.

Rickards H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Queen Elizabeth Psychiatric Hospital, 
Edgbaston, Birmingham, UK. hugh.rickards@bsmht.nhs.uk

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Depressions are a heterogeneous group of conditions that 
contribute significantly to impairments in quality of life, independent of the 
severity of neurological illness. Depression may predate neurological signs and 
symptoms in the evolution of neurodegenerative disorders, and there is some 
evidence that depressive illness itself may be a risk factor in the aetiology of 
some dementias. This review aims to summarize the relevant current literature on 
diagnosis, aetiology and treatment of depression in neurology.
RECENT FINDINGS: Diagnosing depression in neurological conditions can be 
particularly difficult because of communication difficulties and changes in 
emotional expression as a result of the underlying neurological disease. Rating 
scales loaded towards somatic symptoms can show poor validity for screening or 
rating of severity in this setting. The evidence for the treatment of depression 
in neurological disease is scant, and often the treatment advice is based on 
consensus views of clinicians. Nevertheless, there have been some clinical 
trials, which are reported.
SUMMARY: Depression is common in neurology. It is underrecognized and 
undertreated. Recent research has allowed us to define depression more clearly 
in this setting. Trials of treatment are urgently needed, especially as 
depression is a significant factor in quality of life and may affect prognosis.

DOI: 10.1097/01.yco.0000218601.17722.5b
PMID: 16612216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1420. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 May;77(5):585-9. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2005.081711.

Motor subtype and cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's disease 
with dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Burn DJ(1), Rowan EN, Allan LM, Molloy S, O'Brien JT, McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, University of Newcastle, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, NE4 6BE, UK. d.j.burn@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: A previous cross sectional study found over-representation of a 
postural instability gait difficulty (PIGD) motor subtype in Parkinson's disease 
patients with dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), compared with 
Parkinson's disease (PD).
AIMS: (1) To examine rates of cognitive and motor decline over two years in PD 
(n=40), PDD (n=42) and DLB (n=41) subjects, compared with age matched controls 
(n=41), (2) to record whether motor phenotypes of PD, PDD, and DLB subjects 
changed during the study, (3) to find out if cognitive and motor decline in PD 
was associated with baseline motor subtype, and (4) to report the incidence of 
dementia in PD patients in relation to baseline motor subtype.
RESULTS: Most of PDD and DLB participants were PIGD subtype at baseline 
assessment. In the non-demented PD group, tremor dominant (TD) and PIGD subtypes 
were more evenly represented. Cognitive decline over two years was greater in 
PDD and DLB groups (mean decline in MMSE -4.5 and -3.9, respectively), compared 
with PD (-0.2) and controls (-0.3). There was an association between PIGD 
subtype and increased rate of cognitive decline within the PD group. Of 40 PD 
patients, 25% of the 16 PIGD subtype developed dementia over two years, compared 
with none of the 18 TD or six indeterminate phenotype cases (chi2=6.7, Fisher's 
exact test p<0.05).
CONCLUSION: A PIGD motor subtype is associated with a faster rate of cognitive 
decline in PD and may be considered a risk factor for incident dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2005.081711
PMCID: PMC2117449
PMID: 16614017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: none declared


1421. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2006 Jun;12(5):309-13. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.01.002. Epub 2006 Apr 18.

Anticipation of onset age in familial Parkinson's disease without SCA gene 
mutations.

Huang Y(1), Hayes M, Harding AJ, Brooks WS, Fung VS, Rowe D, Joffe R, Crimmins 
D, Hely M, Halliday GM.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, University of New South Wales, 
Barker Street, Randwick, NSW 2031, Australia.

Assessment of a series of 279 cases with Lewy body disease revealed 14 families 
having a family history consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance, eight of 
these with dominant Parkinsonism and six with dominant dementia. Analysis of the 
age at onset and genetic features in these families revealed significant 
anticipation only in a subset of parkinsonian families, with no pathological 
alleles for spinocerebellar ataxias or the common alpha-synuclein or LRRK2 point 
mutations.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2006.01.002
PMID: 16621662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1422. Brain Res. 2006 May 4;1087(1):28-32. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.02.121. Epub 
2006 Apr 13.

Genetic association between Ubiquitin Carboxy-terminal Hydrolase-L1 gene S18Y 
polymorphism and sporadic Alzheimer's disease in a Chinese Han population.

Xue S(1), Jia J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital University of Medical 
Sciences, 45 Changchun Street, 100053 Beijing, China.

Increasing evidence indicates that the dysfunction of ubiquitin-proteasome 
system (UPS) is associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD). In the 
ubiquitin-proteasome pathway, Ubiquitin Carboxy-terminal Hydrolase-L1 (UCH-L1) 
plays an important role for the cellular clearance of abnormal proteins. Since a 
substitution of serine by tyrosine at codon 18, exon 3 (S18Y polymorphism) of 
the UCH-L1 gene exhibits a protective effect against the development of 
degenerative disease such as sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD) in several 
different ethnic groups, we hypothesized that UCH-L1 gene S18Y polymorphism may 
have that same effect on the pathologic process of AD. We examined UCH-L1 S18Y 
polymorphism genotypes of 116 sporadic AD patients and 123 healthy subjects in 
Chinese Han population using PCR-restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) 
analysis. The allele and genotype data as well as data after stratification by 
age of onset failed to demonstrate any association between AD and S18Y 
polymorphism. However, after stratification by gender, female AD patients showed 
significantly less frequencies of Y allele and YY genotype in S18Y polymorphism 
than female controls (P = 0.003 and P = 0.015 respectively). We conclude that Y 
allele and YY genotype of S18Y in the UCH-L1 gene may have a protective effect 
against sporadic AD in female subjects, probably due to altering the function of 
UCH-L1 and the interactions among different risk factors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.02.121
PMID: 16626667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1423. Acta Neurol Scand. 2006 May;113(5):353-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2006.00582.x.

Is ischemic cerebrovascular disease a risk factor for dementia in patients with 
Parkinson's disease?

Papapetropoulos S, Villar JM, Mash DC.

Comment on
    Acta Neurol Scand. 2005 Dec;112(6):386-90.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2006.00582.x
PMID: 16629774 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1424. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2006 Mar-Apr;21(2):119-25. doi: 
10.1177/153331750602100212.

Recognition and treatment of Alzheimer's disease: a case-based review.

Marseille DM(1), Silverman DH.

Author information:
(1)Neuronuclear Imaging Section, Division of Biological Imaging, David Geffen 
School of Medicine, University of California at Los Angeles Medical Center, Los 
Angeles, California, USA.

Early recognition and treatment initiation are pivotal in managing Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Once a diagnosis of AD is made, a treatment plan is developed and 
should include treatment initiation with cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEIs) to 
improve cognition, management of comorbid conditions, and treat behavioral 
symptoms. Caregiver compliance is integral to AD treatment success. The purpose 
of this report is to present two real case studies of "suspected" AD or related 
dementia and stress the significance of early and accurate diagnosis in disease 
management. In case 1, a caregiver reports gradual but progressive loss of 
memory, and the patient himself complains of memory impairment. Neuroimaging 
analysis confirms "typical " AD. In case 2, initiation of ChEI therapy is 
followed by substantial clinical improvement in the face of a complex medical 
picture, and neuroimaging revealing more neurodegenerative changes than could be 
accounted for by "pure" AD.

DOI: 10.1177/153331750602100212
PMCID: PMC10833257
PMID: 16634468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1425. Mov Disord. 2006 Aug;21(8):1123-30. doi: 10.1002/mds.20897.

Changes in motor subtype and risk for incident dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Alves G(1), Larsen JP, Emre M, Wentzel-Larsen T, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Center for Movement Disorders, Stavanger, Norway. algu@sir.no

The objective of this study was to assess the temporal relationship between 
changes in predominant motor symptoms and incident dementia in Parkinson's 
disease (PD). A community-based sample of 171 nondemented patients with PD was 
followed prospectively and examined at baseline and after 4 and 8 years. The 
motor subtype of Parkinsonism was classified into tremor-dominant (TD), 
indeterminate, or postural instability gait difficulty (PIGD) subtype at each 
visit, based on defined items in the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, 
subscales II and III. Dementia was diagnosed according to DSM-III-R criteria, 
based on clinical interview, cognitive rating scales, and neuropsychological 
examination. Logistic regression was used to analyze the relationship between 
subtype of Parkinsonism and dementia. Transition from TD to PIGD subtype was 
associated with a more than threefold increase in the rate of Mini-Mental State 
Examination decline. Compared to patients with persistent TD or indeterminate 
subtype, the odds ratio for dementia was 56.7 (95% CI: 4.0-808.4; P = 0.003) for 
patients changing from TD or indeterminate subtype to PIGD subtype, and 80.0 
(95% CI: 4.6-1400.1; P = 0.003) for patients with persistent PIGD subtype. 
Patients with TD subtype at baseline did not become demented until they 
developed PIGD subtype, and dementia did not occur among patients with 
persistent TD subtype of Parkinsonism. In a substantial proportion of PD 
patients who develop postural instability and gait disorder during the course of 
the disease, this transition is associated with accelerated cognitive decline 
and highly increased risk for subsequent dementia. These findings raise the 
question whether PIGD and dementia share common or parallel neuropathology.

(c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20897
PMID: 16637023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1426. Curr Opin Psychiatry. 2005 May;18(3):335-41. doi: 
10.1097/01.yco.0000165605.21424.03.

Psychiatric aspects of Parkinson's disease.

Ehrt U(1), Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Stavanger University Hospital, Hillevåg, 
Stavanger, Norway.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Recently, there has been much interest and rapid progress in 
understanding the neuropsychiatry of Parkinson's disease. This paper reviews the 
most important papers published during 2004 on dementia and cognitive 
impairment, depression and psychosis in Parkinson's disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: Many new studies of cognitive impairment and dementia in 
Parkinson's disease have been published during 2004. Cognitive impairment has 
been demonstrated even during the first 1-2 years after onset of disease. 
Whereas executive and attentional impairment is typical, learning deficits occur 
early in some patients. Both functional and structural imaging suggest that in 
addition to fronto-subcortical deficits, temporal and parietal changes occur 
early as well. In the first large placebo-controlled trial, the cholinesterase 
inhibitor rivastigmine improved cognition, daily functioning and psychiatric 
symptoms without worsening of parkinsonism. The frequency and characteristics of 
depression, anxiety and hallucinations have been explored in several studies. 
Unfortunately, there is still little scientific evidence available to guide the 
treatment of these important aspects of Parkinson's disease, and adequately 
designed clinical trials are needed. Although subthalamic stimulation, in 
addition to improvement of movement, is frequently associated with some 
affective and cognitive improvement, permanent and significant worsening may 
occur in some. Future studies should aim at identifying at-risk patients, as 
well as identifying the optimal pharmacological and stimulation treatments for 
individual patients.
SUMMARY: These findings provide a deeper understanding of the neurobiological 
substrate of cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson's disease, and 
provide new information regarding the assessment and management of dementia and 
other neuropsychiatric aspects of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1097/01.yco.0000165605.21424.03
PMID: 16639159


1427. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2006 Mar;46(3):199-202.

[A 62-year-old woman with early-onset Parkinson's disease associated with the 
PINKi gene deletion].

[Article in Japanese]

Atsumi M(1), Li Y, Tomiyama H, Sato K, Hattori N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Baba Memorial Hospital.

We report the first case of early-onset Parkinson's disease (EOP) with the 
PTEN-induced kinase 1 (PINK1) gene deletion in 62 years old Japanese female. The 
symptoms were started with unstable gait at the age 38. Parkinsonian symptoms 
became apparent in 45 years old. L-Dopa was markedly effective on her 
parkinsonian symptoms. However, equinovarus foot induced by L-Dopa intake 
appeared three months prior to the admission. On admission, she presented with 
mild cognitive impairment, severe depression, marked retropulsion, resting 
tremor in the left upper limb and mild hyperreflexia in the four limbs. Rigidity 
was not present. Mutational analysis revealed homozygous deletion from exon 6 to 
8 in the PINK1 gene. An ethnic diversity in PINK1 mutation is suggested.

PMID: 16642930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1428. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006 Mar;65(3):278-88. doi: 
10.1097/01.jnen.0000205145.54457.ea.

Biochemical staging of synucleinopathy and amyloid deposition in dementia with 
Lewy bodies.

Deramecourt V(1), Bombois S, Maurage CA, Ghestem A, Drobecq H, Vanmechelen E, 
Lebert F, Pasquier F, Delacourte A.

Author information:
(1)Inserm Unit 815, Lille, France.

The primary feature of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the aggregation of 
alpha-synuclein into characteristic lesions: Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy 
neurites. However, in most of DLB cases, LBs are associated with neurofibrillary 
tangles and amyloid plaques (both Alzheimer disease [AD]-related lesions). We 
wanted to determine if this overlap of lesions is statistical, as a result of 
the late onset of both diseases, or results from a specific physiopathological 
synergy between synucleinopathy and either tauopathy or amyloid pathology. All 
patients with DLB from our prospective and multidisciplinary study were 
analyzed. These cases were compared with cases with pure AD and patients with 
Parkinson disease and controls. All cases were analyzed thoroughly at the 
neuropathologic and biochemical levels with a biochemical staging of aggregated 
alpha-synuclein, tau, and Abeta species. All sporadic cases of DLB were 
associated with abundant deposits of Abeta x-42 that were similar in quality and 
quantity to those of AD. Amyloid precursor protein (APP) dysfunction is a risk 
factor for AD as demonstrated by pathogenic mutations and Abeta accumulation. 
The constant and abundant Abeta x-42 deposition in sporadic DLB suggests that 
synucleinopathy is also promoted by APP dysfunction. Therefore, we conclude that 
APP is a therapeutic target for both AD and DLB.

DOI: 10.1097/01.jnen.0000205145.54457.ea
PMID: 16651889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1429. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2005 Oct;189(7):1383-90; discussion 1390-1.

[Early clinical signs of dementia in the elderly].

[Article in French]

Lôo H(1), Gallarda T, Amado I, Olie JP.

Author information:
(1)L'Académie Nationale de Médecine.

Clinical signs and symptoms preceding the onset of dementia are sometimes acute, 
such as mood disorders often associated with hypochondriacal traits and 
cognitive slowing, sudden and serious suicide attempts, character and conduct 
disorders contrasting with the previous state, and psychotic disorders 
presenting as pathological mistrust, or ill-structured prejudice or persecution. 
Most forerunning symptoms reflect a progressive deterioration of cognitive 
functions over a long period, that have been masked by various coping strategies 
used by the patient with the spouse's help. Progressive cognitive deficits may 
develop over years before dementia can be diagnosed with confidence. 
Quantitative tools can help to detect dementia incipiens, such as the Folstein 
Mini Mental Test, the Mattis Dementia Scale, the five-word learning test, the 
clock drawing test, and the brief cognitive battery. The profile of early 
cognitive deterioration varies according to the type of dementia (Alzheimer's 
disease, fronto-temporal dementia, Lewy body dementia, and vascular dementia). 
The symptoms of dementia may be interlinked with symptoms of other disorders. 
Neuropsychological tests and brain imaging are needed to validate the diagnosis.

PMID: 16669138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1430. Med Health R I. 2006 Apr;89(4):130-3.

Deep brain stimulation surgery for Parkinson's disease: the role of 
neuropsychological assessment.

Amick MM(1), Grace J.

Author information:
(1)Memorial Hospital of Rhode Island, Department of Medical Rehabilitation, 111 
Brewster Street, Pawtucket, RI 02860, USA. Melissa_Amick@Brown.edu

Neuropsychological assessment has two primary roles in the DBS process. First, 
assessment of cognitive and emotional functioning ensures that only appropriate 
candidates undergo this surgical procedure. Patients with dementia, cognitive 
performance suggestive of an additional neuropathological process, or 
significant psychiatric impairments should not undergo DBS. Second, 
neuropsychological assessment is essential to determine the cognitive and 
emotional outcomes following surgery. At the present time, a disruption in 
verbal fluency is the only consistent cognitive decline associated with DBS. 
While worsening of depression and the development of symptoms of mania are 
potential side effects from DBS, more studies find that DBS is associated with 
improvements in emotional functioning. Based on the growing understanding of the 
risk factors and potential side effects to DBS, neuropsychological assessment is 
necessary to ensure that patients selected to undergo this surgical intervention 
will likely have positive cognitive and emotional outcomes, in addition to the 
expected benefits in motor functioning.

PMID: 16676908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1431. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2006 Aug 30;30(6):1170-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.04.001. Epub 2006 May 8.

Quetiapine-induced neuroleptic malignant syndrome in dementia with Lewy bodies: 
a case report.

Kobayashi A(1), Kawanishi C, Matsumura T, Kato D, Furukawa R, Kishida I, 
Hirayasu Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 3-9 
Fukuura, Yokohama 236-0004, Japan.

Patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are particularly vulnerable to 
adverse effects of neuroleptics; this sensitivity is included among the clinical 
diagnostic criteria for DLB. Recently atypical neuroleptics, which carry less 
risk of extrapyramidal side effects than typical agents, have come into 
increasing use in treating psychotic symptoms and behavioral disturbances 
related to DLB. The present report is the first to describe a DLB patient who 
developed neuroleptic malignant syndrome (NMS) induced by quetiapine, an 
atypical neuroleptic known to have relatively infrequent extrapyramidal side 
effects in DLB patients. Physicians should be aware of the possibility of the 
occurrence of NMS in DLB even when atypical neuroleptics are administered.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2006.04.001
PMID: 16682107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1432. Prog Neurobiol. 2006 Apr;78(6):364-73. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.03.004. 
Epub 2006 May 8.

Amyloid beta and neuromelanin--toxic or protective molecules? The cellular 
context makes the difference.

Rao KS(1), Hegde ML, Anitha S, Musicco M, Zucca FA, Turro NJ, Zecca L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Nutrition, Central Food Technological Research 
Institute, Mysore 570020, India.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) share several pathological 
mechanisms. The parallels between amyloid beta (Abeta) in AD and alpha-synuclein 
in PD have been discussed in several reports. However, studies of the last few 
years show that Abeta also shares several important characteristics with 
neuromelanin (NM), whose role in PD is emerging. First, both molecules 
accumulate with aging, the greatest risk factor for AD and PD. Second, in spite 
of their different structures, Abeta and NM have similar characteristics that 
could also lead to neuroprotection. Metals are required to catalyze their 
formation and they can bind large amounts of these metals, generating stable 
complexes and thus playing a protective role against metal toxicity. Moreover, 
they may be able to remove toxic species such as oligopeptides and excess 
cytosolic dopamine. Third, both Abeta and NM have been implicated in parallel 
aspects of the neuronal death that underlies AD and PD, respectively. For 
example, both molecules can activate microglia, inducing release of toxic 
factors such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha), interleukin-6 (IL-6), 
and nitric oxide (NO). A careful analysis of these parallel effects of Abeta and 
NM, including their seemingly paradoxical ability to participate in both cell 
death and protection, may lead to an improved understanding of the roles of 
these molecules in neurodegeneration and also provide insights into possible 
parallels in the pathological mechanisms underlying AD and PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2006.03.004
PMID: 16682109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1433. Arch Neurol. 2006 May;63(5):665-72. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.5.665.

Neuropathologic features of amnestic mild cognitive impairment.

Petersen RC(1), Parisi JE, Dickson DW, Johnson KA, Knopman DS, Boeve BF, Jicha 
GA, Ivnik RJ, Smith GE, Tangalos EG, Braak H, Kokmen E.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
peter8@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2006 May;63(5):645-6.

BACKGROUND: The neuropathologic substrate of amnestic mild cognitive impairment 
(aMCI) is not known.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the neuropathologic features of patients who died while 
their clinical classification was aMCI.
DESIGN: Cohort study.
SETTING: Community based.
PARTICIPANTS: Sixty-six individuals, including 15 who had memory impairment 
beyond that allowed for aging but who were not demented, were studied along with 
28 clinically healthy individuals and 23 patients with probable Alzheimer 
disease (AD) for comparison.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Standard neuropathologic techniques and classification 
according to Khachaturian, Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer 
Disease, and National Institute on Aging-Reagan criteria were used to analyze 
autopsy tissue from 15 individuals who died while their clinical diagnosis was 
aMCI. For comparison, autopsy data on age-matched groups of clinically healthy 
individuals and patients with probable AD were analyzed.
RESULTS: Most patients with aMCI did not meet the neuropathologic criteria for 
AD, but their pathologic findings suggest a transitional state of evolving AD. 
All the patients with aMCI had pathologic findings involving medial temporal 
lobe structures, likely accounting for their memory impairment. In addition, 
there were many concomitant pathologic abnormalities, including argyrophilic 
grain disease, hippocampal sclerosis, and vascular lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: The neuropathologic features of aMCI matched the clinical features 
and seemed to be intermediate between the neurofibrillary changes of aging and 
the pathologic features of very early AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.63.5.665
PMID: 16682536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1434. Arch Neurol. 2006 May;63(5):674-81. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.5.674.

Neuropathologic outcome of mild cognitive impairment following progression to 
clinical dementia.

Jicha GA(1), Parisi JE, Dickson DW, Johnson K, Cha R, Ivnik RJ, Tangalos EG, 
Boeve BF, Knopman DS, Braak H, Petersen RC.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2006 May;63(5):647-8.

BACKGROUND: The pathologic outcome of patients diagnosed with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) following progression to dementia is poorly understood.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the pathologic substrates of dementia in cases with 
prior diagnosis of amnestic MCI.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Community-based cohort.
PATIENTS: Thirty-four subjects followed up prospectively as part of a 
community-based study who were diagnosed with amnestic MCI, progressed to 
clinical dementia, and underwent subsequent postmortem brain analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Neuropathologic analyses resulted in assignment of a 
primary pathologic diagnosis and included staging of Alzheimer pathologic 
abnormalities and identification of contributing vascular disease, Lewy bodies, 
and argyrophilic grains.
RESULTS: Although the majority of subjects progressed both clinically and 
pathologically to Alzheimer disease (AD), 10 (29%) of them developed non-AD 
primary pathologic abnormalities. All of the cases were found to have sufficient 
pathologic abnormalities in mesial temporal lobe structures to account for their 
amnestic symptoms regardless of the cause. Most subjects were found to have 
secondary contributing pathologic abnormalities in addition to primary 
pathologic diagnoses. No significant differences between subjects with and 
without neuropathologically proven AD were detected in demographic variables, 
apolipoprotein E genotype, or cognitive test measures at onset of MCI, onset of 
dementia, or last clinical evaluation.
CONCLUSIONS: The neuropathologic outcome of amnestic MCI following progression 
to dementia is heterogeneous, and it includes AD at a high frequency. Complex 
neuropathologic findings including 2 or more distinct pathologic entities 
contributing to dementia may be common in community-based cohorts. Neither 
demographic variables nor cognitive measures had predictive value in determining 
which patients diagnosed with MCI will develop the neuropathologic features of 
AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.63.5.674
PMID: 16682537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1435. Arch Neurol. 2006 May;63(5):717-22. doi: 10.1001/archneur.63.5.717.

History of vascular disease and mild parkinsonian signs in community-dwelling 
elderly individuals.

Louis ED(1), Luchsinger JA.

Author information:
(1)The Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, and Department of Neurology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, 710 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
edl2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) are commonly found during the clinical 
examination of older people. These signs could reflect the accumulation of 
vascular pathological changes in the brain. If the etiology were vascular, one 
could hypothesize that individuals with MPS would be more likely to have 
systemic vascular disease than would their counterparts without these signs.
OBJECTIVES: To examine whether MPS are associated with a history of vascular 
disease and whether certain MPS (rigidity, changes in axial function) are more 
strongly associated with a history of vascular disease than are other MPS 
(tremor).
METHODS: Evaluation of older people without dementia in Washington 
Heights-Inwood, northern Manhattan, NY. The presence of vascular diseases was 
assessed with a structured health interview.
RESULTS: Mild parkinsonian signs were present in 375 (16.4%) of 2286 
participants without dementia. Diabetes mellitus, heart disease, peripheral 
vascular disease, and stroke were more prevalent in participants with MPS than 
without MPS, whereas nonvascular diseases (cancer, thyroid disease) were not. In 
a logistic regression analysis that adjusted for age, sex, education, and 
depressive symptoms, the number of vascular diseases was associated with MPS 
(odds ratio, 1.31 [95% confidence interval, 1.18-1.46]; P<.001). The combination 
of diabetes mellitus and heart disease increased the odds of MPS by 70% and the 
combination of these with stroke increased the odds by 332%.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of MPS in elderly individuals might reflect, in part, 
the accumulation of vascular pathological changes in the basal ganglia or white 
matter regions caused by preventable vascular diseases. Prospective and 
pathological studies are needed to further explore this finding.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.63.5.717
PMID: 16682541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1436. Neurology. 2006 May 9;66(9):1425-6. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000210433.49727.40.

Initial pharmacotherapy in a population of veterans with Parkinson disease.

Swarztrauber K(1), Koudelka C, Brodsky MA.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson Disease Research Education and Clinical Center, Portland VA Medical 
Center, Portland, OR, USA. swarztra@ohsu.edu

The authors analyzed patient and prescribing provider characteristics for 530 
veterans identified from VA pharmacy records with Parkinson disease (PD) and 
initial pharmacotherapy. Neurologists prescribed 29% of initial therapy. While a 
patient being younger and seeing a movement disorder specialist predicted 
receiving dopamine agonists, only 20% of patients younger than age 65 years 
received dopamine agonists. Initial pharmacotherapy is strongly influenced by 
the provider's specialty but mostly initiated by providers without PD expertise.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000210433.49727.40
PMID: 16682678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1437. Neurologist. 2006 May;12(3):149-59. doi: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000215750.52786.b1.

The neurology of menopause.

Henderson VW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California 
94305-5405, USA. vhenderson@stanford.edu

BACKGROUND: Menopause is a normal milestone experienced annually by 2 million 
American women each year, and many women are concerned about the relation 
between menopause and health. Associated hormonal changes have the potential to 
influence neurologic disease, as do hormonal therapies prescribed for menopausal 
symptoms or other conditions. The objective of this article is to increase 
neurologists' awareness of the relation between menopause and neurologic 
illness.
REVIEW SUMMARY: This was a focused review of 4 common neurologic disorders 
potentially influenced by menopause or by estrogen-containing hormone therapy: 
stroke, epilepsy, Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer disease. Hormonal effects are 
germane to each illness, although clinical implications are clearer for stroke 
and Alzheimer disease than for epilepsy and Parkinson disease. For women with 
epilepsy, few clinical data directly address the role of menopause or 
estrogen-containing hormone therapy on seizure frequency. Relevant clinical 
research findings on Parkinson disease are inconsistent and provide an 
inadequate basis for practice guidelines. There is clinical trial evidence that 
hormone therapy does not reduce stroke incidence and may increase risk of 
ischemic stroke; hormone therapy cannot be recommended for stroke prevention. 
The natural menopausal transition is not characterized by objective memory loss. 
There is clinical trial evidence that hormone therapy should not be used for the 
postmenopausal woman age 65 years or older for the preservation of cognitive 
skills, prevention of dementia, or treatment of dementia due to Alzheimer 
disease. Long-term cognitive consequences of short-term hormone therapy used by 
younger women for menopausal symptoms remains an important area of uncertainty.
CONCLUSIONS: Increased awareness of hormonal influences on neurologic illness is 
important for the practicing neurologist.

DOI: 10.1097/01.nrl.0000215750.52786.b1
PMID: 16688016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1438. Neurol Sci. 2006 Apr;27(1):33-9. doi: 10.1007/s10072-006-0562-6.

Increased intrathecal TGF-beta1, but not IL-12, IFN-gamma and IL-10 levels in 
Alzheimer's disease patients.

Rota E(1), Bellone G, Rocca P, Bergamasco B, Emanuelli G, Ferrero P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Via Cherasco 15, I-10126 
Torino, Italy. eugenia_rota@yahoo.it

An inflammatory response has been hypothesised to be involved in the 
pathogenesis of primary dementias, above all Alzheimer's disease (AD). This 
study was aimed at evaluating interleukin (IL)-12 and a panel of related 
cytokine levels in paired CSF and sera of demented patients. IL-12 (p70 
heterodimer and total IL-12 p40 chain), interferon (IFN)-gamma, IL-10 and 
transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta1 levels were measured in 30 patients with 
probable Alzheimer's disease (PrAD), 57 patients with other dementing disorders, 
including probable vascular dementia (PrVD), Parkinson's disease (PD) and normal 
pressure hydrocephalus (NPH), and 25 cognitively normal control subjects. In the 
presence of unchanged concentrations of IL-12, IFN-gamma and IL-10, the mean CSF 
level of TGF-beta1 and the correspondent TGF-beta1 index, but not the serum 
level, were significantly increased in PrAD compared to controls and PrVD, 
whereas no difference was found vs. NPH and PD. Our results support the 
pathophysiological role of TGF-beta1 system in AD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-006-0562-6
PMID: 16688597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1439. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2006 Apr;65(4):387-95. doi: 
10.1097/01.jnen.0000218449.17073.43.

Lewy bodies in progressive supranuclear palsy represent an independent disease 
process.

Uchikado H(1), DelleDonne A, Ahmed Z, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative tauopathy 
characterized by Parkinsonism, vertical gaze palsy, and early falls. Lewy bodies 
(LBs) are detected in approximately 10% of PSP cases, but there is little 
information on the relationship of LBs to tau pathology. We determined the 
frequency of LBs in a large series of autopsy-confirmed cases of PSP and studied 
the density and distribution of LBs, including Parkinson disease stage, in cases 
with LBs (PSP/LBD). PSP/LBD was compared with pure LB disease (LBD), including 
assessment of neuronal loss in key brainstem nuclei. Immunohistochemistry for 
alpha-synuclein revealed LBs in 31 of 290 PSP cases (11%). One case had multiple 
system atrophy in addition to PSP and was excluded from further study along with 
2 PSP/LBD cases with concurrent Alzheimer disease. The 29 cases of PSP/LBD were 
compared with 30 cases of PSP and 24 cases of LBD. The age, sex, brain weight, 
Braak neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) stage, as well as counts of NFTs and senile 
plaques were not different among PSP, LBD, and PSP/LBD, but disease duration was 
longer in LBD. The Parkinson disease stage was similar, but the density of LBs 
in most subcortical nuclei tended to be greater in LBD than in PSP/LBD. In 
contrast, substantia nigra neuronal loss was greater in PSP/LBD than both PSP 
and LBD. Double immunostaining demonstrated alpha-synuclein and tau in different 
neurons with few exceptions. The findings suggest that LBs in PSP are similar in 
distribution to those in LBD and independent of tau pathology. The greater 
density of LBs in LBD compared with PSP/LBD may be the result of longer disease 
duration in LBD, whereas greater neuronal loss in the substantia nigra in 
PSP/LBD may be the result of vulnerability of this brain region to both disease 
processes.

DOI: 10.1097/01.jnen.0000218449.17073.43
PMID: 16691119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1440. Mov Disord. 2006 Sep;21(9):1361-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.20946.

Fracture risk after the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease: Influence of 
concomitant dementia.

Melton LJ 3rd(1), Leibson CL, Achenbach SJ, Bower JH, Maraganore DM, Oberg AL, 
Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

In an inception cohort of 196 Olmsted County, Minnesota, residents with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) first recognized in 1976 to 1995, we tested whether the 
increased risk of bone fractures is associated with concomitant dementia. Using 
the data resources of the Rochester Epidemiology Project, information about PD, 
dementia, other clinical risk factors for fracture and fracture events was 
obtained from review of complete inpatient and outpatient medical records 
spanning each subject's residence in the community. Compared to an equal number 
of age- and sex-matched non-PD referent subjects from the community, PD patients 
were at a 2.2-fold increased risk of fractures generally and a 3.2-fold greater 
risk of hip fractures specifically. Adjusting for age, the independent 
predictors of overall fracture risk in the PD subjects included female sex 
(hazard ratio [HR] 1.6; 95% confidence interval [CI], 1.1-2.3), dementia (HR, 
1.6; 95% CI, 1.1-2.4) and chronic depression, which was associated with a 
reduced risk (HR, 0.4; 95% CI, 0.2-0.8). Hip fractures were predicted by 
dementia (HR, 2.2; 95% CI, 1.2-4.1). The increased fracture risk in patients 
with PD is not entirely explained by concomitant dementia, and additional study 
is needed to determine the relative contributions to fracture risk of falls 
versus bone loss in these patients.

(c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20946
PMID: 16703587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1441. Neurol Sci. 2006 Mar;27 Suppl 1:S40-3. doi: 10.1007/s10072-006-0546-6.

Parkinson's disease and dementia.

Padovani A(1), Costanzi C, Gilberti N, Borroni B.

Author information:
(1)Department Medical and Surgical Sciences, Institute of Neurology, University 
of Brescia, P.zza Spedali Civili 1, I-25125 Brescia, Italy. 
padovani@med.unibs.it

Parkinson's disease (PD) is one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders, 
affecting about 1% of the population over the age of 60. In addition to motor 
abnormalities, there are several non-motor signs and symptoms that may create a 
considerable burden for patients and care-givers. Dementia is common and affects 
approximately 40% of PD patients during the course of the disease, the risk for 
the development of dementia being 6 times higher than in non-PD age-matched 
controls. In most cases, PD patients with dementia (PDD) display a dysexecutive 
syndrome and visuospatial deficits, while memory is relatively unaffected. The 
overlap between PDD and dementia with Lewy bodies suggests that they likely 
share similar underlying neuropathological processes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-006-0546-6
PMID: 16708183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1442. Mov Disord. 2006 Sep;21(9):1343-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.20974.

Subtypes of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: progression to 
dementia.

Janvin CC(1), Larsen JP, Aarsland D, Hugdahl K.

Author information:
(1)Stavanger University Hospital, Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Stavanger, 
Norway.

The aim of this study was to establish the rate of progression from mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) to dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD). PD patients without dementia were recruited in 1997 from an ongoing 
prospective epidemiological study. The assessment included neurological and 
psychiatric examinations, a clinical interview based on the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Revised Third Edition (DSM-III-R) 
criteria for dementia, and a battery of neuropsychological tests. PD was 
diagnosed according to established criteria, dementia was diagnosed according to 
the DSM-III-R criteria, and subtypes of MCI were classified according to 
modified Petersen's criteria. Seventy-two nondemented PD patients were included. 
A total of 34 were cognitively intact, whereas 38 were diagnosed with MCI 
(amnestic, n = 6; single nonmemory domain, n = 17; multiple domains slightly 
impaired, n = 15). Fifty-nine patients (82%) completed follow-up examination 4 
years later, and 18 (62%) of the patients with MCI and 6 (20%) of the 
cognitively intact PD patients were demented (P = 0.001). Single domain 
nonmemory MCI and multiple domains slightly impaired MCI were associated with 
later development of dementia (P = 0.003; P = 0.04), whereas amnestic MCI 
subtype was not (P = 0.76). We conclude that patients with PD and MCI had a 
higher risk of developing dementia than cognitively intact PD patients, 
suggesting that MCI in PD is an early manifestation of dementia. However, these 
findings should be interpreted with caution due to the relatively small number 
of subjects included in this study.

(c) 2006 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20974
PMID: 16721732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1443. Adv Otorhinolaryngol. 2006;63:133-151. doi: 10.1159/000093759.

Olfaction in neurodegenerative disorder.

Hawkes C(1).

Author information:
(1)Essex Centre for Neuroscience, Oldchurch Hospital, Romford, UK.

There has been gradual increase of interest in olfactory dysfunction since it 
was realised that anosmia was a common feature of idiopathic Parkinson's disease 
(IPD) and Alzheimer-type dementia. It is an intriguing observation that a 
premonitory sign of a disorder hitherto regarded as one of movement or cognition 
may be that of disturbed sense of smell. In this review of aging, IPD, 
parkinsonian syndromes, tremor, Alzheimer's disease (AD), motor neuron disease 
(MND), Huntington's chorea (HC) and inherited ataxia, the following observations 
are made: (1) olfactory senescence starts at about the age of 36 years in both 
sexes and accelerates with advancing years, involving pleasant odours 
preferentially; (2) olfactory dysfunction is near-universal, early and often 
severe in IPD and AD developing before any movement or cognitive disorder; (3) 
normal smell identification in IPD is rare and should prompt review of diagnosis 
unless the patient is female with tremor-dominant disease; (4) anosmia in 
suspected progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration is 
atypical and should likewise provoke diagnostic review; (5) subjects with 
hyposmia and one ApoE4 allele have an approximate 5-fold increased risk of later 
AD; (6) impaired sense of smell may be seen in some patients at 50% risk of 
parkinsonism, and possibly in patients with unexplained hyposmia; (7) smell 
testing in HC and MND where abnormality may be found is not likely to be of 
clinical value, and (8) biopsy of olfactory nasal neurons reveals non-specific 
changes in IPD and AD and at present will not aid diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1159/000093759
PMID: 16733338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1444. Brain Lang. 2006 Aug;98(2):194-209. doi: 10.1016/j.bandl.2006.04.014. Epub 2006 
Jun 5.

Stochastic approaches to understanding dissociations in inflectional morphology.

Plunkett K(1), Bandelow S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Oxford University, South Parks Road, 
Oxford OX1 3UD, UK. kim.plunkett@psy.ox.ac.uk

Computer modelling research has undermined the view that double dissociations in 
behaviour are sufficient to infer separability in the cognitive mechanisms 
underlying those behaviours. However, all these models employ multi-modal 
representational schemes, where functional specialisation of processing emerges 
from the training process. Targeted lesioning of different regions of functional 
specialisation leads to varied but predictable deficits in model performance. We 
argue that multi-modal representational schemes are not a necessary condition 
for the observation of double dissociations in an information processing system 
that shares resources across multiple tasks. Using a uni-modal representational 
system, we demonstrate that double dissociations may also result from stochastic 
processes. Lesioning experiments on a single-route, uni-modal connectionist 
model of regular and irregular noun and verb morphology confirm and extend 
earlier work demonstrating that selective impairment across tasks can result 
from damage to a distributed information processing system. A systematic 
investigation of the degree to which performance deteriorates across different 
inflectional classes reveals that simple and double dissociations can occur in 
this single-route, uni-modal model. An important prediction of the model is that 
double dissociations between regular and irregular inflection, resulting from 
stochastic processes should be extremely rare. However, they are particularly 
likely to occur when the researcher uses test batteries consisting of a small 
number of items. Given that cognitive neuropsychologists rarely provide details 
about the distribution of performance in a disordered population, it is 
concluded that a stochastic interpretation of double dissociations may have 
wider applicability than is normally supposed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bandl.2006.04.014
PMID: 16737734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1445. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;62(6):447-50. doi: 10.1007/s00228-006-0132-0. 
Epub 2006 Apr 22.

Tolcapone decreases plasma levels of S-adenosyl-L-homocysteine and homocysteine 
in treated Parkinson's disease patients.

Müller T(1), Kuhn W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Josef-Hospital, University of Bochum, Gudrunstr. 
56, 44791, Bochum, Germany. thomas.mueller@ruhr-uni-bochum.de

BACKGROUND: Elevated plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) appeared in 
levodopa/dopadecarcoxylase inhibitor (DDI) treated patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD). One therapeutic approach for tHcy reduction is vitamine 
supplementation, since folic acid and cobalamine catalyse and enhance metabolism 
of tHcy to methionine. A further therapeutic alternative is inhibition of 
catechol-O-methyltransfrase (COMT) on a regular basis, when levodopa/DDI 
treatment is performed.
METHODS: We measured the concentrations of S-adenosylmethionine (SAM), 
S-adenosylhomocysteine (SAH), tHcy, levodopa and 3-O-methyldopa in plasma of 13 
levodopa treated PD patients before first drug intake at 0600 hours. Blood 
samples were taken before and after 2 days of additional application of the 
centrally acting catechol-O-methyltransferase inhibitor tolcapone 100 mg t.i.d.
RESULTS: Plasma levels of SAH [day 1: 48.32+/-22.52, 23.92-98.25 (mean+/-SD, 
range; micromol/l); day 3: 37.72+/-15.84, 23.4-61.89; p = 0.01] and tHcy (day 1: 
13.88+/-5.62, 7.63-24.81; day 3: 11.38+/-4.44, 5.98-20.45; p = 0.04) 
significantly reduced. Plasma levels of levodopa did not significantly (p = 
0.17) increase, whereas 3-OMD concentrations significantly (p = 0.0002) reduced 
after additional tolcapone intake. There was no significant change of SAM plasma 
levels (p = 0.22).
CONCLUSION: Our prospective trial shows, that COMT inhibition with tolcapone 
lowers tHcy synthesis. Tolcapone may also possess beside its proven, occasional, 
hepatotoxic potency also beneficial effects via decrease of SAH and tHcy. This 
may hypothetically reduce homocysteine mediated progress of neuronal 
degeneration and the risk for onset of dementia, vascular disease and 
polyneuropathy in levodopa treated PD patients in the long term.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-006-0132-0
PMID: 16758261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1446. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Oct 25;248(1-2):205-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.013. Epub 
2006 Jun 8.

Dual-tasks and walking fast: relationship to extra-pyramidal signs in advanced 
Alzheimer disease.

Camicioli R(1), Bouchard T, Licis L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Neurology, University of Alberta, 
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. rcamicio@ualberta.ca

Extra-pyramidal signs (EPS) and cadence predicted falls risk in patients with 
advanced Alzheimer disease (AD). Dual task performance predicts falls with 
variable success. Dual-task performance and walking fast were examined in 
advanced AD patients with EPS (EPS+, >3 modified Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale [UPDRS] signs) or without EPS (EPS-, three or less UPDRS signs). 
Demographics, mental and functional status, behavioral impairment, EPS, and 
quantitative gait measures (GaitRite) were determined. The effects of an 
automatic dual-task (simple counting) and of walking fast on spatial and 
temporal gait characteristics were compared between EPS+ and EPS- subjects using 
a repeated measures design. Cadence decreased, while stride time, swing time and 
variability in swing time increased with the dual task. Results were 
insignificant after adjusting for secondary task performance. With walking fast, 
speed, cadence and stride length increased while stride time, swing time and 
double support time decreased. Although EPS+ subjects were slower and had 
decreased stride length, dual task and walking fast effects did not differ from 
EPS- subjects. Patient characteristics, the type of secondary task and the 
specific gait measures examined vary in the literature. In this moderately to 
severely demented population, EPS did not affect "unconscious" (dual task) or 
"conscious" (walking fast) gait modulation. Given their high falls risk, and 
retained ability to modulate walking, EPS+ AD patients may be ideal candidates 
for interventions aimed at preventing falls.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.013
PMID: 16759668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1447. Brain Pathol. 2006 Apr;16(2):124-30. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2006.00006.x.

The 2,6-disubstituted naphthalene derivative FDDNP labeling reliably predicts 
Congo red birefringence of protein deposits in brain sections of selected human 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Smid LM(1), Vovko TD, Popovic M, Petric A, Kepe V, Barrio JR, Vidmar G, 
Bresjanac M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neural Plasticity and Regeneration, Institute of 
Pathophysiology, University of Ljubljana, Ljubljana, Slovenia. 
lojze.smid.jr@mf.uni-lj.si

Deposition of conformationally altered proteins prominently characterizes 
pathogenesis and pathomorphology of a number of neurodegenerative disorders. 
2-(1-{6-[(2-[F-18]fluoroethyl) (methyl)amino]-2-naphthyl} ethylidene) 
malononitrile ([F-18]FDDNP), a hydrophobic, viscosity-sensitive, 
solvent-sensitive, fluorescent imaging probe has been used with positron 
emission tomography to visualize brain pathology in the living brain of 
Alzheimer disease (AD) patients. Its non-radiofluorinated analog FDDNP was shown 
to label senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) in brain tissue 
sections. This work aimed at evaluating FDDNP labeling of various protein 
deposits in fixed, paraffin-embedded brain tissue sections of selected 
neurodegenerative disorders: AD, cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA), 
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
Pick disease (PiD), Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, multiple 
system atrophy (MSA). Cerebral hypertensive vascular hyalinosis (HVH) was used 
as negative control. Significant agreement between amyloid histochemical 
properties and FDDNP labeling of the deposits was established. FDDNP labeling 
showed high positive predictive value for birefringence in senile plaques and 
NFTs in AD, prion plaques and amyloid deposits in CAA. No FDDNP labeled 
structures were observed in HVH, PSP, PiD or MSA tissue sections. Our findings 
may be of significant value for the detection of neuropathological aggregates 
with [F-18]FDDNP in some of these disorders in the living brain of human 
subjects.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2006.00006.x
PMCID: PMC8095915
PMID: 16768752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1448. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Oct 25;248(1-2):62-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.032.

Absence of the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele is associated with working 
memory impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Tröster AI(1), Fields JA, Paolo AM, Koller WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of North Carolina School of Medicine, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. trostera@neurology.unc.edu

The apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon4 allele has been associated with an 
increased risk of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and weaker episodic memory among 
elderly. Although this APOE allele has been linked to earlier onset of 
Parkinson's disease (PD), an association with dementia in PD has been only 
inconsistently demonstrated. Given the heterogeneity of cognitive impairment 
patterns in PD, this study sought to determine whether an association exists 
between APOE genotype and specific cognitive deficits in PD. The 
neuropsychological test performance of 42 PD patients without an epsilon4 allele 
(PD-Non4) and of 20 with at least one epsilon4 allele (PD-epsilon4) was compared 
to that of 146 elderly control subjects (NC). The PD groups were comparable in 
overall severity of cognitive impairment and disease duration, but the 
PD-epsilon4 group was younger, had an earlier disease onset, and contained a 
higher proportion of persons with dementia. Both PD groups showed wide-ranging 
cognitive impairments relative to NC. Once age differences between groups were 
controlled for, the PD groups generally did not differ from each other in 
cognitive performance. However, only the PD-Non4 group demonstrated working 
memory/attention impairments (digit span, visual span, Trailmaking test) 
relative to the NC group. Results suggest that the APOE genotype may influence 
the cognitive phenotype of PD, and specifically that absence of the epsilon4 
allele is associated with working memory impairment. Additionally, results are 
consistent with prior findings showing an association between the epsilon4 
allele and earlier onset of PD and presence of dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.032
PMID: 16769085 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1449. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Oct;77(10):1129-35. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.090183. Epub 2006 Jun 13.

Higher cortical deficits influence attentional processing in dementia with Lewy 
bodies, relative to patients with dementia of the Alzheimer's type and controls.

Bradshaw JM(1), Saling M, Anderson V, Hopwood M, Brodtmann A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuropsychology, Austin Health, PO Box 5555, 
Heidelberg, Victoria 3084, Australia. jbrad@unimelb.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Attentional dysfunction is believed to be a prominent and 
distinguishing neuropsychological feature of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB); 
yet, the specific nature of the attentional deficit and factors that can 
potentially influence attentional processing in DLB have not been fully defined.
AIMS: To clarify the nature of the attentional deficit in early-stage DLB 
relative to patients with early-stage dementia of the Alzheimer's type (DAT) and 
elderly controls, and examine the effect of task complexity and type of 
cognitive load on attentional processing in DLB.
METHODS: Attentional impairment and fluctuating attention were investigated in 
three groups of subjects--patients with clinical features of early probable DLB 
(n = 20), a group with early probable DAT (n = 19) and healthy elderly controls 
(n = 20)--using an experimental computerised reaction time paradigm.
RESULTS: Patients with DLB showed greater attentional impairment and 
fluctuations in attention relative to patients with DAT and elderly controls. 
The attentional deficit was generalised in nature but increased in magnitude as 
greater demands were placed on attentional selectivity. Attentional deficits in 
DLB were most pronounced under task conditions that required more active 
recruitment of executive control and visuospatial cognitive processes.
CONCLUSIONS: Attentional deficits in DLB are widespread and encompass all 
aspects of attentional function. Deficits in higher cortical function influence 
the degree of attentional impairment and fluctuating attention, suggesting that 
attentional processing in DLB is mediated by interacting cortical and 
subcortical mechanisms. These findings serve to clarify the nature of the 
attentional deficit in DLB and have potentially important ramifications for our 
understanding of the neurocognitive underpinnings of fluctuations.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.090183
PMCID: PMC2077555
PMID: 16772356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


1450. Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2006 Jul;114(1):62-5. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0447.2006.00778.x.

Complex visual hallucination and mirror sign in posterior cortical atrophy.

Yoshida T(1), Yuki N, Nakagawa M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Gerontology, Research Institute for Neurological 
Diseases and Geriatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, 
Kyoto, Japan. tomo-kayo@k8.dion.ne.jp

Comment in
    Acta Psychiatr Scand. 2006 Jul;114(1):65-6.

OBJECTIVE: In posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), visual hallucinations are rare 
symptoms and mirror sign has not been described.
METHOD: Single case report.
RESULTS: We reported a 60-year-old woman with PCA who reported complex visual 
hallucinations, such as a man walking in her room, and mirror sign, which was 
the perception of a stranger staring at her when she looked into a mirror. She 
could not recognize images of herself in the mirror correctly, although she 
could recognize that a person standing next to her and the images of that person 
reflected in the mirror were the same person.
CONCLUSION: Early complex visual hallucinations in this patient appeared to be 
more characteristic of dementia with Lewy body than Alzheimer's disease (AD). It 
is hard to explain mirror sign in this patient as being because of either 
prosopagnosia, Balint's syndrome or advanced AD. This patient may have other 
underlying cognitive dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0447.2006.00778.x
PMID: 16774663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1451. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2006;44(7):863-6. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2006.143.

Elevated plasma homocysteine levels in L-dopa-treated Parkinson's disease 
patients with dyskinesias.

Zoccolella S(1), Lamberti P, Iliceto G, Dell'Aquila C, Diroma C, Fraddosio A, 
Lamberti SV, Armenise E, Defazio G, de Mari M, Livrea P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Bari, Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Elevated plasma homocysteine (Hcy) concentrations are associated 
with increased risk of systemic vascular diseases, Alzheimer's disease and 
vascular dementia. Several cross-sectional reports and two prospective clinical 
studies have recently reported elevated plasma Hcy levels in L-dopa-treated 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and Hcy has been proposed as a possible 
mediator for the development of long-term L-dopa motor complications (such as 
wearing off and on-off phenomena, and dyskinesias). The aim of the study was to 
elucidate a possible role of L-dopa-related hyperhomocysteinemia in the 
development of dyskinesias.
METHODS: In this cross-sectional study we compared Hcy, B(12) and folate levels 
in 53 PD patients treated with L-dopa (29 with dyskinesias, 24 without 
dyskinesias).
RESULTS: Mean plasma Hcy levels were higher in the group of PD patients with 
dyskinesias (19 vs. 15.4 micromol/L; T: 2.12; p=0.04). After taking into account 
potential confounding factors, analysis of the data revealed that the occurrence 
of dyskinesias progressively increased with plasma Hcy levels (relative risk 
1.2, 95% CI 1.015-1.4; p=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results raise the possibility that Hcy plays a role in the 
development of dyskinesias, through its toxic effects on both dopaminergic 
neurons and non-substantia nigra, non-dopaminergic neurons.

DOI: 10.1515/CCLM.2006.143
PMID: 16776634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1452. Lancet Neurol. 2006 Jul;5(7):572-7. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70476-8.

Rapid-eye-movement sleep behaviour disorder as an early marker for a 
neurodegenerative disorder: a descriptive study.

Iranzo A(1), Molinuevo JL, Santamaría J, Serradell M, Martí MJ, Valldeoriola F, 
Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona and Institut D'Investigació 
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain. airanzo@clinic.ub.es

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2006 Jul;5(7):552-3.

BACKGROUND: Rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) is a 
parasomnia characterised by dream-enacting behaviours related to unpleasant 
dreams and loss of muscle atonia during REM sleep. RBD may be idiopathic or 
associated with neurological disease. Available data suggest that in some cases 
RBD might be the initial manifestation of a neurodegenerative disease. We sought 
to determine the frequency and nature of neurological disorders developing in 
patients diagnosed with idiopathic RBD at our sleep centre.
METHODS: We retrospectively assessed 44 consecutive patients (39 men and five 
women with a mean age of 74 years), with at least 2 years of clinical follow-up 
after a diagnosis of idiopathic RBD, through a detailed clinical history, 
complete neurological examination, rating scales of parkinsonism, and 
neuropsychological tests.
FINDINGS: 20 (45%) patients developed a neurological disorder after a mean of 
11.5 years from the reported onset of RBD and a mean follow-up of 5.1 years from 
the diagnosis of idiopathic RBD at our sleep centre. Emerging disorders were 
Parkinson's disease in nine patients, dementia with Lewy bodies in six, multiple 
system atrophy with predominant cerebellar syndrome in one, and mild cognitive 
impairment in four in whom visuospatial dysfunction was prominent. Patients with 
longer clinical follow-up developed a neurological disease (OR 1.512, 95% CI 
1.105-2.069; p=0.010).
INTERPRETATION: Our study indicates that in people presenting to sleep centres, 
RBD often antedates the development of a neurodegenerative disorder. Close 
follow-up of patients with idiopathic RBD could enable early detection of 
neurodegenerative disease. This finding may be of great interest when early 
effective treatment strategies and neuroprotective drugs become available.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(06)70476-8
PMID: 16781987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1453. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 18;281(33):23302-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C600143200. Epub 2006 
Jun 16.

Stabilization of the tau exon 10 stem loop alters pre-mRNA splicing.

Donahue CP(1), Muratore C, Wu JY, Kosik KS, Wolfe MS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Neurofibrillary tangles containing filaments of the microtubule-associated 
protein tau are found in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases. Mutations in 
the tau gene itself cause frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism, 
demonstrating the critical role of tau in pathogenesis. Many of these mutations 
in tau are silent, are found at the 5'-splice site of exon 10, and lead to 
increased inclusion of exon 10. These silent mutations are predicted to 
destabilize a stem loop structure at the exon 10 5'-splice site; however, the 
existence of this stem loop under physiological conditions and its role in 
splice regulation are controversial. Here we show that base changes that 
stabilize this stem loop in vitro substantially decrease exon 10 inclusion in a 
wild type tau minigene and rescue the increase in exon 10 splicing caused by a 
dementia-causing point mutation. Moreover, we probed the intracellular structure 
of the tau stem loop with antisense RNA and demonstrate that the stability of 
the stem loop dictates antisense effectiveness. Together these results validate 
the stem loop as a bona fide structure regulating tau exon 10 splicing.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.C600143200
PMCID: PMC2072867
PMID: 16782711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1454. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Oct 25;248(1-2):120-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.017. Epub 
2006 Jun 19.

Differences and similarities in the neuropsychological profile of dementia with 
Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease in the early stage.

Guidi M(1), Paciaroni L, Paolini S, De Padova S, Scarpino O.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Unit, Geriatric Hospital, INRCA, Via della montagnola 81, 60100 
Ancona, Italy. m.guidi@inrca.it

The literature concerning the neuropsychological profile of dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) reports contrasting data even though a main impairment in 
attentional and visuospatial processes is mostly pointed out. In the present 
study, two selected groups, one of 12 DLB and the other of 12 Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) patients, both in the early stage of the disease, were matched for 
age, education and Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE). A comprehensive 
neuropsychological assessment and three scales to evaluate fluctuating cognition 
were administered. Significant differences were found between the two groups on 
attentional domain, memory, constructional and visuoperceptual abilities and 
fluctuation scales.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.017
PMID: 16784757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1455. Neurotox Res. 2000;2(2-3):293-310. doi: 10.1007/BF03033799.

Neuroprotective strategies in Parkinson's disease: protection against 
progressive nigral damage induced by free radicals.

Chiueh CC(1), Andoh T, Lai AR, Lai E, Krishna G.

Author information:
(1)Unit on Neurodegeneration and Neuroprotection, Laboratory of Clinical 
Science, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, Building 10, Room 3D-41, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-1264, USA. chiueh@helix.nih.gov

Brain undergoes neurodegeneration when excess free radicals overwhelm 
antioxidative defense systems during senescence, head trauma and/or neurotoxic 
insults. A site-specific accumulation of ferrous citrate-iron complexes in the 
substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons could lead to exaggerated dopamine 
turnover, dopamine auto-oxidation, free radical generation, and oxidant stress. 
Eventually, this iron-catalyzed dopamine auto-oxidation results in the 
accumulation of neuromelanin, a progressive loss of nigral neurons, and the 
development of Parkinson's disease when brain dopamine depletion is greater than 
80%. Emerging evidence indicates that free radicals such as hydroxyl radicals 
((.-)OH) and nitric oxide ((.-)NO) may play opposite role in cell and animal 
models of parkinsonism. (.-)OH is a cytotoxic oxidant whereas oNO is an atypical 
neuroprotective antioxidant. (.-)NO and S-nitrosoglutathione (GSNO) protect 
nigral neurons against oxidative stress caused by 1-methyl-4-phenylpyridinium 
(MPP(+)), dopamine, ferrous citrate, hemoglobin, sodium nitroprusside and 
peroxynitrite. MPP(+), the toxic metabolite of 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP), increases the nigral uptake 
of iron complexes and dopamine overflow leading to the generation of (.-)OH, 
protein oxidation, lipid peroxidation, and associated retrograde degeneration. 
In addition to GSNO, MPP(+)-induced oxidative neurotoxicity can be prevented by 
antioxidants including selegiline, 7-nitroindazole, 17beta-estradiol, melatonin, 
alpha-phenyl-tert-butylnitrone and U78517F. Similar to selegiline, 
7-nitroindazole is a MAO-B inhibitor, which blocks the bio-activation of MPTP 
and oxidative stress. Freshly prepared but not light exposed, (.-)NO-exhausted 
GSNO is about 100 times more potent than the classic antioxidant glutathione. 
Via S-nitrosylation, GSNO also inhibits proteolysis and cytotoxicity caused by 
caspases and HIV-1 protease. Furthermore, in addition to protection against 
serum deprivation stress, the induction of neuronal NOS1 in human cells 
increases tolerance to MPP(+)-induced neuro-toxicity since newly synthesized 
(.-)NO prevents apoptosis possibly through up-regulation of bcl-2 and down 
regulation of p66(shc). In conclusion, reactive oxygen species are unavoidable 
by-products of iron-catalyzed dopamine auto-oxidation, which can initiate lipid 
peroxidation, protein oxidation, DNA damage, and nigral loss, all of which can 
be prevented by endogenous and exogenous (.-)NO. Natural and man-made 
antioxidants can be employed as part of preventative or neuroprotective 
treatments in Parkinson's disease and perhaps dementia complexes as well. For 
achieving neuroprotection and neuro-rescue in early clinical parkinsonian 
stages, a cocktail therapy of multiple neuroprotective agents may be more 
effective than the current treatment with extremely high doses of a single 
antioxidative agent.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03033799
PMID: 16787846


1456. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Jul;77(7):874-6. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2005.084418.

Frail elderly patients with dementia go too fast.

van Iersel MB(1), Verbeek AL, Bloem BR, Munneke M, Esselink RA, Rikkert MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Internal Code 931, PO Box 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 
m.vaniersel@ger.umcn.nl

The reason why patients with dementia fall more often and sustain more fractures 
than patients without dementia remains unclear. Therefore, the relationship 
between dementia and gait velocity as a marker for mobility and falls in a 
cohort of frail elderly (mean age of 77.3 years) inpatients was assessed. 
Patients with dementia were expected to walk slower than patients without 
dementia. A trend was indeed observed: absolute gait velocity of 0.59 m/s in 
patients with dementia (n = 63) versus 0.65 m/s in patients without dementia (n 
= 62; p = 0.19). After adjustment for parkinsonism and walking aids, however, 
patients with dementia walked 0.44 m/s faster than patients without dementia (p 
= 0.02). Probable explanations are frontal lobe disinhibition and lack of 
insight, causing patients with dementia to walk relatively too fast in the 
context of their frailty. Therefore, the high risk of falls in dementia may be 
partially explained by the loss of control of gait velocity.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2005.084418
PMCID: PMC2117489
PMID: 16788015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None.


1457. Neurologia. 2006 Jun;21(5):219-25.

[SPECT and PET in neurology].

[Article in Spanish]

Masdeu JC, Arbizu J, Toledo J, Valero M.

Both single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission 
tomography (PET) are helpful in the practice of neurology. Ictal SPECT is useful 
to determine the origin of focal seizures in the pre-surgical evaluation. In 
some centers, it is used to predict the likelihood of massive cerebral swelling 
after stroke and of cerebral infarction after a subarachnoid hemorrhage. It has 
also been used to study dopaminergic function in parkinsonian syndromes and in 
the evaluation of dementia. Given its higher resolution and some other factors, 
PET is more useful in the evaluation of brain tumors, dementia and the 
parkinsonian syndromes. It is also useful in the presurgical evaluation of 
epilepsy.

PMID: 16788863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1458. Neurology. 2006 Sep 12;67(5):908-10. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000230215.41296.18. 
Epub 2006 Jun 21.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations are an important risk factor for Lewy body 
disorders.

Goker-Alpan O(1), Giasson BI, Eblan MJ, Nguyen J, Hurtig HI, Lee VM, Trojanowski 
JQ, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Section on Molecular Neurogenetics, Medical Genetics Branch, National Human 
Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892-3708, USA.

The synucleinopathies are neurodegenerative disorders defined by inclusions 
composed of aberrantly fibrillized alpha-synuclein, but factors contributing to 
this process remain largely unknown. The authors examined the glucocerebrosidase 
gene in 75 autopsy specimens with different synucleinopathies and identified 
mutations in 23% of cases of dementia with Lewy bodies, expanding on previous 
findings in subjects with Parkinson disease. Mutations in this lysosomal protein 
may interfere with the clearance or promote aggregation of alpha-synuclein.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000230215.41296.18
PMID: 16790605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1459. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Oct 25;248(1-2):167-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.002. Epub 
2006 Jun 23.

The morphological basis of mental dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Kenyongasse 18, A-1070 Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Mental dysfunction including dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD), the incidence 
of which averages 20-40%, is suggested to have six-fold lifetime risk compared 
to age-matched controls. It is caused by a variety of functional and 
pathological lesions ranging from damage to subcortical-cortical networks to 
cortical and limbic Lewy body and neuritic Alzheimer pathologies, the 
relationship and impact of which are still under discussion. Based on two 
consecutive autopsy series of PD, with prevalence of cognitive impairment of 33% 
to 35.7%, its essential morphological changes and their impact on the natural 
history (survival) are discussed. Whereas cortical Lewy body stages 5 and 6 
without additional pathologies only rarely were associated with dementia, around 
20% of demented PD cases were classified as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) with 
variable degrees of Alzheimer (AD) pathology, and around one third showed severe 
neuritic AD lesions which occurred in PD patients with later disease onset and 
significantly shorter survival. Frequent close relations in the severity between 
alpha-synuclein and tau-pathologies suggest synergistic reaction and common 
underlying pathogenesis of both lesions. Clinico-pathological studies in PD 
showed a significantly negative relation between cognitive impairment and 
neuritic AD lesions somewhat different from that in AD, suggesting that neuritic 
AD pathology, either alone or in combination with cortical and limbic Lewy 
bodies, are major causes of mental and cognitive dysfunction in PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.002
PMID: 16797594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1460. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2006 Oct;77(10):1136-42. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.093146. Epub 2006 Jun 26.

Attentional deficits affect activities of daily living in dementia-associated 
with Parkinson's disease.

Bronnick K(1), Ehrt U, Emre M, De Deyn PP, Wesnes K, Tekin S, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatric Clinic, Stavanger University Hospital, Helse Stavanger, Post Box 
8100, 4068 Stavanger, Norway. bronnick@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of attentional deficits on activities of 
daily living (ADL) in patients with dementia associated with Parkinson's disease 
(PDD).
METHOD: 461 patients were assessed neuropsychologically. Factor analyses were 
used to differentiate attention from other cognitive functions and to 
differentiate different aspects of ADL functions. The effects of the attentional 
measure on ADL were examined using sequential multiple regression, controlling 
for age, sex, education, severity of motor symptoms and other cognitive 
functions.
RESULTS: Three cognitive factors were identified, with one factor emerging as a 
measure of vigilance and focused attention. This factor predicted different 
aspects of ADL status even after controlling for motor functions and other 
cognitive factors. The attention factor was the single strongest cognitive 
predictor of ADL status, matching the strength of the effects of motor functions 
on ADL status.
CONCLUSION: Impaired attention is an important determinant of ADL functions in 
patients with PDD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.093146
PMCID: PMC2077544
PMID: 16801351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: None declared.


1461. Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1811-6. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000234880.51322.16.

Neurosurgery in Parkinson disease: a distressed mind in a repaired body?

Schüpbach M(1), Gargiulo M, Welter ML, Mallet L, Béhar C, Houeto JL, Maltête D, 
Mesnage V, Agid Y.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Investigation Clinique, Fédération des Maladies du Système Nerveux, 
INSERM U679, Université Paris VI, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1799-800.
    Neurology. 2007 Apr 3;68(14):1164; author reply 1164-5.

OBJECTIVE: To prospectively evaluate the impact of subthalamic nucleus (STN) 
stimulation on social adjustment in patients with Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: Before and 18 to 24 months after bilateral STN stimulation, the authors 
assessed 29 patients with PD for motor disability, cognition (Mattis dementia 
rating scale, frontal score), psychiatric morbidity (Mini-5.0.0, MADRS, BAS), 
quality of life (PDQ-39), social adjustment (Social Adjustment Scale), and 
psychological status using unstructured in-depth interviews.
RESULTS: Despite marked improvement in parkinsonian motor disability, the 
absence of significant changes in cognitive status, and improvement of 
activities of daily living and quality of life by the end of the study, social 
adjustment did not improve. Several kinds of problems with social adjustment 
were observed, affecting the patients' perception of themselves and their body, 
marital situation, and professional life. Marital conflicts occurred in 17/24 
couples. Only 9 out of 16 patients who had a professional activity before the 
operation went back to work after surgery.
CONCLUSION: After STN stimulation, patients experienced difficulties in their 
relations with themselves, their spouses, their families, and their 
socio-professional environment. The authors suggest a multidisciplinary 
psychosocial preparation and follow-up to help patients and their entourage cope 
with the sudden changes in their existence following successful neurosurgery.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000234880.51322.16
PMID: 16801642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1462. Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1837-44. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219668.47116.e6.

Neuropathology of older persons without cognitive impairment from two 
community-based studies.

Bennett DA(1), Schneider JA, Arvanitakis Z, Kelly JF, Aggarwal NT, Shah RC, 
Wilson RS.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. dbennett@rush.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1801-2.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relation of National Institute on Aging-Reagan 
(NIA-Reagan) neuropathologic criteria of Alzheimer disease (AD) to level of 
cognitive function in persons without dementia or mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI).
METHODS: More than 2,000 persons without dementia participating in the Religious 
Orders Study or the Memory and Aging Project agreed to annual detailed clinical 
evaluation and brain donation. The studies had 19 neuropsychological performance 
tests in common that assessed five cognitive domains, including episodic memory, 
semantic memory, working memory, perceptual speed, and visuospatial ability. A 
total of 134 persons without cognitive impairment died and underwent brain 
autopsy and postmortem assessment for AD pathology using NIA-Reagan 
neuropathologic criteria for AD, cerebral infarctions, and Lewy bodies. Linear 
regression was used to examine the relation of AD pathology to level of 
cognitive function proximate to death.
RESULTS: Two (1.5%) persons met NIA-Reagan criteria for high likelihood AD, and 
48 (35.8%) met criteria for intermediate likelihood; 29 (21.6%) had cerebral 
infarctions, and 18 (13.4%) had Lewy bodies. The mean Mini-Mental State 
Examination score proximate to death was 28.2 for those meeting high or 
intermediate likelihood AD by NIA-Reagan criteria and 28.4 for those not meeting 
criteria. In linear regression models adjusted for age, sex, and education, 
persons meeting criteria for intermediate or high likelihood AD scored about a 
quarter standard unit lower on tests of episodic memory (p = 0.01). There were 
no significant differences in any other cognitive domain.
CONCLUSIONS: Alzheimer disease pathology can be found in the brains of older 
persons without dementia or mild cognitive impairment and is related to subtle 
changes in episodic memory.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219668.47116.e6
PMID: 16801647 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1463. Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1850-4. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219640.59984.a7.

Value of 123I-MIBG radioactivity in the differential diagnosis of DLB from AD.

Yoshita M(1), Taki J, Yokoyama K, Noguchi-Shinohara M, Matsumoto Y, Nakajima K, 
Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan. myoshita@ucdavis.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the diagnostic reliability of cardiac iodine-123 
metaiodobenzylguanidine ((123)I-MIBG) radioactivity in discriminating dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) from Alzheimer disease (AD) regardless of parkinsonism.
BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of DLB may be confounded by the absence of 
parkinsonism. This highlights the need to improve the accuracy of antemortem 
diagnosis of DLB without parkinsonism.
METHODS: Cardiac sympathetic denervation was examined using myocardial 
(123)I-MIBG scintigraphy in 37 patients with DLB, 42 patients with AD, and 10 
normal elderly controls. The DLB patients consisted of seven patients without 
parkinsonism (DLB/P-) and 30 patients with parkinsonism (DLB/P+) at the time of 
the study.
RESULTS: The heart-to-mediastinum uptake ratio (H/M ratio) of myocardial MIBG 
uptake was decreased in both the DLB groups vs the AD group (p < 0.0001) and 
control group (p < 0.0001). The washout rate (WR) was higher in the DLB group 
than in the control group (p < 0.0001) and AD group (p < 0.0001). No differences 
were found between the AD and control groups or between the DLB/P+ and DLB/P- 
groups in either the early or delayed H/M ratio or WR. In discriminating between 
DLB and AD, regardless of parkinsonism, the delayed H/M ratio had a sensitivity 
of 100%, a specificity of 100%, and a positive predictive value of 100% at a 
cutoff value of 1.68.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that dementia with Lewy bodies results in 
cardiac sympathetic denervation and that iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine 
myocardial scintigraphy is a sensitive tool for discriminating dementia with 
Lewy bodies from Alzheimer disease even in patients without parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219640.59984.a7
PMID: 16801649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1464. Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1941-3. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219815.83681.f7.

Vitamins and entacapone in levodopa-induced hyperhomocysteinemia: a randomized 
controlled study.

Postuma RB(1), Espay AJ, Zadikoff C, Suchowersky O, Martin WR, Lafontaine AL, 
Ranawaya R, Camicioli R, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ron.postuma@muhc.mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Neurology. 2007 Apr 24;68(17):1440; author reply 1440-1.

Elevated homocysteine is associated with increased risk of heart disease, 
stroke, and dementia. Therapy of Parkinson disease (PD) with levodopa elevates 
homocysteine. The authors conducted a 6-week, multicenter, randomized, 
double-blind, placebo-controlled trial to test whether folate 1 mg/vitamin B(12) 
500 microg or entacapone reduced serum homocysteine in 35 levodopa-treated PD 
patients. Levodopa initiation caused a small elevation in homocysteine. Vitamin 
therapy, but not entacapone, resulted in a decrease in homocysteine compared to 
placebo.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219815.83681.f7
PMID: 16801668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1465. Neurology. 2006 Jun 27;66(12):1949-50. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219812.20616.b3.

Family history of dementia is a risk factor for Lewy body disease.

Woodruff BK(1), Graff-Radford NR, Ferman TJ, Dickson DW, DeLucia MW, Crook JE, 
Arvanitakis Z, Brassler S, Waters C, Barker W, Duara R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, 13400 East Shea Boulevard, 
Scottsdale, Arizona 85259, USA. woodruff.bryan@mayo.edu

Genetic factors are important in Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease 
but have not been well characterized in Lewy body dementia (LBD). The authors 
obtained family history in patients from an autopsy series of AD and LBD and in 
living healthy controls. A family history of dementia was more common in both 
LBD and AD compared with controls, suggesting that genetic factors are as 
important in LBD as they are in AD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000219812.20616.b3
PMID: 16801670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1466. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Oct 25;248(1-2):196-204. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.010. Epub 
2006 Jun 27.

The "posture second" strategy: a review of wrong priorities in Parkinson's 
disease.

Bloem BR(1), Grimbergen YA, van Dijk JG, Munneke M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. B.Bloem@neuro.umcn.nl

Falls are common in Parkinson's disease. It remains difficult to predict these 
falls, presumably because clinical balance tests assess single components of 
postural control, whereas everyday fall mechanisms are typically more 
complicated. A substantial proportion of everyday falls appears to occur while 
Parkinson patients attempt to perform multiple tasks at the same time. 
Furthermore, little attention is generally paid to the possible contribution of 
cognitive impairments to falls. The importance of mental dysfunction is 
supported by the fact that cognitive loading while walking or balancing can lead 
to marked deteriorations in postural performance, and there is some evidence to 
suggest that such "dual tasking" is particularly difficult for elderly persons 
with dementia or depression. We examined what strategies Parkinson patients used 
when a basic walking task became increasingly challenging by adding additional 
tasks (both motor and cognitive). Most patients could perform a simple "dual 
task" test: simultaneously walking and answering simple questions. However, as 
the walking task became more complex, patients' performance began to 
deteriorate. Interestingly, this was reflected not only by failure to answer 
questions, but also by an increasing number of blocks in motor performance 
(walking and balancing). This behaviour was different from that of both young 
and elderly controls, who appeared to sacrifice performance on the cognitive 
task in order to optimise their gait and balance ("posture first" strategy). 
Preliminary evidence suggest that impaired multiple task performance is 
associated with a two-fold increased risk of sustaining falls in daily life. We 
conclude that Parkinson patients are less inclined than healthy persons to 
maintain a safe gait. Instead, Parkinson patients use a "posture second" 
strategy and treat all elements of a complex task with equal priority, which in 
daily life may go at the expense of maintaining balance and lead to falls.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.010
PMID: 16806270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1467. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Oct 25;248(1-2):255-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.011. Epub 
2006 Jun 30.

Cognitive decline correlates with neuropathological stage in Parkinson's 
disease.

Braak H(1), Rüb U, Del Tredici K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Neuroanatomy, J.W. Goethe University Clinic, 
Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, 60590 Frankfurt/Main, Germany. Braak@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Recently, the relationship between cognitive status and the neuropathological 
stages of a newly proposed staging procedure for Parkinson's disease (PD) was 
assessed in a cohort of 88 individuals. None of the patients had received the 
clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies. The topographic distribution 
pattern of the cerebral Lewy body pathology was evaluated semiquantitatively in 
alpha-synuclein immunoreactions. MMSE scores from the last neurological 
examination prior to death were used to determine cognitive status and the 
degree of cognitive decline. Four subgroups of Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) scores ranging from nonsignificantly impaired to severely impaired 
cognition were analyzed statistically with nonparametric tests. Each of the 88 
cases could be assigned to one of the PD stages 3-6, and MMSE scores correlated 
significantly with the aforementioned stages. Since the median MMSE scores 
decreased from stages 3-6, it is probable that the risk of developing dementia 
in PD becomes greater as the disease process in the brain progresses.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.011
PMID: 16814807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1468. J Nucl Med. 2006 Jul;47(7):1099-101.

Reduced cardiac uptake and enhanced washout of 123I-MIBG in pure autonomic 
failure occurs conjointly with Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Kashihara K(1), Ohno M, Kawada S, Okumura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Okayama Kyokuto Hospital, Kurata, Okayama, Japan. 
kkashi@kyokuto.or.jp

The purpose of this study was to investigate myocardial uptake of 
123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) in patients with pure autonomic failure 
(PAF), which has pathologic features in common with idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (IPD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: Six patients with PAF, 130 with IPD, 21 with DLB, 9 with corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD), 11 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), and 11 with 
multiple-system atrophy (MSA) underwent myocardial 123I-MIBG scintigraphy, as 
did 16 control patients.
RESULTS: Resulting heart-to-mediastinum (H/M) ratios were significantly lower in 
patients with PAF, IPD, or DLB than in patients with CBD, PSP, or MSA and in the 
controls. H/M ratios were lower for delayed images than for early ones in 
patients with PAF, IPD, or DLB, whereas the ratios were higher for delayed 
images in patients with CBD and in the controls.
CONCLUSION: Cardiac sympathetic denervation and enhanced washout of 123I-MIBG 
from sympathetic nerve terminals may develop in parallel in patients with PAF, 
IPD, or DLB.

PMID: 16818943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1469. J Neurol Sci. 2006 Nov 1;249(1):13-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.060. Epub 2006 
Jul 3.

Immunoreactivities of p62, an ubiqutin-binding protein, in the spinal anterior 
horn cells of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Mizuno Y(1), Amari M, Takatama M, Aizawa H, Mihara B, Okamoto K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gunma University Graduate School of Medicine, 
3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan. mizunoy@med.gunma-u.ac.jp

An ubiquitin-binding protein, p62, is one of the components of the 
ubiquitin-containing inclusions in several human neurodegenerative diseases. 
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by the presence of 
skein-like inclusions, Lewy body-like inclusions, and basophilic inclusions in 
the remaining anterior horn cells, in which these inclusions contain ubiquitin, 
while the other characteristic inclusions of Bunina type are ubiquitin-negative. 
We examined the spinal cord from 28 ALS cases including two ALS with dementia 
and two ALS with basophilic inclusions, using antibody to p62. The results 
demonstrated that p62 localized in skein-like inclusions, Lewy body-like 
inclusions and basophilic inclusions. The number of p62-positive inclusions 
observed in the remaining anterior horn cells of each section was variable among 
the ALS cases. In contrast, Bunina bodies, that do not contain ubiquitin, were 
negative for p62. As far as we examined, the 11 non-ALS cases did not show any 
p62 immunoreactivities in the anterior horn cells. Our results suggested that 
p62 plays important roles in forming the inclusions and may be associated with 
the protection of the neurons from degenerative processes involving ubiquitin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2006.05.060
PMID: 16820172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1470. Nervenarzt. 2007 Jun;78(6):657-64. doi: 10.1007/s00115-006-2106-y.

[Relation between certain diseases and frequency of depression in geriatric 
patients].

[Article in German]

Zietemann V(1), Zietemann P, Weitkunat R, Kwetkat A.

Author information:
(1)IBE - Institut für Medizinische Informationsverarbeitung, Biometrie und 
Epidemiologie, München.

The higher prevalence of depression in specific diseases and older persons is 
discussed. This prevalence varies greatly according to the method used to 
collect data. A risk group can only be defined if information on diseases and 
other influencing factors are collected uniformly. The target diagnoses 
Parkinson's disease, stroke, myocardial infarction, cancer, diabetes mellitus, 
chronic pain, multiple infarct syndrome, Alzheimer's and other dementia were 
recorded from 1208 geriatric patients of the ZAGF municipal hospital in Munich, 
Germany. Logistic regression was used to identify chronic pain as the main 
cofactor for an association with depression (clinical diagnoses by ICD-10) and 
depressive symptoms (via GDS [Geriatric Depression Scale]). This association was 
also found for multimorbid patients with chronic pain. Impairment of the 
activities of daily living and the clinical setting were important additional 
cofactors. Pain patients are therefore at higher risk for depression.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-006-2106-y
PMID: 16821065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1471. BMC Neurol. 2006 Jul 6;6:24. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-6-24.

Association of HFE common mutations with Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's 
disease and mild cognitive impairment in a Portuguese cohort.

Guerreiro RJ(1), Bras JM, Santana I, Januario C, Santiago B, Morgadinho AS, 
Ribeiro MH, Hardy J, Singleton A, Oliveira C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, USA. ritajoao@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Pathological brain iron deposition has been implicated as a source 
of neurotoxic reactive oxygen species in Alzheimer (AD) and Parkinson diseases 
(PD). Iron metabolism is associated with the gene hemochromatosis (HFE Human 
genome nomenclature committee ID:4886), and mutations in HFE are a cause of the 
iron mismetabolism disease, hemochromatosis. Several reports have tested the 
association of HFE variants with neurodegenerative diseases, such as AD and PD 
with conflicting results.
METHODS: Genotypes were analysed for the two most common variants of HFE in a 
series of 130 AD, 55 Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) and 132 PD patients. 
Additionally, a series of 115 healthy age-matched controls was also screened.
RESULTS: A statistically significant association was found in the PD group when 
compared to controls, showing that the presence of the C282Y variant allele may 
confer higher risk for developing the disease.
CONCLUSION: Taken together these results suggest that the common variants in HFE 
may be a risk factor for PD, but not for AD in the Portuguese population.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-6-24
PMCID: PMC1534050
PMID: 16824219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1472. Rev Esp Med Nucl. 2006 Jul-Aug;25(4):229-35. doi: 10.1157/13090655.

[Dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease: differential diagnosis by 
cardiac sympathetic innervation MIBG imaging].

[Article in Spanish]

Estorch M(1), Camacho V, Fuertes J, Rodríguez-Revuelto A, Hernández MA, Flotats 
A, Kulisevsky J, Carrió I.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Nuclear, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Universidad Autónoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España. mestorch@santpau.es

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common cause of degenerative 
dementia after Alzheimer's disease (AD). At present, pre-mortem diagnosis of DLB 
can only be made clinically using the International Consensus Criteria. However, 
an accurate differential diagnosis between these diseases could improve the 
therapeutic handling of patients with DLB, due to their supersensitivity to 
neuroleptic treatment and the difficult treatment of their psychotic symptoms.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the utility of cardiac MIBG imaging as diagnostic study for 
DLB, to help in the differential diagnosis with AD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Cardiac MIBG imaging was performed in 11 patients with 
clinical criteria of probable DLB (7 males, mean age 77 years [range 62-89 
years], mean MMSE 17 [range 11-28], and in 9 patients with clinical criteria of 
probable AD (3 males, mean age 79 years [range 61-87 years], mean MMSE 17 [range 
4-25]). Planar anterior images of the thorax were acquired at 15 minutes. (early 
study) and 4 hours (late study) after tracer injection. Myocardial MIBG activity 
was quantified by means of a heart-to-mediastinum ratio (HMR). A HMR > 1.8 was 
considered normal.
RESULTS: Respect AD patients, patients with DLB showed decreased HMR in the 
early study (1.34 +/- 0.27 [range 1.03-1.98] vs. 1.84 +/- 0.22 [range 
1.53-2.15], p<0.001) and in the late study (1.22 +/- 0.23 [range 0.95-1.75] vs. 
1.73 +/- 0.08 [range 1.59-1.89], p<0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: Cardiac MIBG imaging could be a useful tool for differential 
diagnosis between DLB and AD.

DOI: 10.1157/13090655
PMID: 16827985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1473. Curr Vasc Pharmacol. 2006 Jul;4(3):237-43. doi: 10.2174/157016106777698414.

Hyperhomocysteinemia in movement disorders: Current evidence and hypotheses.

Zoccolella S(1), Martino D, Defazio G, Lamberti P, Livrea P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Bari, Italy.

Elevated plasma levels of homocysteine (Hcy) are a risk factor for systemic 
vascular diseases, stroke and vascular dementia. In recent years, increasing Hcy 
levels have been detected in neurological disorders that are not vascular in 
origin including Alzheimer's Disease and movement disorders (MD) such as 
idiopathic Parkinson's Disease (PD), Huntington's Disease (HD) and primary 
dystonia. Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) in PD results from L-Dopa administration 
and its O-methylation dependent from catechol-O-methyltransferase and may be 
implicated in the development of motor complications and non-motor symptoms, 
such as dementia. In a recent study, HHcy has been evidenced in HD patients, 
compared to controls. Because mutated Huntington protein influences Hcy 
metabolism by modulating cystathionine-beta-synthase activity, Hcy could 
represent a biological marker of neurodegeneration and could explain the leading 
role of cardiovascular and cerebrovascular diseases as causes of death in HD. 
Finally, several cases of homocystinuria associated with dystonia, and some 
recent reports of elevated Hcy in patients with primary adult onset dystonia 
have been published. Increased Hcy plasma levels may have important implications 
in patients affected by these basal ganglia disturbances, by exerting neurotoxic 
effects, contributing to neurotransmitter imbalance in motor circuits, and 
increasing the risk for vascular insults and cognitive dysfunctions.

DOI: 10.2174/157016106777698414
PMID: 16842141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1474. Hematol Oncol Clin North Am. 2006 Aug;20(4):797-809. doi: 
10.1016/j.hoc.2006.03.002.

The epidemiology of prostate cancer--with a focus on nonsteroidal 
anti-inflammatory drugs.

Chan JM(1), Feraco A, Shuman M, Hernández-Díaz S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, University of California San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143-1695, USA. june.chan@ucsf.edu

Aspirin and other NSAIDs have a potential role in the primary and secondary 
prevention of many common diseases associated with aging, including the top two 
causes of mortality in the United States-cardiovascular disease and cancer. 
These agents may be beneficial in the management of Alzheimer's disease,other 
forms of dementia, and Parkinson's. disease. Because men with prostate cancer or 
precancer are likely to present with coexisting conditions that would be 
affected by systemic aspirin, NSAID, or other COX-2 inhibitor therapies, it is 
important to consider any possible preventive studies or future clinical 
recommendations of aspirin or NSAIDs for prostate cancer within the context of 
these comorbid conditions. Aspirin or nonaspirin NSAIDs may be appropriate 
prevention therapy for patients at high risk of prostate cancer, myocardial 
infarction, Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease, lung cancer, or colorectal 
cancer, but low risk for gastrointestinal complications or stroke. Further 
quantitative comparative studies of the risks and benefits of these common 
comorbidities in older Americans, with special attention to dose and duration 
parameters, are warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.hoc.2006.03.002
PMID: 16861115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1475. Neurology. 2006 Jul 25;67(2):315-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000225050.57553.6d.

Dietary folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 and the risk of Parkinson disease.

de Lau LM(1), Koudstaal PJ, Witteman JC, Hofman A, Breteler MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands. m.breteler@erasmusmc.nl

BACKGROUND: Increased homocysteine levels might accelerate dopaminergic cell 
death in Parkinson disease (PD), through neurotoxic effects. Higher dietary 
intakes of folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 (cofactors in homocysteine 
metabolism) might decrease the risk of PD through decreasing plasma 
homocysteine. Moreover, vitamin B6 might influence the risk of PD through 
antioxidant effects unrelated to homocysteine metabolism and through its role in 
dopamine synthesis.
METHODS: In the Rotterdam Study, a prospective, population-based cohort study of 
people aged 55 years and older, the authors evaluated the association between 
dietary intake of folate, vitamin B12, and vitamin B6 and the risk of incident 
PD among 5,289 participants who were free of dementia and parkinsonism and 
underwent complete dietary assessment at baseline. PD was assessed through 
repeated in-person examination and continuous monitoring by computer linkage to 
medical records. Data were analyzed using Cox proportional hazards regression 
analysis.
RESULTS: After a mean follow-up of 9.7 years, the authors identified 72 
participants with incident PD. Higher dietary intake of vitamin B6 was 
associated with a significantly decreased risk of PD (hazard ratio per SD, 0.69 
[95% CI 0.50 to 0.96]; for highest vs lowest tertile, 0.46 [0.22 to 0.96]). 
Stratified analyses showed that this association was restricted to smokers. No 
association was observed for dietary folate and vitamin B(12).
CONCLUSIONS: Dietary vitamin B6 may decrease the risk of Parkinson disease, 
probably through mechanisms unrelated to homocysteine metabolism.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000225050.57553.6d
PMID: 16864826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1476. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2006 Aug;32(4):374-87. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2006.00736.x.

Comparison of extent of tau pathology in patients with frontotemporal dementia 
with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration with Pick bodies and early onset Alzheimer's disease.

Shiarli AM(1), Jennings R, Shi J, Bailey K, Davidson Y, Tian J, Bigio EH, Ghetti 
B, Murrell JR, Delisle MB, Mirra S, Crain B, Zolo P, Arima K, Iseki E, Murayama 
S, Kretzschmar H, Neumann M, Lippa C, Halliday G, Mackenzie J, Khan N, Ravid R, 
Dickson D, Wszolek Z, Iwatsubo T, Pickering-Brown SM, Mann DM.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroscience Research Group, University of Manchester, Greater 
Manchester Neurosciences Centre, Hope Hospital, Salford, UK.

In order to gain insight into the pathogenesis of frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (FTLD), the mean tau load in frontal cortex was compared in 34 
patients with frontotemporal dementia linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) with 12 
different mutations in the tau gene (MAPT), 11 patients with sporadic FTLD with 
Pick bodies and 25 patients with early onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD). Tau 
load was determined, as percentage of tissue occupied by stained product, by 
image analysis of immunohistochemically stained sections using the 
phospho-dependent antibodies AT8, AT100 and AT180. With AT8 and AT180 
antibodies, the amount of tau was significantly (P < 0.001 in each instance) 
less than that in EOAD for both FTDP-17 (8.5% and 10.0% respectively) and 
sporadic FTLD with Pick bodies (16.1% and 10.0% respectively). With AT100, the 
amount of tau detected in FTDP-17 was 54% (P < 0.001) of that detected in EOAD, 
but no tau was detected in sporadic FTLD with Pick bodies using this particular 
antibody. The amount of insoluble tau deposited within the brain in FTDP-17 did 
not depend in any systematic way upon where the MAPT mutation was 
topographically located within the gene, or on the physiological or structural 
change generated by the mutation, regardless of which anti-tau antibody was 
used. Not only does the amount of tau deposited in the brain differ between the 
three disorders, but the pattern of phosphorylation of tau also varies according 
to disease. These findings raise important questions relating to the role of 
aggregated tau in neurodegeneration - whether this represents an adaptive 
response which promotes the survival of neurones, or whether it is a detrimental 
change that directly, or indirectly, brings about the demize of the affected 
cell.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2006.00736.x
PMID: 16866983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1477. Nurs Stand. 2006 Jul 5-11;20(43):51-5. doi: 10.7748/ns2006.07.20.43.51.c6557.

Supporting people with dementia in acute hospital settings.

Cunningham C(1), Archibald C.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Services Development Centre, University of Stirling, Scotland. 
colm.cunningham@stir.ac.uk

This article is the first in a series of five focusing on the needs of patients 
with dementia. The number of people with dementia accessing acute care is 
rising. The need for acute hospital care to adapt to demographic changes and to 
reflect these in the acute hospital structure is emphasised. The most common 
forms of dementia, including Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia and Lewy 
body dementia, are discussed. The psychosocial aspects of this condition also 
need to be considered to promote nursing care that is sensitive to patients' 
needs.

DOI: 10.7748/ns2006.07.20.43.51.c6557
PMID: 16875284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1478. J Formos Med Assoc. 2006 Jul;105(7):556-62. doi: 10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60150-9.

Behavioral and psychologic symptoms in different types of dementia.

Chiu MJ(1), Chen TF, Yip PK, Hua MS, Tang LY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. mjchiu@ntumc.org

BACKGROUND/PURPOSE: Behavioral and psychologic symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are 
major sources of a caregiver's burden and also the most important factor when 
considering the need for institutionalization of dementia patients. BPSD occur 
in about 90% of patients with dementia. Studies comparing the BPSD in the major 
types of dementia using unitary behavioral rating scales are limited. We studied 
BPSD in patients with four major types of dementias from a memory clinic.
METHODS: We recruited patients with dementia from our memory clinic from January 
2003 to February 2004. The Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer's Disease Rating 
Scale (BEHAVE-AD) was used to measure BPSD severity. Clinical Dementia Rating 
and Mini Mental State Examination were used to determine dementia severity.
RESULTS: A total of 137 patients with four major types of dementia were 
recruited from 155 patients with dementia who attended the clinic during the 
study period. The main dementia types identified were Alzheimer's dementia (AD) 
in 54.8%, vascular dementia (VaD) in 20.6%, frontotemporal dementia (FTD) in 
8.4%, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) in 4.5%, and other dementias in 11.6%. 
BPSD were found in 92.0% of the patients but only 43.1% received psychotropic 
treatment. The relative risk of receiving psychotropic treatment for BPSD 
subscales paralleled the extent of caregivers' burden as assessed by the 
BEHAVE-AD global rating. Type-specific BPSD, e.g. hallucination was identified 
for DLB, activity disturbances for FTD, anxiety and phobias for AD and affective 
disturbance for VaD.
CONCLUSION: A strategy of targeting type-specific BPSD may be beneficial, such 
as environmental stimulus control for DLB patients who are prone to have 
hallucinations, design of a pacing path for patients with FTD who need support 
for symptoms of wandering and emotional support for patients with VaD who are 
susceptible to depression.

DOI: 10.1016/S0929-6646(09)60150-9
PMID: 16877235 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1479. Eur J Neurol. 2006 Aug;13(8):836-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01216.x.

Alexithymia in Parkinson's disease is related to severity of depressive 
symptoms.

Costa A(1), Peppe A, Carlesimo GA, Pasqualetti P, Caltagirone C.

Author information:
(1)I.R.C.C.S. Fondazione Santa Lucia, Roma, Italy. a.costa@hsantalucia.it

The authors investigated the possible relationship between depression and 
alexithymia in a population of hospitalized patients suffering from Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Fifty-eight PD patients without dementia participated in the 
study. Alexithymia was screened using the 20 item version of the Toronto 
Alexithymia Scale (TAS 20). Depression was diagnosed using a Structured Clinical 
Interview (SCID I) for DSM-IV. Severity of depression was evaluated with the 
Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). The prevalence of Alexithymia was about 21%. PD 
patients with major depression were significantly more alexithymic (TAS 20 
average score = 61.4) than PD patients without depression (TAS 20 average score 
= 47.4) and, also, tended to be more alexithymic than PD patients with minor 
depression (MiD; TAS 20 average score =50.6), whereas no difference was found 
between PD patients with MiD and PD patients without depression. Moreover, high 
scores obtained on the BDI were found to strongly predict high level of 
alexithymia in these patients. These results extend to a cohort of PD patients 
previous data from the literature evidencing a strong association between 
alexithymia and severity of depressive symptoms.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01216.x
PMID: 16879293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1480. J Nutr Health Aging. 2006 Jul-Aug;10(4):255-62.

Underweight, weight loss and related risk factors among older adults in 
sheltered housing--a Swedish follow-up study.

Mamhidir AG(1), Ljunggren G, Kihlgren M, Kihlgren A, Wimo A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gerontological Caring Science, Neurotec Department, Karolenska 
Institetutet, Stockholm, Sweden. anna-greta.mamhidir@lg.se

BACKGROUND: Underweight and weight loss are important factors in detecting 
malnutrition.
OBJECTIVE: To describe underweight, weight loss and related nutritional factors 
after 12 months among individuals 75 years or older and living in sheltered 
housing. A further aim was to identify possible risk factors associated with 
underweight and weight loss.
DESIGN: This is a part of a cross-sectional follow-up study from a county in 
Sweden, examining the disabilities, resources and needs of 719 older adults in 
sheltered housing units. Data were collected twice, with a 12-month interval 
using the Resident Assessment Instrument.
RESULTS: Among the 503 remaining chronically ill individuals with cognitive and 
functional disabilities, 35% were classified as underweight at the initial 
assessment and 38% at the second, a non-significant difference. A further 
analysis showed 39% had decreased weight, 27% remained stable and 28% gained 
weight. A weight loss of 5% occurred in 27% of the older adults and a loss of 
10% occurred in 14%. Risk factors associated with being underweight and weight 
loss, using scales derived from the instrument were cognitive and functional 
decline. Dementia and Parkinson's disease, eating dependencies and constipation 
were the strongest risk factors when analyzed as single items.
CONCLUSION: A high percentage was underweight or exhibited weight loss and 
several risk factors were identified. Ensuring adequate nutritional status in 
individuals with a variety of diseases and declining health status is 
challenging. Increased combined efforts using a wide range of measures, 
nutritional programs and routines need to be regularly implemented.

PMID: 16886095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1481. Sleep. 2006 Jul;29(7):927-33. doi: 10.1093/sleep/29.7.927.

A preliminary fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography study in healthy 
adults reporting dream-enactment behavior.

Caselli RJ(1), Chen K, Bandy D, Smilovici O, Boeve BF, Osborne D, Alexander GE, 
Parish JM, Krahn LE, Reiman EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona 85259, USA. 
caselli.richard@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Sleep. 2006 Jul;29(7):874-5.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To test the hypothesis that healthy adults reporting 
dream-enactment behavior (DEB+) have reduced cerebral metabolic rate for glucose 
(CMRgl) in regions preferentially affected in patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB).
DESIGN: Automated brain-mapping algorithms were used to compare regional 
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) measurements from 
previously evaluated DEB cases and controls.
SETTING: Tertiary-care academic medical centers.
PARTICIPANTS: Seventeen cognitively normal patients with DEB+ and 17 control 
subjects (DEB-) who were individually matched for age (59 +/- 11 years), 
education level (16 +/- 4 years), sex (67% women), body mass index (26 +/- 4.8 
kg/m2), first-degree relative with dementia (85%), and proportion of 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) e4 carriers (13 e4 carriers, 4 noncarriers).
INTERVENTIONS: FDG-PET.
MEASUREMENTS AND RESULTS: DEB was associated with significantly lower CMRgl in 
several brain regions known to be preferentially affected in both DLB and 
Alzheimer disease (parietal, temporal, and posterior cingulate cortexes) and in 
several other regions, including the anterior cingulate cortex (p < .001, 
uncorrected for multiple comparisons). The DEB-associated CMRgl reductions were 
significantly greater in the APOE e4 noncarriers than in the carriers.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary findings suggest that cognitively normal persons 
with DEB have reduced CMRgl in brain regions known to be metabolically affected 
by DLB, supporting further study of DEB as a possible risk factor for the 
development of DLB.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/29.7.927
PMID: 16895260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1482. PLoS Genet. 2006 Aug;2(8):e128. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020128.

Identification of mitochondrial DNA polymorphisms that alter mitochondrial 
matrix pH and intracellular calcium dynamics.

Kazuno AA(1), Munakata K, Nagai T, Shimozono S, Tanaka M, Yoneda M, Kato N, 
Miyawaki A, Kato T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, Brain Science 
Institute, RIKEN, Saitama, Japan.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is highly polymorphic, and its variations in humans 
may contribute to individual differences in function as well as susceptibility 
to various diseases such as Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, bipolar 
disorder, and cancer. However, it is unclear whether and how mtDNA polymorphisms 
affect intracellular function, such as calcium signaling or pH regulation. Here 
we searched for mtDNA polymorphisms that have intracellular functional 
significance using transmitochondrial hybrid cells (cybrids) carrying 
ratiometric Pericam (RP), a fluorescent calcium indicator, targeted to the 
mitochondria and nucleus. By analyzing the entire mtDNA sequence in 35 cybrid 
lines, we found that two closely linked nonsynonymous polymorphisms, 8701A and 
10398A, increased the basal fluorescence ratio of mitochondria-targeted RP. 
Mitochondrial matrix pH was lower in the cybrids with 8701A/10398A than it was 
in those with 8701G/10398G, suggesting that the difference observed by RP was 
mainly caused by alterations in mitochondrial calcium levels. Cytosolic calcium 
response to histamine also tended to be higher in the cybrids with 8701A/10398A. 
It has previously been reported that 10398A is associated with an increased risk 
of Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, bipolar disorder, and cancer, whereas 
10398G associates with longevity. Our findings suggest that these mtDNA 
polymorphisms may play a role in the pathophysiology of these complex diseases 
by affecting mitochondrial matrix pH and intracellular calcium dynamics.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pgen.0020128
PMCID: PMC1534079
PMID: 16895436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests. The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


1483. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2006 Aug 9;1:30. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-30.

Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17).

Wszolek ZK(1), Tsuboi Y, Ghetti B, Pickering-Brown S, Baba Y, Cheshire WP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, FL, USA. wszolek.zbigniew@mayo.edu

Frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) is an 
autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disorder, which has three cardinal 
features: behavioral and personality changes, cognitive impairment, and motor 
symptoms. FTDP-17 was defined during the International Consensus Conference in 
Ann Arbor, Michigan, in 1996. The prevalence and incidence remain unknown but 
FTDP-17 is an extremely rare condition. It is caused by mutations in the tau 
gene, which encodes a microtubule-binding protein. Over 100 families with 38 
different mutations in the tau gene have been identified worldwide. The 
phenotype of FTDP-17 varies not only between families carrying different 
mutations but also between and within families carrying the same mutations. The 
pathogenetic mechanisms underlying the disorder are thought to be related to the 
altered proportion of tau isoforms or to the ability of tau to bind microtubules 
and to promote microtubule assembly. Definitive diagnosis of FTDP-17 requires a 
combination of characteristic clinical and pathological features and molecular 
genetic analysis. Genetic counseling should be offered to affected and at-risk 
individuals; for most subtypes, penetrance is incomplete. Currently, treatment 
for FTDP-17 is only symptomatic and supportive. The prognosis and rate of the 
disease's progression vary considerably among individual patients and genetic 
kindreds, ranging from life expectancies of several months to several years, 
and, in exceptional cases, as long as two decades.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1172-1-30
PMCID: PMC1563447
PMID: 16899117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1484. Eur J Pharmacol. 2006 Sep 1;545(1):51-64. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.06.025. 
Epub 2006 Jun 17.

Emerging role of polyphenolic compounds in the treatment of neurodegenerative 
diseases: a review of their intracellular targets.

Ramassamy C(1).

Author information:
(1)INRS-Institut Armand-Frappier, 245 Hymus Boulevard, Pointe-claire, Québec, 
H9R 1G6/ INAF, Univ. Laval. Québec, QC, Canada. charles.ramassamy@iaf.inrs.ca

Aging is the major risk factor for neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. A large body of evidence indicates that 
oxidative stress is involved in the pathophysiology of these diseases. Oxidative 
stress can induce neuronal damages, modulate intracellular signaling, ultimately 
leading to neuronal death by apoptosis or necrosis. Thus antioxidants have been 
studied for their effectiveness in reducing these deleterious effects and 
neuronal death in many in vitro and in vivo studies. Increasing number of 
studies demonstrated the efficacy of polyphenolic antioxidants from fruits and 
vegetables to reduce or to block neuronal death occurring in the pathophysiology 
of these disorders. These studies revealed that other mechanisms than the 
antioxidant activities could be involved in the neuroprotective effect of these 
phenolic compounds. We will review some of these mechanisms and particular 
emphasis will be given to polyphenolic compounds from green tea, the Ginkgo 
biloba extract EGb 761, blueberries extracts, wine components and curcumin.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2006.06.025
PMID: 16904103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1485. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2006 Aug;21(8):755-60. doi: 10.1002/gps.1557.

Effectiveness of acetylcholinesterase inhibitors: diagnosis and severity as 
predictors of response in routine practice.

Van Der Putt R(1), Dineen C, Janes D, Series H, McShane R.

Author information:
(1)Oxfordshire Mental Healthcare Trust, Fulbrook Centre, Churchill Hospital, 
Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: Evidence from open label studies has indicated that patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) do better 
than those with other diagnoses, including Alzheimer's disease (AD). In 
addition, those with dementia of moderate severity do better than those with 
mild severity.
METHOD: Data collected for the monitoring of cholinesterase inhibitor 
prescribing in Oxfordshire over four years were supplemented with retrospective 
case notes inspection. 'Clinical response' was defined as improvement sufficient 
to merit continuation of therapy. A mini-mental state examination (MMSE) 
improvement of 2 or more points was defined as a 'cognitive response'.
RESULTS: Medication was prescribed for 1322 patients and outcome data was 
available on 1250. Subsequently, 939 patients were reassessed after a mean of 
120 days (SD 64.1). Medication was discontinued early by 311, mainly due to side 
effects. Of those who reached reassessment, 82% (771 of 939) were clinical 
responders and 37% (232 of 622) were cognitive responders. Overall, MMSE scores 
improved by +0.6 points [95% Confidence Intervals (CI) 0.3-0.9] and by +1.0 
points (95% CI 0.7-1.3) in clinical responders; and deteriorated -1.5 points 
(95% CI -0.9--2.1) in clinical non-responders. A greater probability of clinical 
response was seen for DLB/PDD compared to AD patients (Odds Ratio (OR) = 2.28, 
95% CI 1.07-4.89], and in men (OR = 1.51, 95% CI 1.02-2.23). A positive 
cognitive response was predicted by DLB/PDD compared to AD (OR = 2.07, 95% CI 
1.16-3.70), moderate dementia compared to mild dementia (OR = 3.90, 95% CI 
2.75-5.52), and by increasing age (OR 1.03 for each incremental year, 95% CI 
1.01-1.06). Those with moderate dementia were not more likely to have a positive 
clinical response than those with mild dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: DLB/PDD patients were more likely to be both clinical and cognitive 
responders than those with AD. The finding that cognitive, but not clinical, 
response was more likely in those with moderate dementia than in those with mild 
dementia accords with the findings from randomised studies in the January 2006 
revision of the NICE Appraisal Consultation Document.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1557
PMID: 16906631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1486. Neurodegener Dis. 2004;1(4-5):218-24. doi: 10.1159/000080989.

Clinical and molecular aspects of frontotemporal dementia.

Froelich-Fabre S(1), Skoglund L, Ostojic J, Kilander L, Lindau M, Glaser A, 
Basun H, Lannfelt L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Caring Science, Division of Geriatrics, 
Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a neurodegenerative disease and next to 
Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia, the third most common cause of 
early-onset progressive dementia. FTD leads to neurodegeneration in the frontal 
and temporal neocortex and usually encompasses both sides of the frontal and 
anterior temporal lobes. Psychologically, FTD is characterized by personality 
changes such as lack of insight, inappropriate behaviour, disinhibition, apathy, 
executive disabilities and a decline in cognitive functions, with large clinical 
and neuropathological variations among cases. Neuropathological characteristics 
include gliosis or microvacuolation of cortical nerve cells. Inclusions staining 
for tau protein and/or ubiquitin are also common findings. Both sporadic and 
hereditary forms of FTD have been identified and 30-50% of the FTD cases have a 
familial background. So far, at least three genetic loci for FTD have been 
identified, at human chromosomes 3, 9 and 17 in familial forms of the disease. A 
large number of the familial forms have been linked to chromosome 17q21 and 
referred to as frontotemporal dementia and Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. 
In the majority of these families, pathogenic mutations in the tau gene were 
identified. However, tau mutations seem to be a rare cause of disease in the 
general FTD population. Thus, other genes and/or environmental factors are yet 
to be identified, which will give further clues to this complex and 
heterogeneous disorder.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000080989
PMID: 16908993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1487. Neurodegener Dis. 2005;2(1):28-35. doi: 10.1159/000086428.

TAU haplotype and the Saitohin Q7R gene polymorphism do not influence CSF Tau in 
Alzheimer's disease and are not associated with frontotemporal dementia or 
Parkinson's disease.

Johansson A(1), Zetterberg H, Håkansson A, Nissbrandt H, Blennow K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Unit of Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska 
Academy at Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden. 
annica.johansson@clinchem.gu.se

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have described Saitohin(STH), a gene located in the 
human TAU gene. The corresponding protein shows a similar tissue expression to 
tau, which is involved in many neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). A 
single nucleotide polymorphism in the STH gene has been suggested to be involved 
in sporadic AD and is in complete linkage disequilibrium with the TAU haplotype 
H1.
OBJECTIVE: A case-control study was performed to further explore the possible 
involvement of the STH Q7R polymorphism and the extended TAU haplotype in AD, 
FTD or PD.
METHODS: Patients with AD (n = 398), FTD (n = 96) and PD (n = 105), and controls 
(n = 186) were genotyped for the STH polymorphism and/or the TAU haplotype. 
Genotype data were related to levels of total-tau, phospho-tau and Abeta(1-42) 
in cerebral spinal fluid (CSF) in more than 300 AD patients and to an amount of 
senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles in the frontal cortex and hippocampus 
in patients with autopsy-confirmed AD.
RESULTS: The STH Q7R polymorphism and the TAU haplotype were in complete linkage 
disequilibrium in all patients (AD and FTD) and controls investigated for both 
genes. There were no significant differences in genotype or allele distributions 
in AD, FTD or PD cases compared to controls. Neither TAU haplotype nor STH 
influenced CSF levels of total-tau, phospho-tau and Abeta(1-42) significantly. 
In AD patients with neuropathological scores of plaque and tangles, no 
associations with TAU haplotype and STH were found.
CONCLUSION: We found no evidence that could support a major pathogenic role of 
STH and TAU haplotype in AD, FTD or PD.

DOI: 10.1159/000086428
PMID: 16909000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1488. Encephale. 2006 Mar-Apr;32(2 Pt 1):244-52. doi: 10.1016/s0013-7006(06)76151-6.

[Oxidative stress involvement in schizophrenia pathophysiology: a review].

[Article in French]

Fendri C(1), Mechri A, Khiari G, Othman A, Kerkeni A, Gaha L.

Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherche en Santé mentale (01/UR/08.08), Service de Psychiatrie, 
Centre hospitalo-universitaire Fattouma Bourguiba de Monastir, rue du 1er juin 
5000, Monastir, Tunisie.

BACKGROUND: Schizophrenia is a devastating psychiatric disorder with a broad 
range of behavioural and biologic manifestations. There are several clinical 
characteristics of the illness that have been consistently associated with poor 
premorbid adjustment, long duration of psychosis prior to treatment and 
prominent negative symptoms. The etiopathogenic mechanisms of lack of insight in 
patients with schizophrenia are to date unknown, although several hypotheses 
have been suggested. A point of convergence for the theoretical models occurs 
with regard to the neuronal membrane. Neuronal membrane contains a high 
proportion of polyunsaturated fatty acid and is the site for oxidative stress. 
Oxidative stress is a state when there is unbalance between the generation of 
reactive oxygen species and antioxidant defence capacity of the body. It is 
closely associated with a number of diseases including Parkinson's disease, 
Alzheimer-type dementia and Huntington's chorea. Accumulating evidence points to 
many interrelated mechanisms that increase production of reactive oxygen or 
decrease antioxidant protection in schizophrenic patients.
OBJECTIVES: This review aims to summarize the perturbations in antioxidant 
protection systems during schizophrenia, their interrelationships with the 
characteristic clinics and therapeutics and the implications of these 
observations in the pathophysiology of schizophrenia are discussed.
LITERATURE FINDINGS: In schizophrenia there is evidence for deregulation of free 
radical metabolism, as detected by abnormal activity of critical antioxidant 
enzymes (superoxide dismutase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase). Many 
studies conclude in the decrease in the activity of key antioxidant enzymes in 
schizophrenia. A few studies have examined levels of non enzymatic antioxidants 
such as plasma antioxidant proteins (albumin, bilirubine, uric acid) and trace 
elements. How showed decreased levels in schizophrenic patients. Others studies 
have provided evidence of oxidative membrane damage by examining levels of lipid 
peroxidation products. Such abnormalities have been associated with certain 
clinical symptoms and therapeutic features. Negative symptoms have been 
associated with low levels of GSH-Px. Positive symptoms have been positively 
correlated with SOD activity. Plasma TAS was significantly lower in drug-free 
and haloperidol treated patients with schizophrenia. A low erythrocyte SOD 
activity has been found in never-treated patients, but with haloperidol 
treatment, SOD activity increased.
DISCUSSION: These results demonstrate altered membrane dynamics and antioxidant 
enzyme activity in schizophrenia. Membrane dysfunction can be secondary to free 
a radical-mediated pathology, and may contribute to specific aspects of the 
schizophrenia symptomatology. Membrane defects can significantly alter a broad 
range of membrane functions and presumably modify behavior through multiple 
downstream biological effects. Phospholipid metabolism in the brain may be 
perturbed in schizophrenia, with reduced amounts of phosphatidylcholins and 
phosphatidylethanolamine in post-mortem brain tissue from schizophrenic 
patients, and large amounts of lipofuscin-like materiel in the oligodendrocytes. 
The existence of these products within cell membranes results in an unstable 
membrane structure, altered membrane fluidity and permeability and impaired 
signal transduction. Recent findings suggest that multiple neurotransmitter 
systems may be faulty. CNS cells are more vulnerable to the toxic effects of 
free radicals because they have a high rate of catecholamine oxidative metabolic 
activity. Neurotransmitters, like glutamate, can induce the same metabolic 
processes that increase free radical production and can lead to impaired 
dopamine-glutamate balance. These results question the role of this imbalance in 
the biochemical basis evoked in the etipathogenic mechanisms of schizophrenia, 
as well as the role of antioxidants in the therapeutic strategy and their 
implication in preventive and early intervention approaches in populations at 
risk for schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0013-7006(06)76151-6
PMID: 16910626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1489. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006 Aug;9(3):235-42. doi: 10.3233/jad-2006-9302.

Lewy body pathology in late-onset familial Alzheimer's disease: a 
clinicopathological case series.

Tsuang DW(1), Riekse RG, Purganan KM, David AC, Montine TJ, Schellenberg GD, 
Steinbart EJ, Petrie EC, Bird TD, Leverenz JB.

Author information:
(1)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Centers, Veteran Affairs 
Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, WA 98108, USA. dwt1@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Lewy body pathology (LBP) is a common finding in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), but the pathophysiology for this coexistent pathology remains unclear.
METHODS: We ascertained late-onset dementia (mean age > 60 years old) families 
with at least 3 autopsies. We then conducted systematic alpha-synuclein (SNCA) 
immunostaining to determine the frequency and distribution of LBP in families 
with late-onset AD.
RESULTS: All 32 subjects met NIA-Reagan neuropathological criteria for "high 
likelihood" of having AD. Hematoxylin and eosin staining detected LBP in the 
substantia nigra (SN) in 8 (25%) individuals. SNCA immunostaining detected LBP 
in 21 individuals (66%). While all subjects with SN LBP had co-existent amygdala 
LBP, many (9/21, 43%) of the cases with amygdala LBP did not have coexistent SN 
LBP (McNemar's chi-square test, p=0.008). Each family had at least two cases 
with LBP, but no family had LBP in all autopsied cases.
CONCLUSIONS: Presence of significant AD pathology in one family member was 
highly predictive of similar pathology in other family members. However, despite 
the use of more sensitive SNCA immunohistochemistry, the presence of LBP was 
variable within all 7 families. Consistent with previous studies in sporadic and 
familial AD, the amygdala appeared to be the most vulnerable region for LBP in 
AD. Additional clinical, neuropathologic, and genetic studies are necessary to 
determine the clinical and pathological significance of LBP in AD.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2006-9302
PMID: 16914833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1490. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006 Aug;9(3):261-71. doi: 10.3233/jad-2006-9305.

Gene expression alterations in brain areas of intracerebroventricular 
streptozotocin treated rat.

Grünblatt E(1), Koutsilieri E, Hoyer S, Riederer P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurochemistry, National Parkinson Foundation Centre of 
Excellence Laboratories, Bayerische Julius-Maximilians- University of Würzburg, 
D-97080 Würzburg, Germany. edna.gruenblatt@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

Streptozotocin is well known inducer of experimental diabetes mellitus when 
injected peripherally. However, when administered intracerebroventricular, 
streptozotocin showed a whole spectrum of specific biochemical and behavioural 
alterations with regard to cognitive functions, feeding, nociception, brain 
glucose metabolism, neurotransmission and oxidative stress, without producing 
arterial hyperglycaemia, similarly to Alzheimer's disease. In order to reveal 
the mechanism of action of neurodegeneration in streptozotocin rat model we 
investigated the expression of several genes involved in inflammation, oxidative 
stress, growth- and transcription-factors in the cortex, striatum and 
cerebellum, using real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Genes such as GDNF, BDNF and 
integrin-alpha-M were up-regulated, while 
immediate-early-gene-transcription-factor NGF-IB and metallothionein-1/2 were 
down-regulated in the cortex of streptozotocin-treated rats. Conversely, NGF-IB, 
GDNF and BDNF mRNA expression did not alter in the striatum and cerebellum. 
However, integrin alpha-M and metallothionein-1/2 expressions decreased 
significantly in the striatum and increased in the cerebellum. These gene 
changes may provide an insight into the cascade of physiological abnormalities 
following the inhibition of neuronal insulin signal transduction. Additionally, 
similarities to neuronal cell death in sporadic Alzheimer's disease may become 
apparent.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2006-9305
PMID: 16914836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1491. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006;9(3 Suppl):35-44. doi: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s305.

Vulnerability of cortical neurons to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Braak H(1), Rüb U, Schultz C, Del Tredici K.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Neuroanatomy, J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany. Braak@em.uni-frankfurt.de

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD) are the most 
frequently occurring degenerative illnesses of the human nervous system. Both 
involve multiple neuronal systems, but only a few types of nerve cells are prone 
to develop the disease-associated intraneuronal alterations. In AD affected 
neurons produce neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads, while in PD they 
develop Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites. In both illnesses select types of 
projection cells that generate long, unmyelinated or sparsely myelinated axons 
are particularly susceptible. This kind of selective vulnerability induces a 
distinctive lesional pattern which evolves slowly over time and remains 
remarkably consistent across cases. In the present review, lesions developing in 
the cerebral cortex are described against the backdrop of the internal 
organisation and interconnectivities linking involved cortical areas and 
subcortical nuclei. In AD, six and in PD, three stages can be distinguished, 
reflecting the predictable manner in which the proteinaceous intraneuronal 
inclusions spread through the cerebral cortex. In AD stages I-II and in PD stage 
4, the pathological process makes inroads into the anteromedial temporal 
mesocortex, entorhinal allocortex, and Ammon's horn; thereafter, in AD stages 
III-IV and in PD stage 5, it proceeds into the adjoining high order association 
areas of the basal temporal neocortex. In AD stages V-VI and in PD stage 6, the 
damage affects additional neocortical association areas including first order 
association areas and eventually extends into the primary areas of the 
neocortex. The gradually evolving lesional pattern in AD and PD mirrors the 
ground plan of the cerebral cortex. The highest densities of lesions occur in 
the anterior mesocortical transitional zone between allo- and neocortex. From 
there, the involvement diminishes by degrees and extends into both the 
hippocampal formation and the neocortex. The severity of the neocortical lesions 
decreases in inverse proportion to the trajectories of increasing cortical 
differentiation and hierarchical refinement.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s305
PMID: 16914843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1492. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006;9(3 Suppl):367-72. doi: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s341.

Early Alzheimer's disease genetics.

Schellenberg GD(1).

Author information:
(1)Zachdad@u.washington.edu

The genetics community working on Alzheimer's disease and related dementias has 
made remarkable progress in the past 20 years. The cumulative efforts by 
multiple groups have lead to the identification of three autosomal dominant 
genes for early onset AD. These are the amyloid-beta protein precursor gene 
(APP), and the genes encoding presenilin1 and 2. The knowledge derived from this 
work has firmly established Abeta as a critical disease molecule and lead to 
candidate drugs currently in treatment trials. Work on a related disease, 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism - chromosome 17 type has also added to 
our understanding of pathogenesis by revealing that tau, the protein component 
of neurofibrillary tangles, is also a critical molecule in neurodegeneration. 
Lessons learned that still influence work on human genetics include the need to 
recognize and deal with genetic heterogeneity, a feature common to many genetic 
disorders. Genetic heterogeneity, if recognized, can be source of information. 
Another critical lesson is that clinical, molecular, and statistical scientists 
need to work closely on disease projects to succeed in solving the complex 
problems of common genetic disorders.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s341
PMID: 16914874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1493. J Alzheimers Dis. 2006;9(3 Suppl):373-80. doi: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s342.

Mutations in the tau gene (MAPT) in FTDP-17: the family with Multiple System 
Tauopathy with Presenile Dementia (MSTD).

Spillantini MG(1), Murrell JR, Goedert M, Farlow M, Klug A, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 2PY, UK. mgs11@cam.ac.uk

Work in 1980s and early 1990s established that the microtubule-associated 
protein tau is the major component of the paired helical filament of Alzheimer's 
disease. Similar filamentous deposits are also present in a number of other 
diseases, including progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration 
and Pick's disease. In 1998, the relevance of tau dysfunction for the 
neurodegenerative process became clear, when mutations in the tau gene were 
found to cause the inherited "frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17)". The paper highlighted here [Spillantini M.G., Murrell 
J.R., Goedert M., Farlow M., Klug A. and Ghetti B. (1998) Mutation in the tau 
gene in familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. USA 95, 7737-7741] reported a mutation at position + 3 in the intron 
following alternatively spliced exon 10 of the tau gene in a family.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2006-9s342
PMID: 16914875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1494. Neurosurg Focus. 1999 Sep 15;7(3):e1. doi: 10.3171/foc.1999.7.3.4.

An overview of central nervous system transplantation in human disease.

Breeze RE(1), Wang MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
Denver, Colorado.

Although its roots date back over a century, the field of neurotransplantation 
has been shaped mostly by advances over the past 30 years. Animal models of 
nigrostriatal disconnection in the 1970s allowed investigators to explore the 
feasibility of neural grafting. By the end of that decade, functional and 
behavioral effects had been demonstrated using fetal tissue grafts. In the 
1980s, animal experimentation continued, as did clinical trials involving 
patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. Both autologous adrenal medullary 
tissue and fetal allografts were tested in the clinical setting, with the latter 
proving to yield superior results. Animal models of striatal cell loss provided 
the impetus for limited clinical trials in patients with Huntington's disease by 
the early 1990s, and work with both diseases continues today. Although much has 
been learned, neural grafting remains experimental. Broader applications are 
being explored even now, though, as transplant techniques are applied to animal 
models of dementia, spinal cord injury, cortical injury, and pain. Some very 
limited human trials have already begun in some of these areas. In this review 
some of the advances in the field are highlighted.

DOI: 10.3171/foc.1999.7.3.4
PMID: 16918229


1495. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2006;22(4):288-95. doi: 10.1159/000095159. Epub 2006 
Aug 17.

Familial occurrence of dementia and parkinsonism: a systematic review.

Kurz MW(1), Schlitter AM, Larsen JP, Ballard C, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Heinrich Heine University Düsseldorf, Germany.

Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are 
common clinical dementias characterized neuropathologically by the presence of 
cortical Lewy body pathology and with distinct clinical and neurobiological 
similarities. Importantly, genetic factors seem to play a key role in the 
pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease. In the current article, we examine the 
evidence for a genetic component to DLB and PDD by reviewing studies of familial 
PDD and DLB as well as familial coincidental PDD and DLB, and report the genes 
involved. There is a convincing genetic overlap between both syndromes, 
suggesting that they share a common etiological factor.

Copyright (c) 2006 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000095159
PMID: 16921239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1496. Cell. 2006 Aug 25;126(4):655-7. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.011.

Improving synaptic function in a mouse model of AD.

Lansbury PT Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, 65 Landsdowne Street, 
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2006 Aug 25;126(4):775-88.

Memory loss is an early symptom of Alzheimer's Disease (AD). The findings of 
Gong et al. (2006) now indicate that enhancing the activity of UCH-L1, a 
ubiquitin hydrolase, alleviates the synaptic dysfunction and memory loss 
associated with a mouse model of AD. This work also raises the question of what 
role UCH-L1 might play in other diseases involving protein aggregation, such as 
Parkinson's Disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.cell.2006.08.011
PMID: 16923386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1497. Neurology. 2006 Aug 22;67(4):660-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000230161.28299.3c.

Lewy bodies in the amygdala increase risk for major depression in subjects with 
Alzheimer disease.

Lopez OL(1), Becker JT, Sweet RA, Martin-Sanchez FJ, Hamilton RL.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of Neurology, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA, USA. lopezol@upmc.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine the relationship between major depression and the 
presence of Lewy bodies (LBs) in patients with Alzheimer disease (AD).
METHODS: The authors examined the presence of major depression in 267 
pathologically diagnosed AD cases with Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
scores >9. LBs were identified in 142 (53%) patients using alpha-synuclein 
immunohistochemistry. Subjects were classified according to the Consensus 
Guidelines for the Clinical and Pathologic Diagnosis of Dementia with LB: 1 to 2 
(n = 21), 3 to 6 (n = 26), and 7 to 10 (n = 69). Twenty-six patients had LB only 
in the amygdala. All cases with LB scores 7 to 10 (or cortical) had amygdala 
LBs. The association between LBs and major depression was examined with logistic 
regression analyses, controlled for age at study entry, education level, MMSE 
scores, antidepressant use, follow-up time, and the presence of cerebrovascular 
disease.
RESULTS: Major depression was present in 11 (9%) AD alone cases, and in 25 (18%) 
of the AD + LBs cases; amygdala: 8 (31%), scores 1 to 2: 1 (5%), scores 3 to 6: 
3 (11.5%), and scores 7 to 10: 13 (14%). Major depression was associated with 
LBs, in general (relative risk [RR] = 3.06, 95% CI: 1.25 to 7.46), with amygdala 
only LBs (RR = 8.56 (95% CI: 1.83 to 40.3), and with LB scores 7 to 10 (RR = 
3.83, 95% CI: 1.33 to 11.0). There was an association between all amygdala LBs 
cases (amygdala only LBs + LB scores 7 to 10) and major depression (RR = 4.77, 
95% CI: 1.78 to 12.7), but no association was noted between LBs and depression 
in the absence of amygdala LBs (RR = 0.96, 95% CI: 0.46 to 1.06).
CONCLUSION: Lewy bodies (LBs) in the amygdala and in cortical areas increase the 
risk for major depression in Alzheimer disease. What is common in these two 
groups is the presence of LBs in the amygdala. That is, all of the cases with 
cortical LBs also had LBs in the amygdala, making this region the critical area 
for the development of depression.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000230161.28299.3c
PMID: 16924019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1498. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2006 Sep;6(5):379-86. doi: 10.1007/s11910-996-0018-7.

Olfactory dysfunction as a predictor of neurodegenerative disease.

Albers MW(1), Tabert MH, Devanand DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia UniversityCollege of Physicians and 
Surgeons, 710 West 168th Street,New York, NY 10032, USA. mwa28@columbia.edu

Olfactory dysfunction is present in patients diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease 
or idiopathic Parkinson's disease and can differentiate each of these disorders 
from related disorders with similar clinical presentations. The pathologic 
hallmarks of each disease are present in brain regions involved in processing 
olfactory input. Both the olfactory functional deficits and the corroborating 
pathologic lesions are present in asymptomatic subjects with increased risk of 
developing these diseases. Preclinical detection of neurodegenerative diseases 
is necessary to control their devastating effects on individuals and societies. 
We address whether olfactory dysfunction can be used to assess risk for 
developing Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's disease in asymptomatic 
individuals. We argue that further characterization and a deeper understanding 
of olfactory deficits in these neurodegenerative diseases at the molecular, 
cellular, and systems levels will augment our acumen for preclinical detection 
and elucidate pathogenic mechanisms to guide the development of new therapeutic 
modalities.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-996-0018-7
PMID: 16928347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1499. Eur J Neurol. 2006 Sep;13(9):990-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01391.x.

Risk factors for Alzheimer's disease in Russia: a case-control study.

Suhanov AV(1), Pilipenko PI, Korczyn AD, Hofman A, Voevoda MI, Shishkin SV, 
Simonova GI, Nikitin YP, Feigin VL.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Internal Medicine Siberian Branch of the Russian Academy of 
Medical Sciences, Novosibirsk, Russia.

No reliable data on risk factors of Alzheimer's disease (AD) are available in 
Russia. We aimed to evaluate the relative importance of various putative 
environmental and medical risk factors of AD in a Russian population. We 
conducted a hospital-based case-control study. Two hundred and sixty consecutive 
AD patients and an equal number of cognitive impairment-free control subjects 
matched for sex, age, level of education and place of birth selected from 
nursing homes and other long-term healthcare facilities in the Novosibirsk 
region for the period from 1998 to 2002 were examined. A conditional logistic 
regression analysis was employed to calculate odds ratios (OR) and corresponding 
95% confidence intervals (CI) for various putative risk factors. Of the 260 
patients with AD, 187 (72%) were females. Patients' age varied from 40 to 89 
years (mean +/- SD: 69.2 +/- 7.7 years). The majority of the patients (77%) had 
secondary education and 12% had university education. Risk factors independently 
associated with AD were family history of parkinsonism among first-degree 
relatives (OR = 4.2; 95% CI 1.2-15.1), hypothyroidism (OR = 2.7; 95% CI 
1.1-6.7), and history of head trauma with loss of consciousness (OR = 1.7; 95% 
CI 1.0-2.8). The most important risk factors for AD in the Russian community are 
family history of parkinsonism, hypothyroidism and a history of head trauma with 
loss of consciousness. These findings have implications for developing 
preventive strategies of AD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01391.x
PMID: 16930366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1500. Eur J Neurol. 2006 Sep;13(9):1026-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01404.x.

Primitive reflex evaluation in the clinical assessment of extrapyramidal 
syndromes.

Borroni B(1), Broli M, Costanzi C, Gipponi S, Gilberti N, Agosti C, Padovani A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy. 
bborroni@inwind.it

The aim of the present study was to evaluate the role of primitive reflexes 
(PRs) as additional alert sign in routine clinical practice in patients with 
extrapyramidal syndrome. We considered glabellar, snout, palmomental and grasp 
reflexes in patients with mild stage of Lewy body dementia (LBD), corticobasal 
degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy or Parkinson disease (PD). We also 
enrolled mild Alzheimer disease (AD) patients, and healthy subjects, as 
controls. LBD patients showed the highest prevalence of PRs compared with the 
other groups. The odds ratio of the risk of LBD in PRs > or = 2 was 27.9 (95% CI 
2.9-269.0) compared with control group, 14.6 (95% CI 2.7-79.6) compared with 
mild AD, and 19.7 (95% CI 3.7-104.3) compared with PD. These data suggest that 
the occurrence of combination of PRs might be an useful additional warning sign 
of possible diffuse Lewy body pathology more than other causes of extrapyramidal 
syndrome.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2006.01404.x
PMID: 16930372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


