1001. Neurobiol Aging. 2003 Nov;24(7):893-902. doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(03)00005-8.

Combination of serum markers related to several mechanisms in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Teunissen CE(1), Lütjohann D, von Bergmann K, Verhey F, Vreeling F, Wauters A, 
Bosmans E, Bosma H, van Boxtel MP, Maes M, Delanghe J, Blom HJ, Verbeek MM, 
Rieckmann P, De Bruijn C, Steinbusch HW, de Vente J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neuropsychology, European Graduate School of 
Neuroscience (Euron), Universiteit Maastricht, P.O. Box 616, 6200 MD Maastricht, 
The Netherlands. c.teunissen.cell@med.vu.nl

Alzheimer's disease (AD) probably involves several pathobiochemical mechanisms 
and this may be reflected by changes in different serum components. The present 
study investigated whether the combined analysis of serum molecules related to 
different mechanisms improves the discrimination of AD patients from healthy 
controls. Serum of patients with AD was analyzed for a broad spectrum of marker 
molecules, including 11 inflammatory proteins, 12 sterol intermediates and 
phytosterols, 2 brain-specific proteins and 4 constituents involved in 
homocysteine homeostasis. The serum molecule concentrations were combined in a 
logistic regression model, using a forward stepwise inclusion mode. The results 
showed that the combination of interleukin-6 (IL-6) receptor, protein alpha1 
fraction, cysteine and cholesterol concentrations improved the discrimination 
between AD patients and healthy controls compared to the single markers. In 
conclusion, the results of this study have shown that the complex pathology in 
AD is reflected in a pattern of altered serum concentrations of several marker 
molecules related to several pathobiochemical mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(03)00005-8
PMID: 12928047 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1002. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2003 Jul;3(4):306-13. doi: 10.1007/s11910-003-0007-z.

Behavioral changes associated with deep brain stimulation surgery for 
Parkinson's disease.

Anderson KE(1), Mullins J.

Author information:
(1)Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, University of 
Maryland School of Medicine, 22 South Greene Street, Room NW49A, Baltimore, MD 
21201, USA. kanderson@psych.umaryland.edu

Evaluation for psychiatric and cognitive dysfunction is a crucial part of 
preoperative assessment for deep brain stimulation (DBS) surgery. All candidates 
for DBS should be treated for active psychiatric disorders, and the treatment 
team should also screen for past psychiatric history, which may predispose to 
postoperative psychiatric illness. A wide range of behavioral symptoms have been 
seen following DBS, including depression, hallucinations or true psychosis, 
mania, and impulsivity. Suicidal ideation should be treated aggressively. 
Cognitive changes may occur, but data are currently too limited to make 
predictions regarding subtle effects on cognition. However, patients with 
dementia may experience further decline in cognitive function following DBS.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-003-0007-z
PMID: 12930700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1003. Rev Neurol. 2003 Jul 16-31;37(2):127-30.

[Dementia and Lewy bodies].

[Article in Spanish]

Kaufer D(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh Alzheimer Disease Research Center, Pittsburgh, PA 
15213, USA. dkaufer@pitt.edu

Consensus diagnostic criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) proposed in 
1996 have provided a useful foundation for research in the field. As a 
clinicopathologically defined entity, DLB has overlapping features of both 
Alzheimer s disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Consensus criteria for 
DLB distinguish it from PD dementia by the earlier appearance of motor signs in 
the latter. Studies evaluating the standardized clinical diagnostic criteria for 
DLB have generally found them to be highly predictive of Lewy body pathology. 
However, many cases with Lewy body pathology and concomitant pathological 
features of AD elude clinical detection. Emerging data suggests that AD 
pathological features mask the clinical expression of concomitant Lewy body 
pathology, and that DLB and PD dementia may be more similar than distinct.

PMID: 12938071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1004. Rev Neurol. 2003 Jul 16-31;37(2):145-9.

[Imaging of mild cognitive impairment].

[Article in Spanish]

Meltzer CC(1), Bell-Mc-Ginty S, Scanlon JM.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Radiología, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, Pensilbania 
15213-2582, USA. meltzercc@msx.upmc.edu

The refinement of in vivo imaging approaches to investigating the structure and 
function of the aging brain has provided the opportunity to strengthen our 
knowledge of the biological substrate of normal aging and late life neurological 
and psychiatric disorders. While postmortem studies are biased toward the end 
stages of disease, functional and structural imaging have permitted us to 
characterize the brain changes accompanying early Alzheimer s disease (AD). As 
more effective therapeutic approaches to slowing (and potentially reversing) 
disease progression are developed, the role of imaging in determining pre AD or 
high risk conditions becomes increasingly important. The goal of applying non 
invasive means to identify the transition state of mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) is of considerable public health importance. Further, emerging imaging 
strategies may be used to monitor the efficacy of therapeutic regimens.

PMID: 12938074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1005. Rev Neurol. 2003 Jul 16-31;37(2):155-63.

[Neuropathology of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment].

[Article in Spanish]

López OL(1), DeKosky ST.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Neurología, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Pittsburgh, 
Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. lopezol@msx.upmc.edu

The neuropathological hallmarks of Alzheimer s disease (AD) are the presence of 
senile (neuritic) plaques (NP), neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), synapse loss, and 
neuronal cell loss. Large neurons are more affected than small ones. AD patients 
can also have other non specific lesions, such as granulovacuolar degeneration, 
Hirano bodies, and Lewy bodies. AD patients present a loss of many cholinergic 
neurons, especially those located in the nucleus basalis of Meynert, as well as 
a decrease of choline acetyl transferase (ChAT) activity, which suggested that 
the core of the cognitive deficits of AD was caused by the loss of cholinergic 
input. Interestingly, recent studies conducted in subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) (these are patients that are at risk of developing AD) have 
shown that these subjects can have NP and NFT in the neocortex and allocortex, 
with relatively normal levels of ChAT in a variety of brain regions. This 
suggests the structures of the cholinergic system are preserved in early stages 
of the disease. Scientists have made significant advances in understanding both 
the clinical manifestations and pathobiological manifestations of AD. However, 
the mechanisms of specific vulnerability of the cholinergic system to AD, as 
well as the initial process that leads to the complex neuropathological lesions 
are unknown.

PMID: 12938076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1006. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2003 Jun;85(2-5):473-82. doi: 
10.1016/s0960-0760(03)00220-6.

Estrogens and menopause: pharmacology of conjugated equine estrogens and their 
potential role in the prevention of neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's.

Bhavnani BR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Institute of Medical Sciences, 
University of Toronto, and St. Michael's Hospital Research Center, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada M5B 1W8. bhavnani@smh.toronto.on.ca

Menopause marks the start of a new phase in a woman's life that is associated 
with a decrease in circulating estrogen levels. Although the average age of 
women has increased from 50 to nearly 85 years, the average age at menopause has 
remained essentially constant at 50 years. Thus, women now spend nearly a third 
of their lives in an estrogen deficient state. This normal aging process in 
women is associated with increasing health problems such as osteoporosis, 
cardiovascular disease, neurodegenerative diseases, and cancer. Estrogen 
replacement therapy (ERT) has been shown to play an important beneficial role in 
the health and well being of postmenopausal women. Several estrogen preparations 
are available and among these conjugated equine estrogens (CEE) are most 
frequently used. The drug CEE, is a complex natural urinary extract of pregnant 
mare's urine and contains at least 10 estrogens in their sulfate ester form and 
these are the ring B saturated estrogens: estrone (E(1)), 17beta-estradiol 
(17beta-E(2)), 17alpha-estradiol (17alpha-E(2)), and the ring B unsaturated 
estrogens equilin (Eq), 17beta-dihydroequilin (17beta-Eq), 
17alpha-dihydroequilin (17alpha-Eq), equilenin (Eqn), 17beta-dihydroequilenin 
(17beta-Eqn), 17alpha-dihydroequilenin (17alpha-Eqn), and Delta(8)-estrone 
(Delta(8)-E(1)). All of these estrogens in their unconjugated form are 
biologically active and can interact with recombinant human estrogen receptor 
alpha (ERalpha) and beta (ERbeta) with 17beta-estradiol and 
17beta-dihydroequilin having the highest affinity for both receptors. A number 
of the ring B unsaturated estrogens had nearly twofold higher affinity for the 
ERbeta. The pharmacokinetics of these estrogens in postmenopausal women indicate 
that the unconjugated estrogens compared to their sulfated forms are cleared 
more rapidly. The 17-keto estrogens are metabolized to the more potent 
17beta-reduced products which are cleared at a slower rate. In postmenopausal 
women, the extent of 17beta-activation is much higher with the ring B 
unsaturated estrogens than with ring B saturated estrogens. Oxidized LDL and 
oxidative stress are thought to contribute to both atherosclerosis and 
neurodegenerative disorders. Neurons in particular are at a high risk from 
damage resulting from oxidative stress. In vivo and in vitro studies indicate 
that the oxidation of LDL isolated from postmenopausal women was inhibited 
differently by various estrogens and other antioxidants. The unique ring B 
unsaturated estrogens were the most potent while the red wine component 
t-resveratrol was the least potent. Studies were designed to explore the 
cellular and molecular mechanisms that may be involved in the neuroprotective 
effects of CEE components. The data indicate that the neurotoxic effects of 
oxidized LDL and glutamate can be inhibited by various estrogens, with the ring 
B unsaturated estrogens being the most active. These effects are involved in the 
inhibition of DNA fragmentation and up-regulation of anti-apoptotic protein 
Bcl-2 and down-regulation of pro-apoptotic protein Bax. These combined data 
suggest that some of the neuroprotective benefits associated with long-term 
estrogen therapy may occur by the above mechanism(s). Because estrogens such as 
the Delta(8)-estrogens are relatively less feminizing than the classical 
estrogen 17beta-estradiol, they may be important in the development of more 
neuro-specific estrogens that will be useful in the prevention of 
neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson disease, in both 
men and women.

DOI: 10.1016/s0960-0760(03)00220-6
PMID: 12943738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1007. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2003;(65):185-95. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0643-3_11.

The role of acetylcholine and dopamine in dementia and psychosis in Parkinson's 
disease.

Bosboom JL(1), Stoffers D, Wolters ECh.

Author information:
(1)Research Institute Neurosciences Vrije Universiteit, Department of Neurology, 
Vrije Universiteit University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder in which there 
is abnormal degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra and the 
ventral tegmental area combined with a varying degree of deterioration of the 
cholinergic, serotonergic and noradrenergic system, leading to a variety of 
motor and non-motor abnormalities. Dopamine (DA) depletion in nigrostriatal 
projections manifests with abnormal spontaneous motor behavior and (subtle) 
cognitive deficits, whereas more overt cognitive impairment may develop with 
concomitant DA-deficiency related mesocorticolimbic denervation. In combination 
with a progressive dysfunction of the ascending neocortical cholinergic (and 
serotonergic and noradrenergic) projections, mainly due to a loss of cholinergic 
neurons in the nucleus basalis of Meynert (NbM), these cognitive deficits may 
proceed into dementia sometimes in combination with psychotic behavior, which 
might also be associated with dopaminomimetic and/or anticholinergic treatment 
as well as with cholinergic deficit or dopaminomimetic induced REM sleep 
disturbances. As these psychiatric symptoms have a substantial negative effect 
on the patient's quality of life, contribute to caregiver distress and are 
predictive of nursing home placement, identification and adequate treatment is 
of great importance. Recent evidence supports a possible role for cholinomimetic 
therapy in alleviating cognitive dysfunction and psychotic symptoms in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0643-3_11
PMID: 12946056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1008. Proc Biol Sci. 2003 Aug 7;270 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S62-4. doi: 
10.1098/rsbl.2003.0012.

Preliminary evaluation of nanoscale biogenic magnetite in Alzheimer's disease 
brain tissue.

Hautot D(1), Pankhurst QA, Khan N, Dobson J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physics and Astronomy, University College London, London WC1E 
6BT, UK.

Elevated iron levels are associated with many types of neurodegenerative 
disease, such as Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases. However, 
these elevated iron levels do not necessarily correlate with elevated levels of 
the iron storage or transport proteins, ferritin and transferrin. As such, 
little is known about the form of this excess iron. It has recently been 
proposed that some of the excess iron in neurodegenerative tissue may be in the 
form of the magnetic iron oxide magnetite (Fe(3)O(4)). We demonstrate, for the 
first time to our knowledge, using highly sensitive superconducting quantum 
interference device (SQUID) magnetometry, that the concentrations of magnetite 
are found to be significantly higher in three samples of Alzheimer's disease 
tissue than in three age- and sex-matched controls. These results have 
implications, not only for disease progression, but also for possible early 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1098/rsbl.2003.0012
PMCID: PMC1698038
PMID: 12952638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1009. Ann Neurol. 2003 Sep;54(3):393-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.10680.

Caspase activation in the limbic cortex of subjects with early Alzheimer's 
disease.

Gastard MC(1), Troncoso JC, Koliatsos VE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine, 720 Rutland Avenue, Baltimore, MD 21205-2196, USA.

We investigated the cleavage of caspase-3, a marker of apoptosis, in the medial 
temporal lobe of older subjects with minimal cognitive deficits and low 
CERAD/intermediate Braak scores, that is, clinicopathological descriptors of 
early Alzheimer's disease (AD). The activation of caspase-3 was studied with 
immunoprecipitation-mass spectroscopy and immunocytochemistry, including 
colocalization with paired helical filaments in the neuropil and perikarya. We 
found that caspase-3 is activated in the parahippocampal gyrus in subjects with 
mild AD and that this event is silenced in more advanced illness. Caspase-3 
immunoreactivity has a tangle-like appearance that coevolves with paired helical 
filament pathology within neurons. We propose that activation of apoptosis may 
occur very early in the medial temporal lobe in AD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10680
PMID: 12953274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1010. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Jan;29(1):108-16. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300302.

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptor distribution in Alzheimer's disease, dementia 
with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease, and vascular dementia: in vitro binding 
study using 5-[(125)i]-a-85380.

Pimlott SL(1), Piggott M, Owens J, Greally E, Court JA, Jaros E, Perry RH, Perry 
EK, Wyper D.

Author information:
(1)West of Scotland Radionuclide Dispensary, North Glasgow University Hospitals 
NHS Trust, Western Infirmary, Glasgow, UK. 0011041p@student.gla.ac.uk

Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) have been implicated in a number of 
neurological disorders. 5-Iodo-3-[2(S)-2-azetidinylmethoxy]pyridine 
(5-I-A-85380) is a novel nAChR marker, binding predominantly to the alpha4beta2 
subtype. This in vitro autoradiography study describes the distribution of 
5-[(125)I]-A-85380 binding in post-mortem brain tissue from normal elderly 
individuals and from cases with age-associated dementias of both 
neurodegenerative and vascular types. The binding distribution of 
5-[(125)I]-A-85380 in normal brain tissue was found to be consistent with the 
reported distribution of other high-affinity nicotinic ligands. In addition to 
high thalamic and moderate striatal and temporal cortex density, moderate 
5-[(125)I]-A-85380 binding was also seen in white matter tracts in cingulate, 
occipital, and temporal areas, indicating the presence of nAChRs along nerve 
fiber tracts, which has not been reported in other high-affinity nicotinic 
agonist distribution studies. In Parkinson's disease (PD), loss of striatal 
5-[(125)I]-A-85380 binding closely parallels the loss of nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic markers previously observed. In dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
reduced striatal 5-[(125)I]-A-85380 binding density, comparable to that in PD, 
may be a marker of early degeneration in nigrostriatal inputs, while in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) reduced striatal 5-[(125)I]-A-85380 binding could be 
related to reduced cortical inputs. The reductions of nAChRs seen in AD, DLB, 
and PD were not apparent in vascular dementia (VaD). In conclusion, 5-I-A-85380 
is clearly a useful ligand for both in vitro and in vivo single photon emission 
tomography human studies investigating disease symptoms and progression, 
response to acetylcholinesterase-inhibiting drugs and in differentiating primary 
degenerative dementia from VaD.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300302
PMID: 12955099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1011. Radiologe. 2003 Jul;43(7):521-30. doi: 10.1007/s00117-003-0919-2. Epub 2003 Jun 
25.

[PET and SPECT investigations in Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in German]

Asenbaum S(1).

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinik für Nuklearmedizin, Universitätsklinik für Neurologie, 
Vienna, Austria. susanne.asenbaum@univie.ac.at

Nuclear medicine offers a wide range of possibilities to investigate dementia. 
Various SPECT and PET tracers will be introduced in this article first. 
Different questions concerning evaluation of dementia are discussed taking 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) as an example. It is important to perform nuclear 
medicine investigations on high technical level, using standardized methods as 
statistical parametric mapping (SPM) for evaluation. If neuroprotective 
therapies are available, an early diagnosis, the determination of risk factors 
and longitudinal investigations will be the focus of interest and the main goal 
of nuclear medicine. Apart from measuring cerebral perfusion and glucose 
metabolism the development of new ligands, concerning the cholinergic system and 
the visualization of amyloid plaques, is of great importance.

DOI: 10.1007/s00117-003-0919-2
PMID: 12955214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1012. Artif Intell Med. 2003 Sep-Oct;29(1-2):61-79. doi: 
10.1016/s0933-3657(03)00046-0.

Reliable diagnoses of dementia by the naive credal classifier inferred from 
incomplete cognitive data.

Zaffalon M(1), Wesnes K, Petrini O.

Author information:
(1)IDSIA, Galleria 2, 6928 Manno, (Lugano), Switzerland. zaffalon@idsia.ch

Dementia is a serious personal, medical and social problem. Recent research 
indicates early and accurate diagnoses as the key to effectively cope with it. 
No definitive cure is available but in some cases when the impairment is still 
mild the disease can be contained. This paper describes a diagnostic tool that 
jointly uses the naive credal classifier and the most widely used computerized 
system of cognitive tests in dementia research, the Cognitive Drug Research 
system. The naive credal classifier extends the discrete naive Bayes classifier 
to imprecise probabilities. The naive credal classifier models both prior 
ignorance and ignorance about the likelihood by sets of probability 
distributions. This is a new way to deal with small and incomplete datasets that 
departs significantly from most established classification methods. In the 
empirical study presented here, the naive credal classifier provides reliability 
and unmatched predictive performance. It delivers up to 95% correct predictions 
while being very robust with respect to the partial ignorance due to the largely 
incomplete data. The diagnostic tool also proves to be very effective in 
discriminating between Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0933-3657(03)00046-0
PMID: 12957781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1013. CNS Drugs. 2003;17(12):853-67. doi: 10.2165/00023210-200317120-00001.

Neural transplantation in patients with Huntington's disease.

Rosser AE(1), Dunnett SB.

Author information:
(1)School of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK. rosserae@cf.ac.uk

The gene for Huntington's disease was identified in 1993 as being a CAG repeat 
expansion in exon 1 of a gene now known as huntingtin on chromosome 4. Although 
many of the downstream effects of this mutant gene were identified in the 
subsequent years, a more detailed understanding of these events will be 
necessary in order to design specific interventions to interfere with the 
disease process and slow disease progression. In parallel, a number of groups 
have been investigating alternative approaches to treatment of Huntington's 
disease, including cell and tissue transplantation. As the brunt of cell 
dysfunction and loss is borne by the striatum, at least in the early to 
mid-stages of disease, the goal is to identify methods for replacing lost cells 
with fetal neuroblasts that can develop, integrate into the host circuitry and 
thereby restore lost function. Clinical studies in which primary fetal 
neuroblasts were transplanted into the brains of patients with advanced 
Parkinson's disease have demonstrated benefit when the transplant methodology 
closely follows the biological principles established in animal experiments. On 
the basis of demonstrated benefit following striatal cell transplantation in 
animal models of Huntington's disease, a small number of studies have now 
commenced in patients with Huntington's disease. To date, these clinical studies 
have demonstrated the feasibility and safety of transplantation in this 
condition, but it will require several more years yet before the efficacy of the 
procedure can be confidently established.

DOI: 10.2165/00023210-200317120-00001
PMID: 12962526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1014. J Cogn Neurosci. 2003 Jul 1;15(5):629-42. doi: 10.1162/089892903322307357.

Task-set switching deficits in early-stage Huntington's disease: implications 
for basal ganglia function.

Aron AR(1), Watkins L, Sahakian BJ, Monsell S, Barker RA, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge, UK.

Executive functions are likely mediated by interconnected circuits including 
frontal lobe and basal ganglia structures. We assessed the executive function of 
task switching in patients with early-stage Huntington's disease (HD), a 
neurodegenerative disease affecting the basal ganglia. In two experiments, the 
HD patients had greater difficulty when switching than when repeating a task 
than matched controls, and this was true even when scaling for the overall 
slowing of the patients. In the first experiment, HD patients had a switching 
deficit even in a "pure" condition where they had to switch, predictably, and 
with substantial preparation time, between stimuli having only one possible 
response, indicating a switching deficit different from that for patients with 
Parkinson's disease or frontal lobe trauma, and possibly relating to inadequate 
activation of stimulus-response links or "response set." In the more elaborate 
second experiment, we could not account for the switching deficit of the 
patients in terms of inadequate preparation in advance of a switch, deficient 
suppression of task-set processing from the preswitch trial, or impaired 
suppression of interference due to the presence of a competing task set. 
Instead, we found that part of the switching deficit was due to elevated 
reaction time and errors on switch trials for a repeated response (same button 
press as on preswitch trial) relative to an alternated response (different 
button press from preswitch trial). We argue that this elevated "repetition 
effect" for the HD patients is due to excessive inhibition of the just-performed 
response in advance of a switch. Alterations in the "response-setting" process 
alone (Experiment 1) and both the response-setting and "response inhibition" 
process (Experiment 2) probably arise from striatal pathology in HD, thus 
accounting for the task-switching deficits and showing how basal ganglia 
implemented response processes may underpin executive function.

DOI: 10.1162/089892903322307357
PMID: 12965037 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1015. WMJ. 2003;102(4):37-42.

Risk factors associated with hospitalization for unintentional falls: Wisconsin 
hospital discharge data for patients aged 65 and over.

Guse CE(1), Porinsky R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine and Injury Research Center, 
Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wis 53226, USA. cguse@mcw.edu

OBJECTIVE: To identify risk factors associated with hospitalizations for falls 
in Wisconsin in patients aged 65 and older.
METHODS: This study was a cross-sectional study of year 2000 hospital inpatient 
discharge records for patients aged 65 and older who did not have a 
diagnosis-related group code indicating rehabilitation, obtained from the 
Wisconsin Bureau of Health Information. The database includes all discharges 
from all non-federal Wisconsin hospitals.
RESULTS: Of 223,085 discharged older adults, 6.9% had an unintentional fall 
diagnosis. Independent predictors of an unintentional fall diagnosis were age, 
sex, time of year of discharge, region of residence, alcohol-related problems, 
dementia, Parkinson's disease, mechanical and motor problems, altered 
consciousness, convulsions/epilepsy, anemia, and glaucoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Alcohol-related problems and mechanical and motor problems 
significantly increased the risk of a fall diagnosis in hospitalized patients 
aged 65 and over.

PMID: 12967020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1016. Ideggyogy Sz. 2003 Jul 20;56(7-8):242-8.

[Two cases of frontotemporal dementia].

[Article in Hungarian]

Szabó E(1), Szabó M.

Author information:
(1)Jósa András Megyei Kórház, Pszichiátriai Osztály, 4412, Nyíregyháza, Sóstói 
u. 62. szaboem@axelero.hu

Frontotemporal dementias represent the third most common cause of primer 
degenerative dementias next to Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body disease. 
Frontotemporal dementia constitutes 10-20% of all praesenilis dementias. The 
authors present the results of the 10 years' clinical, neuropsychological, 
neuropathological examinations and brain imaging with the examples of two cases. 
At the early stage of frontotemporal dementia changes of personality and social 
conduct are prominent, whereas cognitive functions are relatively well 
preserved. The usual dementia tests are not sufficiently sensitive to disclose 
non-cognitive symptoms. Clinical diagnosis as well as differentiation from 
functional psychiatric disorders can be difficult. Brain imaging present the 
frontal and the anterior temporal lobe atrophy and selective hypometabolism in 
these areas. The typical onset is between at the age 50 and 65 years. It is very 
rare under the age of 30. The symptoms of two patients started at the age of 
42-44. The first diagnosis was post traumatic stress disorder. Later stereotyped 
behaviour, mental rigidity, hyperorality, irritability, progressive reduction of 
speech and vegetative dysfunctions appeared. Besides the affecting of the 
irresistibly worsening symptoms and the medical care requiring strength and 
inventiveness, the authentic informing of the relatives is also a challenge. The 
caregivers have special relationship with the patients and their relatives.

PMID: 12971119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1017. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2003 May;13(2):197-209. doi: 
10.1016/s1052-5149(03)00025-x.

Neuroimaging in Alzheimer disease: an evidence-based review.

Kantarci K(1), Jack CR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. kantarci.kejal@mayo.edu

Current clinical criteria (DSM-IIIR and NINCDS-ADRDA) for the diagnosis of 
dementia and AD are reliable; however, these criteria remain to be validated by 
clinicians of different levels of expertise at different clinical settings. 
Structural neuroimaging has an important role in initial evaluation of dementia 
for ruling out potentially treatable causes. Although CT is the appropriate 
choice when brain tumors, subdural hematoma, or normal pressure hydrocephalus is 
suspected, MR imaging is more sensitive to the white-matter changes in vascular 
dementia. The diagnostic accuracy of PET, SPECT, 1H MRS, and MR volumetry of the 
hippocampus for distinguishing patients with AD from healthy elderly individuals 
is comparable to the accuracy of a pathologically confirmed clinical diagnosis. 
Sensitivity of PET for distinguishing patients with dementia with Lewy bodies 
from AD, however, is higher than that of clinical evaluation; similarly, SPECT 
and 1H MRS may be adjuncts to clinical evaluation for distinguishing patients 
with frontotemporal dementia from those with AD. Neuroimaging is valuable in 
predicting future development of AD in patients with MCI and in carriers of the 
ApoE epsilon 4 allele who are at a higher risk of developing AD than are 
cognitively normal elderly individuals. Quantitative MR techniques (e.g., MR 
volumetry, DWI, magnetization transfer MR imaging, and 1H MRS) and PET are 
sensitive to the structural and functional changes in the brains of patients 
with MCI, and hippocampal volumes on MR imaging are associated with future 
development of AD in these individuals. PET is also sensitive to the regional 
metabolic decline in the brains of carriers of the ApoE epsilon 4 allele. The 
longitudinal decrease of whole brain and hippocampal volumes on MR imaging, NAA 
levels on 1H MRS, cerebral glucose metabolism on PET, and cerebral blood flow on 
SPECT are associated with rate of cognitive decline in patients with AD. These 
neuroimaging markers may be useful for monitoring symptomatic progression in 
groups of patients with AD for drug trials. Furthermore, antemortem MR-based 
hippocampal volumes correlate with the pathologic stage of AD, and the rate of 
hippocampal volume loss on MR imaging correlates with clinical disease 
progression in the cognitive continuum from normal aging to MCI and to AD. 
Hence, as an in vivo correlate of pathologic involvement, structural imaging 
measures are potential surrogate markers for disease progression in patients 
with established AD and in patients with prodromal AD, who will benefit most 
from disease-modifying therapies underway.

DOI: 10.1016/s1052-5149(03)00025-x
PMID: 13677801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1018. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2003 Sep;159(8-9):762-6.

[The profile of memory disturbance in early Lewy body dementia differs from that 
in Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in French]

Mormont E(1), Laurier-Grymonprez L, Baisset-Mouly C, Pasquier F.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Cliniques Universitaires UCL de Mont-Godinne, Yvoir, 
Belgique. eric.mormont@nchm.ucl.ac.be

It may be difficult to distinguish Lewy body dementia (LBD) from Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) especially at an early stage. Clinical diagnostic criteria for LBD 
still lack sensitivity. We compared memory performance in early AD and LBD to 
identify features that may help to distinguish these two conditions. Patients 
with Mini Mental State scores equal or above 18 were consecutively selected 
retrospectively from the University Out-patient Memory Clinic database. Probable 
LBD and AD were respectively diagnosed according to the international consensus 
criteria and the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria. Short-term memory was assessed with the 
digit span subtest of the Wechsler Memory Scale and the Corsi block-tapping 
test. Long term verbal memory was assessed with a French version of the Grober 
and Buschke test. Long-term visual memory was tested with the recall of four 
geometric figures of the CERAD battery. There was no difference between the two 
groups in short-term or long-term visual memory. Except for the immediate and 
first free recalls, DCL patients performed significantly better than AD patients 
in all subtests of the Grober and Buschke test. The more striking differences 
were seen with the third total and delayed total recall. These results highlight 
the differences of memory impairment pattern in early LBD and AD. Episodic 
verbal memory is better in LBD patients who benefit more from cues, reflecting 
the subcortical component of the disease. Such neuropsychological data should be 
validated prospectively and further be part of the diagnostic criteria.

PMID: 13679718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1019. Clin Chem. 2003 Oct;49(10):1717-25. doi: 10.1373/49.10.1717.

Familial frontotemporal dementia: from gene discovery to clinical molecular 
diagnostics.

Van Deerlin VM(1), Gill LH, Farmer JM, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA. vivianna@mail.med.upenn.edu

Genetic testing is important for diagnosis and prediction of many diseases. The 
development of a clinical genetic test can be rapid for common disorders, but 
for rare genetic disorders this process can take years, if it occurs at all. We 
review the path from gene discovery to development of a clinical genetic test, 
using frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17) as an example of a complex, rare genetic condition. An Institutional 
Review Board-approved multidisciplinary research program was developed to 
identify patients with familial frontotemporal dementia. Genetic counseling is 
provided and DNA obtained to identify mutations associated with FTDP-17. In some 
cases it may be appropriate for individuals to be given the opportunity to learn 
information from the research study to prevent unnecessary diagnostic studies or 
the utilization of inappropriate therapies, and to make predictive testing 
possible. Mutations identified in a research laboratory must be confirmed in a 
clinical laboratory to be used clinically. To facilitate the development of 
clinical genetic testing for a rare disorder, it is useful for a research 
laboratory to partner with a clinical laboratory. Most clinical molecular assays 
are developed in research laboratories and must be properly validated. We 
conclude that the transition of genetic testing for rare diseases from the 
research laboratory to the clinical laboratory requires a validation process 
that maintains the quality-control elements necessary for genetic testing but is 
flexible enough to permit testing to be developed for the benefit of patients 
and families.

DOI: 10.1373/49.10.1717
PMID: 14500612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1020. Mov Disord. 2003 Sep;18 Suppl 6:S72-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.10566.

Current treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies and dementia associated with 
Parkinson's disease.

Burn DJ(1), McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Regional Neurosciences Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, United Kingdom. d.j.burn@ncl.ac.uk

Dementia in Parkinson's disease (PDD) is a frequent and distressing complication 
with major consequences. Clinical and pathological features closely link PDD and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), suggesting they represent part of the same 
disease spectrum. Although dopaminergic deficiency primarily determines the 
akinetic-rigid symptoms of PDD and DLB, there is overwhelming evidence that 
cholinergic dysfunction underpins many of the cognitive impairments and 
psychotic features. Open-label studies have suggested that cholinesterase 
inhibitor drugs may exert positive effects upon all aspects of the 
neuropsychiatric syndrome in PDD and DLB but particularly apathy, anxiety, 
impaired attention, hallucinations, delusions, sleep disturbance, and cognitive 
test performance. Worsening of extrapyramidal motor features is reported only 
rarely. Initial double-blind, placebo-controlled studies in PDD and DLB have so 
far confirmed these encouraging results. Early identification of PD patients at 
greatest risk of developing dementia would permit early use of disease modifying 
treatments which represent the "golden fleece" management approach to these 
groups.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10566
PMID: 14502659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1021. Mov Disord. 2003 Sep;18 Suppl 6:S80-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.10567.

Psychosis in Parkinson's disease.

Poewe W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Innsbruck, Innsbruck, Austria. 
werner.poewe@uibk.ac.at

Psychosis is a disabling nonmotor complication of Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Visual hallucinations are the most common clinical manifestation and have been 
observed in up to 40% of patients with advanced disease in hospital-based 
series. Age, cognitive dysfunction, depression, as well as severity and duration 
of disease have all been identified as risk factors in multiple studies. All 
major antiparkinsonian drugs can induce psychosis in at-risk patients. Early 
drug-induced psychosis has been observed in up to 16% of patients treated with 
dopamine agonists and has been associated with increased risk for the 
development of dementia later on. Management of psychosis in PD is complex and 
includes control of potential triggers and reductions of polypharmacy as well as 
the addition of atypical antipsychotics. Cholinesterase inhibitors may prove an 
additional option in psychotic PD patients with dementia.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10567
PMID: 14502660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1022. Mov Disord. 2003 Sep;18 Suppl 6:S88-95. doi: 10.1002/mds.10568.

Use of functional imaging in Parkinsonism and dementia.

Burn DJ(1), O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Regional Neurosciences Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, United Kingdom. d.j.burn@ncl.ac.uk

Neuropsychiatric symptoms, including dementia, frequently coexist with 
parkinsonian disorders and may cause diagnostic confusion as well as management 
problems. Functional imaging studies include single photon emission computerised 
tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET), proton magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy, diffusion tensor imaging, and functional magnetic 
resonance imaging. This review addresses the utility of these techniques, from 
the clinician's perspective, focusing on the most common causes of parkinsonism 
and cognitive impairment, Parkinson's disease with dementia, dementia with Lewy 
bodies, and Alzheimer's disease. The potential and limitations of these 
techniques for accurate and early diagnosis, monitoring disease progression, and 
establishing the pathophysiological basis underlying key clinical features are 
considered. The development of new probes for SPECT and PET cameras capable of 
labeling protein aggregates (e.g., beta-amyloid) will offer exciting new 
insights into the spatial and temporal pattern of pathophysiological processes. 
Longitudinal studies with clinicopathological correlation represent the "gold 
standard" for fully evaluating functional imaging techniques.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10568
PMID: 14502661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1023. Mov Disord. 2003 Sep;18(9):1018-26. doi: 10.1002/mds.10488.

Diagnostic accuracy of progressive supranuclear palsy in the Society for 
Progressive Supranuclear Palsy brain bank.

Josephs KA(1), Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Diagnostic accuracy has been addressed previously for Parkinson's disease in a 
brain bank collection, but accuracy of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) has 
not been addressed in a similar setting. Clinical and genetic features of 
pathologically confirmed cases of PSP were compared with misdiagnosed cases to 
determine ways to improve diagnostic accuracy. Medical records were reviewed for 
180 cases sent to the Society of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy Brain Bank that 
had standardized neuropathologic evaluations as well as determination of 
apolipoprotein E and tau genotypes. Of the 180 cases studied, 137 had PSP and 43 
had other pathologic diagnoses. Corticobasal degeneration (CBD), multiple system 
atrophy (MSA), and diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD) accounted for 70% of the 
misdiagnosed cases. History of tremor, psychosis, dementia, and asymmetric 
findings were more frequent in misdiagnosed cases. The frequency of H1 tau 
haplotype (93 vs. 80%) and H1H1 genotype (86 vs. 66%) were significantly greater 
and APOE epsilon4 carrier state was significantly less (17 vs. 41 %) in PSP 
compared with misdiagnosed cases. Pathologic evaluation of clinically diagnosed 
PSP remains important for definitive diagnosis, and CBD, MSA, and DLBD are the 
disorders most likely to be misdiagnosed as PSP. Tremor, psychosis, early 
dementia, asymmetric findings, absence of H1 haplotype, and presence of APOE 
epsilon4 should raise questions about a diagnosis of PSP.

Copyright 2003 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10488
PMID: 14502669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1024. Neurol Res. 2003 Sep;25(6):661-4. doi: 10.1179/016164103101201968.

Comparison between Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia: implications for 
treatment.

Kalaria RN(1).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle General Hospital, 
Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 6BE, UK. r.n.kalaria@ncl.ac.uk

Virtually 90% of the elderly with late-onset dementia exhibit neuropathological 
features consistent with Alzheimer's disease (AD), vascular dementia (VaD) or 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), alone or in combination. Both AD and DLB reveal 
extensive senile plaques containing amyloid beta whereas neurofibrillary tangles 
evident as tau pathology are fewer in DLB, which also bears diffuse cortical 
Lewy bodies. Interestingly, however, there is considerable overlap between AD 
and VaD in terms of both risk factors and pathology. Cholinergic deficits are 
also encountered in VaD, which like AD may respond to cholinergic therapy. 
Cerebrovascular pathology, ischemic brain damage and autonomic dysregulation 
resulting in cerebral hypoperfusion appears fundamental in the pathogenesis of 
late-onset dementias.

DOI: 10.1179/016164103101201968
PMID: 14503021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1025. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2003 Oct;29(5):503-10. doi: 
10.1046/j.1365-2990.2003.00453.x.

Tau pathology in the olfactory bulb correlates with Braak stage, Lewy body 
pathology and apolipoprotein epsilon4.

Tsuboi Y(1), Wszolek ZK, Graff-Radford NR, Cookson N, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

Olfactory dysfunction increases with disease severity in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), is early and independent of disease severity in Parkinson's disease (PD), 
but is absent in progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD). Previous histopathologic studies of olfactory bulbs in AD 
have shown neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and senile plaques while Lewy bodies 
(LBs) have been described in PD. Little is known about olfactory bulb pathology 
in PSP and CBD. Tau and alpha-synuclein pathology was assessed with 
immunohistochemistry in olfactory bulbs of AD (N=15), Lewy body disease (LBD; 
N=10), LBD with concurrent AD (AD/LBD; N=19), PSP (N=27), CBD (N=3) and cases 
with no significant neurodegenerative pathology (NSP; N=15). The Braak NFT 
stage, counts of senile plaques and NFT in cortical and hippocampal sections, 
and counts of LBs in amygdala and cortical sections were recorded for each case. 
Apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotypes were determined on DNA prepared from frozen 
brain tissue. All AD and AD/LBD cases and nine of 10 LBD cases had tau pathology 
in the anterior olfactory nucleus (AON), but it was uncommon in PSP (9/27), CBD 
(0/3) and NSP (5/15). Multiple linear regression analysis demonstrated that tau 
pathology in the AON correlated with Braak stage (P<0.001), cortical LB counts 
(P<0.001), as well as APOE epsilon4. Tau pathology is common in the olfactory 
bulb of AD and LBD but is minimal or absent in PSP and CBD. It correlates with 
APOE epsilon4, severity of tau pathology in the brain and surprisingly with 
cortical and amygdala LBs, suggesting a possible synergistic effect between tau 
and synuclein in the AON in cases with both pathologic processes.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1365-2990.2003.00453.x
PMID: 14507342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1026. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2003;16(4):181-6. doi: 10.1159/000072800.

A 6-year study of cognition and spatial function in the demented and 
non-demented elderly: the Sydney Older Persons Study.

Bennett HP(1), Piguet O, Grayson DA, Creasey H, Waite LM, Broe GA, Halliday GM.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Education and Research on Ageing, Concord Hospital, University of 
Sydney, NSW, Australia. hayley.bennett@unsw.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Spatial function has been suggested to be disproportionately worse 
in people with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) than other dementia groups, and 
poor performance on the Mini-Mental State Examination pentagon copying (PC) task 
has been proposed as adequate for assessing this. We aimed to establish the 
prevalence of poor PC in the non-demented elderly; determine the validity of the 
use of PC as a spatial function test, and determine if poor PC is more common in 
DLB than non-DLB dementias.
METHODS: In a population-based sample of 299 participants, 126 were rated as 
being cognitively normal (clinical rating scale [CDR] = 0), 95 mildly 
cognitively impaired (CDR = 0.5), and 78 met criteria for dementia, 19 of whom 
met criteria for probable DLB (pDLB) and 25 with none of the core features of 
DLB (non-DLB). The accuracy of PC performance was determined across CDR groups, 
and the relationship of PC to performance on a broad range of cognitive tests 
was evaluated. The dementia groups were compared cross-sectionally to determine 
differences in PC and other cognitive test performance, as well as 3 and 6 years 
earlier to determine cognitive differences at initial stages of cognitive 
decline.
RESULTS: Poor PC was common in the non-demented elderly (39% CDR = 0; 43% CDR = 
0.5). In this non-demented group, PC was selectively related to tests of spatial 
function. Poor PC was not significantly different in the pDLB and non-DLB groups 
at any assessment time, however it became more prevalent as dementia severity 
increased. Memory function and verbal fluency were more impaired in the pDLB 
group in the early stages of the disorder.
COMMENT: PC appears to be a good measure of spatial function in the elderly. 
However, in contrast to other findings of poor spatial skills in DLB when 
dementia is in the mild to moderate stages, poor PC performance has not been 
shown to be a good early marker of DLB and its clinical correlates are yet to be 
determined.

Copyright 2003 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000072800
PMID: 14512711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1027. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2003 Sep-Oct;26(5):239-51. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-200309000-00008.

The effects of a cholinesterase inhibitor are prominent in patients with 
fluctuating cognition: a part 3 study of the main mechanism of cholinesterase 
inhibitors in dementia.

Onofrj M(1), Thomas A, Iacono D, Luciano AL, Di Iorio A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Neuroscience, Institute of Neurophysiopathology, 
University G. D'Annunzio, Via Fonte Romano, Chieti-Pescura, 65124 Pescara, 
Italy. onofrj@unich.it

Fluctuating cognition is evidenced in different forms of dementia and is 
accompanied by electroencephalographic (EEG) abnormalities. The authors 
hypothesize that cholinesterase inhibitors are effective mostly in patients with 
fluctuating cognition. Twenty-three patients affected by mild dementia with 
similar scores on Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Alzheimer Disease 
Assessment Scale-cognitive subscale (ADAS-cog), and Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale evaluation were classified in a group with fluctuating cognition (n 
= 11) and a group of nonfluctuators (n = 12). All patients were assigned 
randomly to the branches of a double-blind crossover study of donepezil (DPZ), a 
5 to 10-mg dose, versus vitamin E, a 2000 IU dose, for 30 days. MMSE, ADAS-cog, 
University of California at Los Angeles Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), 
quantitative EEG, P3 event-related potentials, choice reaction time variability 
(CRTV) were assessed at baseline and at the end of treatments. At the end of the 
crossover study all patients received DPZ for 6 months. The dominant EEG 
frequency variability, low EEG frequencies amplitude, the P3 latency and jitter, 
CRTV, and NPI was significantly different in the fluctuating cognition group 
than the nonfluctuating group at baseline (P < 0.001). Short-term DPZ 
administration induced a significant increase in MMSE scores, reduction of 
ADAS-cog and of NPI scores (P < 0.003-0.001), increase of EEG alpha activity and 
reductions of P3 latency and jitter, dominant frequency variability and CRTV (P 
< 0.009-0.001) in the fluctuating cognition group, and significant increases of 
MMSE scores (P = 0.03) and a decrease of P3 jitter and dominant frequency 
variability (P < 0.034-0.041) in the nonfluctuating group. Short-term DPZ 
effects differed significantly between fluctuating cognition and nonfluctuating 
patients (0.001). Significant effects of the 6-month observation were observed 
only in fluctuating cognition patients. Logistic analysis showed that P3 latency 
predicts the effect of DPZ (P = 0.04, P < 0.01) in the crossover study, and CRTV 
predicts the effect at the 6-month follow-up.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-200309000-00008
PMID: 14520164 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1028. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2003 Oct;110(10):1145-8. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-003-0032-8.

Apraxia of eyelid opening in a case of atypical corticobasal degeneration.

Sepe-Monti M(1), Giubilei F, Marchione F, Colosimo C.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Università La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

Apraxia of eyelid opening (AEO) occurs in several clinical conditions, even in 
the absence of any other neurological sign; nonetheless, in most of the cases 
AEO has been reported in association with basal ganglia diseases, such as 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD). We describe a patient with a clinical diagnosis 
of frontotemporal dementia who, later, developed parkinsonian signs and AEO. We 
suggest that the finding of AEO in patients with a frontotemporal syndrome could 
be a helpful expedient for the early diagnosis of atypical clinical findings of 
CBD, characterised by behavioural and cognitive aspects at first.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-003-0032-8
PMID: 14523626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1029. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003 Oct;18(10):879-86. doi: 10.1002/gps.928.

Clinical predictors of response to Acetyl Cholinesterase Inhibitors: experience 
from routine clinical use in Newcastle.

Pakrasi S(1), Mukaetova-Ladinska EB, McKeith IG, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Ageing and Health, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK. sanjeet.pakrasi@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Acetyl Cholinesterase Inhibitors (AChEIs) have been in clinical use 
for the past five years in the UK for the symptomatic treatment of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). There are few data on the patterns and predictors of response to 
AChEI therapy in routine clinical practice. We therefore investigated clinical 
variables that may distinguish between AChEI responders and non-responders.
METHODS: A retrospective sample of 160 consecutive patients with dementia who 
were treated on clinical grounds with an AChEI was studied. Treatment response 
was defined in two ways: (a) A clinical response was achieved when there was no 
deterioration or there was an improvement on a global clinical assessment (CGI) 
and (b) a Mini-Mental-State-Examination (MMSE) response when there was an 
improvement of 2 or more MMSE points.
RESULTS: A total of 62 (45%) patients achieved an MMSE response. A diagnosis of 
dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease+Dementia (PDD) was 
associated with a MMSE response, as were hallucinations, and lower MMSE scores 
at baseline. 125 (78%) patients achieved a CGI response for which there were no 
clinical predictors.
CONCLUSIONS: Severity of illness, a diagnosis of DLB and PDD, and presence of 
hallucinations at baseline were predictive of a MMSE response. Non-AD dementia 
and severe dementia responded equally well to AChEI treatment and results of 
further randomised, placebo-controlled studies are needed to clarify the role of 
AChEI in the treatment of these disorders.

Copyright 2003 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.928
PMID: 14533120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1030. CNS Drugs. 2003;17(13):947-63. doi: 10.2165/00023210-200317130-00002.

Clinically significant drug interactions with cholinesterase inhibitors: a guide 
for neurologists.

Bentué-Ferrer D(1), Tribut O, Polard E, Allain H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France. 
daniele.bentue-ferrer@univ-rennes1.fr

Cholinesterase inhibitors are the only pharmacological class indicated for the 
treatment of mild to moderate Alzheimer's disease. These drugs are also being 
used off label to treat severe cases of Alzheimer's disease or vascular dementia 
and other disorders. The widespread use of cholinesterase inhibitors raises the 
possibility of their use in combination regimens, with the subsequent risk of 
deleterious drug-drug interactions in high-risk populations. The purpose of this 
review is to present the possible sources of pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic 
drug-drug interactions involving cholinesterase inhibitors. The four 
cholinesterase inhibitors (tacrine, donepezil, rivastigmine and galantamine) 
that are currently available have different pharmacological properties that 
expose patients to the risk of several types of drug interactions of 
nonequivalent clinical relevance. The principal proven clinically relevant drug 
interactions involve tacrine and drugs metabolised by the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 
1A2 enzyme, as well as tacrine or donepezil and antipsychotics (which results in 
the appearance of parkinsonian symptoms). The bioavailability of galantamine is 
increased by coadministration with paroxetine, ketoconazole and erythromycin. It 
is of interest to note that because rivastigmine is metabolised by esterases 
rather than CYP enzymes, unlike the other cholinesterase inhibitors, it is 
unlikely to be involved in pharmacokinetic drug-drug interactions. Care must be 
taken to reduce the risk of inducing central (excitation, agitation) or 
peripheral (e.g. bradycardia, loss of consciousness, digestive disorders) 
hypercholinergic effects via drug interactions with cholinesterase inhibitors. A 
review of the literature does not reveal any alarming data but does highlight 
the need for prudent prescription, particularly when cholinesterase inhibitors 
are given in combination with psychotropics or antiarrhythmics. Possible 
interactions involving other often coprescribed antidementia agents (e.g. 
memantine, antioxidants, cognitive enhancers) remain an open area requiring 
particularly prudent use.

DOI: 10.2165/00023210-200317130-00002
PMID: 14533945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1031. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2004;17(1-2):14-20. doi: 10.1159/000074080. Epub 
2003 Oct 13.

Agitation in Alzheimer's disease is a manifestation of frontal lobe dysfunction.

Senanarong V(1), Cummings JL, Fairbanks L, Mega M, Masterman DM, O'Connor SM, 
Strickland TL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Siriraj 
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.

OBJECTIVES: (1) To investigate the prevalence and characteristics of agitation 
in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other forms of dementia; (2) to 
explore the association between agitation and other clinical variables, 
including disease severity, functional impairment and other neuropsychiatric 
symptoms, and (3) to determine the predictors of agitation.
METHODS: Data for 427 men and women with dementia from outpatient clinics of the 
University of California, Los Angeles Alzheimer's Disease Center were analyzed. 
There were 277 patients with AD, 43 with vascular dementia, 47 with mixed 
dementia, 45 with frontotemporal dementia and 15 with dementia with Lewy bodies. 
Patients were evaluated with the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), Functional Activities Questionnaire (FAQ), 
neuropsychological tests and the Caregiver Appraisal instrument. SPSS10 was 
utilized for statistical analysis.
RESULTS: There was no difference in agitation subscale scores among patients 
with dementia of various etiologies. In patients with AD, there was increased 
prevalence of agitation with increasing dementia severity. Agitation contributed 
substantially to caregiver burden and impact. There was a significant 
correlation between the FAQ and the NPI agitation subscale score after adjusting 
for MMSE scores. Delusion, disinhibition and irritability subscale scores in AD 
patients were correlated with agitation across disease severity. Subscale scores 
of frontally mediated behaviors including irritability, delusions and 
disinhibition predicted most of the variance in agitation levels.
CONCLUSION: Agitation is common in AD and other dementias and has a marked 
impact on caregivers. It is related to dementia severity and to specific types 
of associated psychopathology implicating frontal lobe dysfunction. The present 
study is the largest and most comprehensive assessment of agitation reported. 
The data suggest that agitation in AD is a frontal lobe syndrome. Frontal lobe 
dysfunction may predispose AD patients to agitation by exaggerating behavioral 
responses to many types of coexisting psychopathology or environmental 
provocations.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000074080
PMID: 14560060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1032. Neurol India. 2003 Jun;51(2):183-8.

Parkinsonism plus syndrome--a review.

Mitra K(1), Gangopadhaya PK, Das SK.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Clinic, Bangur Institute of Neurology, Kolkata 700-025, 
India.

Parkinsonism plus syndrome is a group of heterogeneous degenerative neurological 
disorders, which differ from the classical idiopathic Parkinson's disease in 
certain associated clinical features, poor response to levodopa, distinctive 
pathological characteristics and poor prognosis. Associated clinical features 
include symmetrical onset, infrequent or atypical tremor, prominent rigidity in 
axial musculature, bradykinesia, early postural instability, supranuclear gaze 
palsy, early autonomic failure, pyramidal affection, cerebellar involvement, 
alien limb phenomenon, apraxia and significant early cognitive dysfunction in 
some cases. Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), multiple system atrophy (MSA) 
and dementia with Lewy body disease (DLB) are commoner disorders. Less frequent 
disorders are cortico-basal ganglionic degeneration (CBGD), frontotemporal 
dementia with chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), Pick's disease, parkinsonian-dementia 
complex of Guam, Pallidonigral degeneration, Wilson's disease and a rigid 
variant of Huntington's disease. During the last 3 decades, major progress has 
been made in understanding PSP, CBGD and FTDP-17, which are tau disorders. MSA 
and DLB together with idiopathic Parkinson's disease are called 
alpha-synucleinopathies. Recent studies show that the diagnosis of these 
Parkinsonism plus syndromes improves when strict diagnostic criteria are used. 
However, unusual presentations may pose a diagnostic challenge. The shortcomings 
of the current studies demand the need for further research to identify biologic 
markers that may allow earlier diagnosis, and understanding of the factors 
leading to alpha-synuclein or tau aggregation. Identification of therapeutic 
strategies that may prevent the aggregation of these proteins and rescue 
dysfunctional cells has been stressed. This review focuses on the advances in 
the clinical, neuroimaging, pathologic, genetic and management aspects of these 
disorders.

PMID: 14570999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1033. MMW Fortschr Med. 2003 May 26;145 Suppl 2:49-52, 54.

[Current therapy of patients with dementia].

[Article in German]

Fuchsberger T(1), Möller HJ, Hampel H.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, LMU München. 
hampel@psy.med.uni-muenchen.de

In recent years, the efficacy of symptomatic treatment in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease has repeatedly been demonstrated in a number of multicenter 
studies. Such treatment aims both to improve the patient's cognitive abilities 
and to preserve his or her quality of life and ability to cope with the 
activities of daily life. In this way the burden on relatives and caregivers is 
reduced, and the need for home or institutionalized care delayed. Causally 
effective therapeutic strategies resulting in a cure or the delaying of 
pathophysiological progression are currently not available, but are being 
investigated in ongoing clinical and experimental studies. Presently available 
treatments should be initiated early on, and applied as long as needed, which 
requires the earliest possible clinical diagnosis by the primary-care physician. 
The results of initial studies reveal an effect of antidementia agents also in 
mixed Alzheimer's and vascular dementia, as well as vascular and lewy-body 
dementia. Efforts to obtain approval for these indications are underway.

PMID: 14579485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1034. Sleep Med. 2003 Jul;4(4):351-2. doi: 10.1016/s1389-9457(03)00119-9.

Non-opioid analgesics and the risk of restless leg syndrome-a spurious 
association?

Berger K(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Epidemiology and Social Medicine, University of Muenster, 
Muenster, Germany. bergerk@uni-muenster.de

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate the prevalence and risk 
factors of restless leg syndrome in a secondary care patient population 
maintained on tricyclic and serotonin re-uptake inhibiting antidepressants.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective observational study.
STUDY POPULATION: Two hundred and forty-three patients of a single practice 
specializing in the treatment of affective and anxiety disorders. Patients 
younger than 30 years and those with neurologic diseases such as Parkinson's 
disease, multiples sclerosis and dementia were excluded, as well as those with 
schizophrenia or other illusional disturbances, eating disorders, histories of 
opioid or codeine-containing analgesic abuse or of alcohol or illicit drug 
abuse. Patients remained in the study population only if they had gained 
complete or partial recovery of their anxiety and/or depressive symptoms and 
been treated for at least 6 months in the practice's ambulatory care (85.0% of 
the patients were finally included).
METHODS: Histories of leg discomfort, akathisia, medication use and 
socio-demographic factors were assessed at the time of enrolment. RLS was 
assumed if all minimal criteria of the international RLS study group were 
fulfilled. RLS patients also had a neurologic examination focusing on signs and 
symptoms of neuropathy. It is unclear whether those without RLS were also 
examined neurologically. RLS case status was assessed at 6-month intervals for 
patients in the study. It is unclear if the reported RLS prevalence reflects 
case status at enrolment and/or during the treatment course. The prevalence of 
various pain syndromes, as well as the intake of analgesics and average coffee 
intake per day was compared between those with and without RLS. Lifetime and 
current treatment exposure to antidepressants and dopamine antagonists was 
evaluated according to RLS status. It is unclear what the mean treatment time 
was. Various univariant, descriptive statistics were used. The statistical 
analysis and logistic regression was applied using RLS case status as the 
dependent and co-morbidities, and medications/treatments as independent 
variables.
RESULTS: The prevalence of RLS among the patients included in the analysis was 
27.0%, with female patients more often affected than men (31.0% vs. 19.0%). RLS 
symptom severity during the course of treatment was low for 43 of 65 cases. 
Somatic co-morbidities were more prevalent in RLS affected women and less 
prevalent in RLS affected men than in gender specific non-RLS patients. No 
significant differences were observed for lifetime exposure to dopamine 
antagonist between those with and without RLS (38.0% vs. 35.0%). Chronic pain 
syndromes were observed more often in RLS cases (women: 86.0% vs. 32.0%, men: 
62.5% vs. 29.0%). Twelve percent of those without RLS and 75.0% of RLS cases had 
a history of regular intake of analgesics prior to study enrolment. In a 
multivariate logistic regression model the authors found RLS case status to be 
associated with the intake of analgesics (OR: 25.5, P<0.001), psychiatric 
co-morbidity (OR: 2.97, P=0.01) and an interaction between age and the intake of 
analgesics (OR: 2.6, P=0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: A 27.0% prevalence of RLS was found in this highly selected 
population treated with tricyclic and serotonin re-uptake inhibiting 
antidepressants. The authors infer from their results that regular intake of 
analgesics is a risk factor for RLS and that the observed association of gender 
with RLS might be explained by a higher intake of analgesics in women compared 
to men. They further conclude that the intake of analgesics, rather than the 
pain co-morbidity itself, enhances the risk of RLS.

DOI: 10.1016/s1389-9457(03)00119-9
PMID: 14592311


1035. Science. 2003 Oct 31;302(5646):830-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1090349.

Looking backward to move forward: early detection of neurodegenerative 
disorders.

DeKosky ST(1), Marek K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Disease Research Center, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. DeKoskyST@upmc.edu

Early detection of neurodegenerative disorders would provide clues to the 
underlying pathobiology of these diseases and would enable more effective 
diagnosis and treatment of patients. Recent advances in molecular neuroscience 
have begun to provide the tools to detect diseases like Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, and others early in their course and potentially even 
before the development of clinical manifestations of disease. These genetic, 
imaging, clinical, and biochemical tools are being validated in a number of 
studies. Early detection of these slowly progressive diseases offers the promise 
of presymptomatic diagnosis and, ultimately, of disease-modifying medications 
for use early in disease and during the presymptomatic period.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1090349
PMID: 14593169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1036. Can Fam Physician. 2003 Oct;49:1304-11.

Dementia with Lewy bodies. Review of diagnosis and pharmacologic management.

Frank C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ont. 
frankc@pccchealth.org

Comment in
    Can Fam Physician. 2003 Oct;49:1255-6, 1262-4.

OBJECTIVE: To review clinical features of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and to 
guide family physicians in pharmacologic management, including medications to 
avoid. QUALITY OF EVIDENCE A MEDLINE: search of literature from 1995 to 2002 
used the MeSH terms dementia with Lewy bodies/diagnosis, dementia with Lewy 
bodies/therapy, and antipsychotics/dementia with Lewy bodies. Level II and III 
evidence was available for diagnosis and treatment of DLB. One randomized 
controlled trial of rivastigmine was reviewed and appraised.
MAIN MESSAGE: Dementia with Lewy bodies is common. Diagnosis can be made by 
family physicians using clinical criteria including presence of dementia with 
marked fluctuation in performance, hallucinations, and the onset of 
parkinsonism. Cholinesterase inhibitors should be considered for 
neuropsychiatric symptoms. Levodopa-carbidopa combinations should be considered 
for treatment of parkinsonism. Neuroleptics should be used with caution because 
of the risk of serious sensitivity reactions. If they are needed, atypical 
agents could be safer.
CONCLUSION: Recognition and diagnosis of DLB is important to optimize 
pharmacologic management and to minimize risk of adverse reactions to 
neuroleptics.

PMCID: PMC2214137
PMID: 14594099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1037. J Postgrad Med. 2003 Jul-Sep;49(3):236-45.

Can we prevent Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease?

Kedar NP(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Vitamins and Cancer Research, Department of Radiology, School of 
Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver, CO 80262, USA. 
kedar.prasad@uchsc.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's (AD) are major progressive neurological 
disorders, the risk of which increases with advancing age (65 years and over). 
In familial cases, however, early onset of disease (about 35 years) is observed. 
In spite of extensive basic and clinical research on PD and AD, no preventive or 
long-term effective treatment strategies are available. Several studies have 
indicated that oxidative stress is a major risk factor for the initiation and 
progression of sporadic PD and AD. Even a-synuclein and b-amyloid fragments that 
are associated with the PD and AD, respectively, mediate part of their action 
via oxidative stress. Therefore, reducing oxidative stress appears to be a 
rational choice for the prevention and reduction in the rate of progression of 
these neurological disorders. This review provides a brief description of the 
epidemiology and pathogenesis of PD and AD, and the scientific rationale for the 
use of multiple antioxidants in the prevention of these neurological diseases.

PMID: 14597787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1038. Neurol Sci. 2003 Oct;24(3):199-200. doi: 10.1007/s10072-003-0129-8.

Cerebrospinal fluid biochemical markers in early detection and in differential 
diagnosis of dementia disorders in routine clinical practice.

Parnetti L(1), Lanari A, Saggese E, Spaccatini C, Gallai V.

Author information:
(1)Memory Clinic, Alzheimer Center, Department of Neuroscience, University of 
Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

Measurement of total tau and amyloid beta1-42 (Ab42) in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) improves diagnostic accuracy of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We examined a 
consecutive patient sample referred to our center for diagnostic assessment of 
cognitive decline. CSF tau and Abeta42 were assayed each week as routine 
neurochemical analyses. There were 119 patients investigated. These included 61 
with probable AD (35 mild AD, 26 severe AD), 24 with mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI), 14 with vascular dementia, 11 with Lewy body dementia, and 9 with 
fronto-temporal dementia. Mild AD showed significantly lower CSF Abeta42 levels 
and significantly higher CSF tau levels than the other diagnostic groups; 79% of 
MCI patients had pathological values for both biomarkers. We confirm that these 
biomarkers have a role in the clinical work-up of patients with cognitive 
deficits.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-003-0129-8
PMID: 14598086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1039. Vestn Ross Akad Med Nauk. 2003;(9):6-10.

[Priority clinical research in neurology].

[Article in Russian]

Gusev EI.

PMID: 14598729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1040. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2003 Oct;27(6):493-505. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2003.08.001.

Analysis of neurological disease in four dimensions: insight from ALS-PDC 
epidemiology and animal models.

Shaw CA(1), Wilson JM.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada. cshaw@interchange.ubc.ca

The causal factor(s) responsible for sporadic neurological diseases are unknown 
and the stages of disease progression remain undefined and poorly understood. We 
have developed an animal model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism 
dementia complex which mimics all the essential features of the disease with the 
initial neurological insult arising from neurotoxins contained in washed cycad 
seeds. Animals fed washed cycad develop deficits in motor, cognitive, and 
sensory behaviors that correlate with the loss of neurons in specific regions of 
the central nervous system. The ability to recreate the disease by exposure to 
cycad allows us to extend the model in multiple dimensions by analyzing 
behavioral, cellular, and biochemical changes over time. In addition, the 
ability to induce toxin-based neurodegeneration allows us to probe the 
interactions between genetic and epigenetic factors. Our results show that the 
impact of both genetic causal and susceptibility factors with the cycad 
neurotoxins are complex. The article describes the features of the model and 
suggests ways that our understanding of cycad-induced neurodegeneration can be 
used to decipher and identify the early events in various human neurological 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2003.08.001
PMID: 14599431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1041. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2004 Jan-Feb;38(1):37-44. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4943(03)00081-5.

A screening instrument for a Sicilian neuroepidemiological survey in the 
elderly.

Nicoletti A(1), Salemi G, Morgante L, Le Pira F, Epifanio A, Reggio A, Basile G, 
Savettieri G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscinces, University of Catania, Via S. Sofia No. 78, 
Catania 95125, Italy. anicol@dimtel.nti.it

We evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of a screening instrument developed 
for use in a two-phase neuroepidemiological survey in Sicily. The Sicilian 
Epidemiological Dementia Study (SEDES) project will evaluate the prevalence and 
incidence of dementia, parkinsonisms and essential tremor in four Sicilian 
municipalities. It is a two-phase door-to-door survey. To identify subjects with 
possible neurological disorders, in this study, we developed a screening 
instrument including a symptoms questionnaire and simple physical tasks for 
parkinsonisms and essential tremor. The Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) was 
chosen for screening dementia. The symptoms questionnaire and simple tasks 
developed to identify possible patients with parkinsonism and essential tremor, 
was tested in a hospital setting. To evaluate sensitivity, we selected 20 
patients with essential tremor and 40 with Parkinson's disease (20 with Stages 
I-II and 20 with Stages III-V) [Neurology 17 (1967) 427]. To evaluate 
specificity we also selected 20 healthy subjects. The screening instrument was 
administered in a hospital setting by trained interviewers. Sensitivity of the 
screening instrument (questionnaire plus simple tasks) was 100% for essential 
tremor and parkinsonisms regardless of the stage. Specificity of the instrument 
was 90% (95% CI 66.9-98.2); the predictive positive value was 90.9%, while the 
negative predictive value was 100%. Even if validity was assessed in a hospital 
setting, the high sensitivity and specificity obtained suggest that the 
instrument could be an appropriate screening tool for parkinsonisms and 
essential tremor in a two-phase neuroepidemiological survey.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4943(03)00081-5
PMID: 14599702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1042. Neurol Sci. 2003 Oct;24(3):223-4. doi: 10.1007/s10072-003-0141-z.

Association of tau gene polymorphism with Parkinson's disease.

Zappia M(1), Annesi G, Nicoletti G, Serra P, Arabia G, Pugliese P, Messina D, 
Caracciolo M, Romeo N, Annesi F, Pasqua AA, Spadafora P, Civitelli D, Romeo N, 
Epifanio A, Morgante L, Quattrone A.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Neurologica, Università di Catanzaro, Via Campanella, Catanzaro, 
Italy.

We investigated the segregation of the dinucleotide GT repeat polymorphism in 
the intron between exons 9 and 10 of the tau gene in 300 patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and in 197 normal controls. The A3 allele was more 
frequent in cases than in controls (30% versus 16%, p<0.001), and individuals 
carrying at least one A3 allele in their genotype had an increased risk of 
developing PD (odds ratio 2.78, 95% confidence interval 1.81-4.29). No 
significant differences were found between patients by considering the age at 
onset and the presence of family history or dementia. Our findings suggest a 
possible involvement of the tau gene in the pathogenesis of PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-003-0141-z
PMID: 14600827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1043. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2001 Oct 17;2001(3):dn3. doi: 
10.1126/sageke.2001.3.dn3.

Dementia with lewy bodies.

Posner H(1), Chin S, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, Department of 
Neurology, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, and Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, New York, NY 12345, USA.

In this case study, we describe the symptoms, neuropsychological testing, and 
brain pathology of a man with dementia with Lewy bodies. Dementia with Lewy 
bodies might be the second most common form of degenerative dementia in the 
elderly. Progressive cognitive decline, well-formed visual hallucinations, and 
parkinsonism are core features of this disease. This case was marked by 
preserved verbal expression despite impairment in memory, visuospatial skills, 
and attention span. Development of visual symptoms and parkinsonism occurred 
very early in the course of the disease.

DOI: 10.1126/sageke.2001.3.dn3
PMID: 14602963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1044. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2002 Jul 24;2002(29):re3. doi: 
10.1126/sageke.2002.29.re3.

Innate immunity, local inflammation, and degenerative disease.

McGeer PL(1), McGeer EG.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research at the University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, V6T 1Z3, Canada. mcgeerpl@interchange.ubc.ca

The brain lesions associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD), which are referred 
to as neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques, are characterized by the 
presence of a broad spectrum of inflammatory mediators. Surprisingly, these 
mediators, which include complement proteins, inflammatory cytokines, 
prostaglandins, and acute phase reactants such as C-reactive protein and amyloid 
P, are produced by resident brain cells, including neurons. Although secondary 
to the fundamental pathology caused by the presence of tangles and plaques, 
there is strong evidence that inflammation exacerbates the neuronal loss. In 
particular, AD lesions show evidence of self-attack by the complement system--a 
part of the immune system that normally functions to rid the body of invading 
pathogens. However, the lesions are devoid of significant T cell infiltration, a 
hallmark of an inflammatory immune response, and antibodies. We define this 
phenomenon as autotoxicity to distinguish it from classical autoimmunity, in 
which the body raises antibodies to normal endogenous macromolecules. Locally 
produced inflammatory mediators have also been identified in atherosclerotic 
plaques, along with evidence of complement self-attack. As was previously shown 
for heart attacks, epidemiological evidence indicates that extended use of 
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) results in a reduced risk of AD. 
NSAIDs inhibit the production of prostaglandin inflammatory mediators, but 
powerful new therapeutic agents might be developed by targeting more critical 
inflammatory mechanisms, especially the complement system.

DOI: 10.1126/sageke.2002.29.re3
PMID: 14602998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1045. Nutr Rev. 2003 Oct;61(10):327-41. doi: 10.1301/nr.2003.oct.327-341.

Ketones: metabolism's ugly duckling.

VanItallie TB(1), Nufert TH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, 
St. Luke's-Roosevelt Hospital Center in New York City, 10025, USA.

Ketones were first discovered in the urine of diabetic patients in the mid-19th 
century; for almost 50 years thereafter, they were thought to be abnormal and 
undesirable by-products of incomplete fat oxidation. In the early 20th century, 
however, they were recognized as normal circulating metabolites produced by 
liver and readily utilized by extrahepatic tissues. In the 1920s, a drastic 
"hyperketogenic" diet was found remarkably effective for treatment of 
drug-resistant epilepsy in children. In 1967, circulating ketones were 
discovered to replace glucose as the brain's major fuel during the marked 
hyperketonemia of prolonged fasting. Until then, the adult human brain was 
thought to be entirely dependent upon glucose. During the 1990s, diet-induced 
hyperketonemia was found therapeutically effective for treatment of several rare 
genetic disorders involving impaired neuronal utilization of glucose or its 
metabolic products. Finally, growing evidence suggests that mitochondrial 
dysfunction and reduced bioenergetic efficiency occur in brains of patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Because ketones are 
efficiently used by mitochondria for ATP generation and may also help protect 
vulnerable neurons from free radical damage, hyperketogenic diets should be 
evaluated for ability to benefit patients with PD, AD, and certain other 
neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1301/nr.2003.oct.327-341
PMID: 14604265 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1046. J Neurol Sci. 2003 Dec 15;216(1):127-34. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(03)00232-6.

Pathological heterogeneity of clinically diagnosed corticobasal degeneration.

Doran M(1), du Plessis DG, Enevoldson TP, Fletcher NA, Ghadiali E, Larner AJ.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Function Clinic, Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
Lower Lane, Fazakerley, L9 7LJ, Liverpool, UK. larner-a@wcnn-tr.nwest.nhs.uk

Two patients fulfilling suggested clinical diagnostic criteria for corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD) are presented, who were found at postmortem to have 
alternative pathological diagnoses not suspected during life, namely, 
Alzheimer's disease and Pick's disease, respectively. The nosological position 
of these cases is considered in light of a literature review of previous reports 
of clinically diagnosed corticobasal degeneration with atypical (not 
corticobasal degeneration) pathology. Since such phenocopies may be common, we 
suggest that all clinically diagnosed cases of corticobasal degeneration should 
initially be labelled as "corticobasal degeneration syndrome" (CBDS) to 
emphasize that this is a diagnosis based on clinical phenotype, with the term 
corticobasal degeneration being reserved for the specific neuropathological 
phenotype, which itself may have a variety of clinical presentations.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(03)00232-6
PMID: 14607314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1047. Nutrition. 2003 Nov-Dec;19(11-12):957-75. doi: 10.1016/s0899-9007(03)00024-8.

"Brain-specific" nutrients: a memory cure?

McDaniel MA(1), Maier SF, Einstein GO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
87131, USA. mcdaniel@umn.edu

Comment in
    Nutrition. 2003 Nov-Dec;19(11-12):955-6.

OBJECTIVE: We review the experimental evaluations of several widely marketed 
nonprescription compounds claimed to be memory enhancers and treatments for 
age-related memory decline. We generally limit our review to double-blind 
placebo-controlled studies. The compounds examined are phosphatidylserine (PS), 
phosphatidylcholine (PC), citicoline, piracetam, vinpocetine, acetyl-L-carnitine 
(ALC), and antioxidants (particularly vitamin E).
RESULTS: In animals, PS has been shown to attenuate many neuronal effects of 
aging, and to restore normal memory on a variety of tasks. Preliminary findings 
with humans, though, are limited. For older adults with probable Alzheimer's 
disease, a single study failed to demonstrate positive effects of PS on memory 
performance. For older adults with moderate cognitive impairment, PS has 
produced consistently modest increases in recall of word lists. Positive effects 
have not been as consistently reported for other memory tests. There is one 
report of consistent benefits across a number of memory tests for a subset of 
normal adults who performed more poorly than their peers at baseline. The 
choline compounds PC and citicoline are thought to promote synthesis and 
transmission of neurotransmitters important to memory. PC has not proven 
effective for improving memory in patients with probable Alzheimer's disease. 
The issue remains open for older adults without serious degenerative neural 
disease. Research on citicoline is practically nonexistent, but one study 
reported a robust improvement in story recall for a small sample of normally 
aging older adults who scored lower than their peers in baseline testing. Animal 
studies suggest that piracetam may improve neuronal efficiency, facilitate 
activity in neurotransmitter systems, and combat the age-related decrease in 
receptors on the neuronal membrane. However, for patients with probable 
Alzheimer's disease, as well as for adults with age-associated memory 
impairment, there is no clear-cut support for a mnemonic benefit of piracetam. 
Vinpocetine increases blood circulation and metabolism in the brain. Animal 
studies have shown that vinpocetine can reduce the loss of neurons due to 
decreased blood flow. In three studies of older adults with memory problems 
associated with poor brain circulation or dementia-related disease, vinpocetine 
produced significantly more improvement than a placebo in performance on global 
cognitive tests reflecting attention, concentration, and memory. Effects on 
episodic memory per se have been tested minimally, if at all. ALC participates 
in cellular energy production, a process especially important in neurons, and in 
removal of toxic accumulation of fatty acids. Animal studies show that ALC 
reverses the age-related decline in the number of neuron membrane receptors. 
Studies of patients with probable Alzheimer's disease have reported nominal 
advantages over a range of memory tests for ALC-treated patients relative to 
placebo groups. Significant differences have been reported rarely, however. 
Whether ALC would have mnemonic benefits for aging adults without brain disease 
is untested as far as we know. Antioxidants help neutralize tissue-damaging free 
radicals, which become more prevalent as organisms age. It is hypothesized that 
increasing antioxidant levels in the organism might retard or reverse the 
damaging effects of free radicals on neurons. Thus far, however, studies have 
found that vitamin E does not significantly slow down memory decline for 
Alzheimer's patients and does not produce significant memory benefits among 
early Parkinson's patients. Neither did a combination of vitamins E and C 
significantly improve college students' performance on several cognitive tasks.
CONCLUSIONS: In sum, for most of the "brain-specific" nutrients we review, some 
mildly suggestive effects have been found in preliminary controlled studies 
using standard psychometric memory assessments or more general tests designed to 
reveal cognitive impairment. We suggest that future evaluations of the possible 
memory benefits of these supplements might fruitfully focus on memory processes 
rather than on memory tests per se.

DOI: 10.1016/s0899-9007(03)00024-8
PMID: 14624946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1048. Neurosci Lett. 2003 Dec 4;352(2):151-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.08.037.

Polymorphism in the human DJ-1 gene is not associated with sporadic dementia 
with Lewy bodies or Parkinson's disease.

Morris CM(1), O'Brien KK, Gibson AM, Hardy JA, Singleton AB.

Author information:
(1)MRC Building, Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. c.m.morris@ncl.ac.uk

Genetic analysis of early onset Parkinson's disease (PD) has indicated that the 
mutation DJ-1 gene is one cause of autosomal recessive PD. Its role in the 
development of late onset PD and other Lewy body associated disorders such as 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is however unknown. We have therefore determined 
the influence of a common polymorphism in the DJ-1 gene that shows strong 
linkage disequilibrium with other DJ-1 polymorphisms, in late onset PD and DLB. 
No alteration in the frequency of the intron 1 deletion allele was seen in PD or 
DLB, nor were DJ-1 genotypes altered by disease. Stratification of the cases 
according to the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele additionally failed to show 
any significant association. The DJ-1 gene does not appear to be a significant 
risk factor for late onset Lewy body disease in this population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.08.037
PMID: 14625045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1049. Mov Disord. 2003 Nov;18(11):1266-72. doi: 10.1002/mds.10531.

Measuring the rate of progression of Parkinson's disease over a 5-year period 
with beta-CIT SPECT.

Pirker W(1), Holler I, Gerschlager W, Asenbaum S, Zettinig G, Brücke T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria. 
walter.pirker@univie.ac.at

Recent imaging studies suggest a rapid degeneration of the dopaminergic system 
in early Parkinson's disease (PD), followed by a slowing of the degenerative 
process in advanced disease. In the present study, a group of early-stage PD 
patients underwent three sequential [123I]beta-CIT SPECT studies to assess the 
decline of striatal dopamine transporter binding over a 5-year period. 
Twenty-one of a cohort of 24 early PD patients who participated in an earlier 
longitudinal beta-CIT SPECT imaging study [Mov Disord 2002;17:45-53] were 
included. Scan intervals were 26 +/- 11 months (scan 1-2) and 38 +/- 15 months 
(scan 2-3), respectively. The relative annual rate of decline of striatal 
beta-CIT binding from age-expected normal values at the time of Scan 1 was used 
as primary outcome variable. The relative annual decline of striatal binding 
from Scan 1 to Scan 2 (4.5 +/- 4.6%) and from Scan 2 to Scan 3 (3.0 +/- 3.0%) 
was not significantly different. The non-significant difference in progression 
rate was due mainly to the rapid early decline of striatal binding in 1 patient 
who subsequently developed a severe dysexecutive dementia syndrome. These data 
are not suggestive of substantial change in the course of dopaminergic 
degeneration in PD within the first 5 to 7 years after symptom onset.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10531
PMID: 14639666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1050. Med Image Anal. 2004 Mar;8(1):69-79. doi: 10.1016/j.media.2003.07.004.

The application of serial MRI analysis techniques to the study of cerebral 
atrophy in late-onset dementia.

Paling SM(1), Williams ED, Barber R, Burton EJ, Crum WR, Fox NC, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK. S.M.paling@shef.ac.uk

We have used a serial MR image analysis technique previously developed for 
studies of cerebral atrophy in early-onset dementia and applied it to a study of 
late-onset dementia patients with images acquired using a different scanner and 
scan sequence. Validation and optimisation tests showed that with only small 
changes to key analysis parameters the technique can successfully be applied to 
previously untested data with dissimilar image characteristics. The overall 
accuracy in estimation of cerebral atrophy using the technique was determined to 
be between 2 and 4 ml (1sigma) depending on the conditions during image 
acquisition. By comparing the results of alternative registration techniques we 
demonstrate the potential of using of fully automated 9 DOF image registration 
as an effective and efficient means of correcting for scanner pixel size 
variations, even in the presence of significant cerebral atrophy. Applied to the 
late-onset dementia study, patients were found to have significantly increased 
mean atrophy rates (p<0.001) compared to controls. In general the analysis 
technique is shown to be a robust, accurate and transferable tool of potential 
value for future studies of dementia and related neuro-degenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.media.2003.07.004
PMID: 14644147 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1051. Aust Fam Physician. 2003 Nov;32(11):927-31.

The art of treating Parkinson disease in the older patient.

Chan DK(1).

Author information:
(1)University of New South Wales, Aged Care and Rehabilitation, Bankstown 
Hospital, New South Wales. daniel.chan@swasahs.nsw.gov.au

BACKGROUND: Parkinson disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder that 
increases sharply after the sixth decade. There are many disorders in the 
elderly that exhibit some parkinsonian signs that can be confused with PD.
OBJECTIVE: This article discusses the diagnostic and management issues of PD in 
the elderly patient.
DISCUSSION: Levo-dopa (L-dopa) therapy is the cornerstone of treatment for PD in 
the elderly. After 5-8 years of treatment, monitor complications such as 
fluctuations and dyskinesia usually occur and adjunct therapy may be required. 
Dopamine agonists can be used to smooth out motor fluctuations and amantadine is 
sometimes useful for dyskinesia. However, the adverse drug effects of adjunct 
therapy in the elderly are more common than with L-dopa alone, and risks need to 
be weighed up against benefits. Nonmotor complications including dementia, 
psychosis, depression, autonomic dysfunction and somnolence are common and 
require special attention. Late stage problems such as aspiration, difficulties 
with activities of daily living or recurrent falls require a multidisciplinary 
approach. Anticholinergic drugs such as benztropine and benzhexol are best 
avoided because of the high risk of major side effects.

PMID: 14650790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1052. Brain Pathol. 2003 Oct;13(4):473-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2003.tb00478.x.

Localization of phosphorylated ERK/MAP kinases to mitochondria and 
autophagosomes in Lewy body diseases.

Zhu JH(1), Guo F, Shelburne J, Watkins S, Chu CT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathology, University of 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

We previously found that sustained ERK activation contributes to toxicity 
elicited by the parkinsonian neurotoxin 6-hydroxydopamine. In addition, 
substantia nigra neurons from patients with incidental Lewy body disease, 
Parkinson disease (PD), and diffuse Lewy body dementia (DLB) display abnormal 
phospho-ERK accumulations in the form of discrete cytoplasmic granules. In this 
study, we investigated the subcellular localization of phospho-ERK 
immunoreactive granules using double label confocal microscopy and 
immuno-electron microscopy. A small percentage of phospho-ERK granules 
co-localized with the early endosome marker Rab5, but not with cathepsin D, 20S 
proteasome beta-subunit, or cytochrome P450 reductase. Phospho-ERK 
immunoreactivity was often associated with mitochondrial proteins (MnSOD, 60 kDa 
and 110 kDa mitochondrial antigens), and some vesicular-appearing phospho-ERK 
granules appeared to envelop enlarged mitochondria by confocal laser scanning 
microscopy. Ultrastructural immuno-gold studies revealed phospho-ERK labeling in 
mitochondria and in association with bundles of approximately 10 nm fibrils. 
Heavily labeled mitochondria were observed within autophagosomes. As 
mitochondrial pathology may play a pivotal role in Parkinson and other related 
neurodegenerative diseases, these studies suggest a potential interaction 
between dysfunctional mitochondria, autophagy, and ERK signaling pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2003.tb00478.x
PMCID: PMC1911206
PMID: 14655753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1053. Neurologia. 2003 Dec;18 Suppl 2:29-38.

[Reflections on screening of neurological diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

Bermejo-Pareja F(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurologia Hospital Unversitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, Spain. 
fbermejop@meditex.es

The concepts and significance of screening and case-finding in neurological 
diseases are briefly introduced. The utility of case-finding in dementia and 
Alzheimer fs disease in primary care and in older adults is analyzed. A 
literature review of this subject and the screening data of the NEDICES study 
are discussed. It is concluded that there is no trial about this subject. For 
this reason it is not possible to recommend for or against routine screening for 
dementia in older adults in primary care. With the available evidence many 
authors recommend screening for dementia in the elderly with cognitive and 
functional decline in primary care. The Parkinson disease case-finding in 
primary care is briefly discussed. Prospective studies to investigate the 
screening for neurological diseases in primary care are a research priority.

PMID: 14669105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1054. Biofactors. 2003;18(1-4):153-61. doi: 10.1002/biof.5520180218.

Effects of Coenzyme Q10 in Huntington's disease and early Parkinson's disease.

Beal MF(1), Shults CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, New York Presbyterian Hospital, New 
York, NY 10021, USA. fbeal@med.cornell.edu

DOI: 10.1002/biof.5520180218
PMID: 14695931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1055. Ann Neurol. 2004 Jan;55(1):113-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.10782.

DJ-1 colocalizes with tau inclusions: a link between parkinsonism and dementia.

Rizzu P(1), Hinkle DA, Zhukareva V, Bonifati V, Severijnen LA, Martinez D, Ravid 
R, Kamphorst W, Eberwine JH, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Heutink P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Two novel mutations recently have been identified in the DJ-1 gene that cause a 
new form of autosomal recessive, early-onset parkinsonism. Because the 
pathological role of this protein is unknown, we examined the issue here and 
report the colocalization of DJ-1 protein within a subset of pathological tau 
inclusions in a diverse group of neurodegenerative disorders known as 
tauopathies. Our study extends the view that different neurodegenerative 
diseases may have similar pathological mechanisms, and that these processes 
likely include DJ-1.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10782
PMID: 14705119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1056. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2004 Jan;61(1):95-102. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.61.1.95.

Measurement of phosphorylated tau epitopes in the differential diagnosis of 
Alzheimer disease: a comparative cerebrospinal fluid study.

Hampel H(1), Buerger K, Zinkowski R, Teipel SJ, Goernitz A, Andreasen N, 
Sjoegren M, DeBernardis J, Kerkman D, Ishiguro K, Ohno H, Vanmechelen E, 
Vanderstichele H, McCulloch C, Moller HJ, Davies P, Blennow K.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Section and Memory Clinic, Alzheimer Memorial Center and 
Geriatric Psychiatry Branch, Department of Psychiatry, Ludwig-Maximilian 
University, Munich, Germany. hampel@psy.med.uni-muenchen.de

BACKGROUND: Abnormal hyperphosphorylation of the microtubule-associated protein 
tau and its incorporation into neurofibrillary tangles are major hallmarks of 
the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease (AD). Different tau phosphoepitopes can be 
sensitively detected in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF).
OBJECTIVE: To compare the diagnostic accuracy of CSF concentrations of tau 
proteins phosphorylated at 3 pathophysiologically important epitopes (p-tau) to 
discriminate among patients with AD, nondemented control subjects, and patients 
with other dementias.
DESIGN AND SETTING: Cross-sectional, bicenter, memory clinic-based studies.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred sixty-one patients with a clinical diagnosis of AD, 
frontotemporal dementia, dementia with Lewy bodies, or vascular dementia and 45 
nondemented controls (N = 206).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Levels of tau protein phosphorylated at threonine 231 
(p-tau231), threonine 181 (p-tau181), and serine 199 (p-tau199). The CSF p-tau 
protein levels were measured using 3 different enzyme-linked immunosorbent 
assays.
RESULTS: The mean CSF levels of the studied p-tau proteins were significantly 
elevated in patients with AD compared with the other groups. Applied as single 
markers, p-tau231and p-tau181 reached specificity levels greater than 75% 
between AD and the combined non-AD group when sensitivity was set at 85% or 
greater. Statistical differences between the assay performances are presented. 
Particularly, discrimination between AD and dementia with Lewy bodies was 
maximized using p-tau181at a sensitivity of 94% and a specificity of 64%, and 
p-tau231 maximized group separation between AD and frontotemporal dementia with 
a sensitivity of 88% and a specificity of 92%. Combinations of the 3 markers did 
not add discriminative power compared with the application as single markers.
CONCLUSIONS: The p-tau proteins in CSF come closest to fulfilling the criteria 
of a biological marker of AD. There is a tendency for p-tau proteins to perform 
differently in the discrimination of primary dementia disorders from AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.61.1.95
PMID: 14706948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1057. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2004 Jan;111(1):47-57. doi: 10.1007/s00702-003-0079-6. 
Epub 2003 Dec 12.

Parkin mutation associated parkinsonism and cognitive decline, comparison to 
early onset Parkinson's disease.

Benbunan BR(1), Korczyn AD, Giladi N.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Tel-Aviv University, Tel-Aviv, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) have cognitive changes 
resulting, presumably, from a progressive disruption of the functional integrity 
of frontostriatal circuitry.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the cognitive state of two brothers with early onset 
autosomal recessive (EO-AR) parkinsonism and a large deletion in the parkin 
gene, and to compare it to that of patients with sporadic young onset PD (YOPD).
METHOD: Two brothers with parkinsonism and deletion of axons 4-6 of the parkin 
gene (ages 51, 55 years; duration of symptoms, 22, 29 years respectively) and 4 
randomly selected patients with YOPD (mean age 47.8+/-4.9 years; mean duration 
of symptoms, 11.5+/-1.9 years) were administered a neuropsychological battery at 
"on" state. We assessed global cognitive state using the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE), orientation, attention, memory, language, ideational praxis, 
constructive praxis and executive functions (shifting aptitude, verbal fluency, 
sequencing).
RESULTS: The older of the two brothers with EO-AR parkinsonism had dementia 
according to DSM IV criteria, and MMSE score of 24, whereas the other had normal 
global cognitive status with mild cognitive changes (MMSE=29). The older brother 
had impaired memory tasks. Storage and retrieval capacities were defective on 
both immediate and delayed recalls, naming, constructional praxis, selective 
attention, shifting aptitude and phonemic and semantic fluency were also 
affected. The younger brother had difficulties in retrieval on delayed recall, 
selective attention, phonetic fluency, shifting aptitude and sequencing. This 
neuropsychological profile clearly differs from that of the YOPD patients, none 
of whom displayed cognitive dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Our patients with parkin mutation performed poorly on 
neuropsychological tests compared to those with YOPD. This difference could 
reflect the longer disease duration or the nature of the degenerative process.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-003-0079-6
PMID: 14714215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1058. Neurology. 2004 Jan 13;62(1):160; author reply 160. doi: 10.1212/wnl.62.1.160.

Influence of Alzheimer pathology on clinical diagnostic accuracy in dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Jellinger KA.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2003 May 27;60(10):1586-90.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.62.1.160
PMID: 14718731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1059. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):13256-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M314124200. Epub 
2004 Jan 13.

Oxidative modifications and down-regulation of ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal 
hydrolase L1 associated with idiopathic Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.

Choi J(1), Levey AI, Weintraub ST, Rees HD, Gearing M, Chin LS, Li L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease, Emory 
University School of Medicine, 1510 Clifton Road, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are the two most common 
neurodegenerative diseases that occur either in relatively rare, familial forms 
or in common, sporadic forms. The genetic defects underlying several monogenic 
familial forms of AD and PD have recently been identified, however, the causes 
of other AD and PD cases, particularly sporadic cases, remain unclear. To gain 
insights into the pathogenic mechanisms involved in AD and PD, we used a 
proteomic approach to identify proteins with altered expression levels and/or 
oxidative modifications in idiopathic AD and PD brains. Here, we report that the 
protein level of ubiquitin carboxyl-terminal hydrolase L1 (UCH-L1), a neuronal 
de-ubiquitinating enzyme whose mutation has been linked to an early-onset 
familial PD, is down-regulated in idiopathic PD as well as AD brains. By using a 
combination of two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry, we 
have identified three human brain UCH-L1 isoforms, a full-length form and two 
amino-terminally truncated forms. Our proteomic analyses reveal that the 
full-length UCH-L1 is a major target of oxidative damage in AD and PD brains, 
which is extensively modified by carbonyl formation, methionine oxidation, and 
cysteine oxidation. Furthermore, immunohistochemical studies show that prominent 
UCH-L1 immunostaining is associated with neurofibrillary tangles and that the 
level of soluble UCH-L1 protein is inversely proportional to the number of 
tangles in AD brains. Together, these results provide evidence supporting a 
direct link between oxidative damage to the neuronal 
ubiquitination/de-ubiquitination machinery and the pathogenesis of sporadic AD 
and PD.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M314124200
PMID: 14722078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1060. Pharmacol Ther. 2004 Jan;101(1):1-15. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2003.08.005.

Genealogy, expression, and molecular mechanisms in apoptosis.

Dlamini Z(1), Mbita Z, Zungu M.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Developmental Biology Division, School of Molecular and Cell 
Biology, University of Witwatersrand, Private Bag 3, 2050, Johannesburg, South 
Africa. dlamini@gecko.biol.wits.ac.za

Apoptosis, known as programmed cell death, is a conserved, gene-directed 
mechanism for the elimination of unnecessary or unwanted cells from an organism. 
A retrospective look at the basis of human disease pathogenesis almost always 
reveals an apoptotic component that either contributes to disease progression or 
accounts for it. Modulating the expression of key molecular components of the 
cell death machinery is an attractive and obvious strategy for apoptosis-based 
therapeutics. Apoptosis is an important component of most developmental 
abnormalities and human diseases and in many cases the underlying cause of the 
resulting pathology. It has also become clear that many, if not all, viruses 
possess mechanisms to forestall apoptosis and provide a living host to enhance 
virus propagation. Diseases like AIDS involve excessive apoptosis, and 
suppression of apoptosis may restore functionality to the infected tissues. 
Although these are still early days, it is difficult not to get excited about 
the significant advances that have already been made. The true therapeutic 
benefits of apoptosis modulation for the treatment of many devastating human 
diseases remain to be discovered.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2003.08.005
PMID: 14729389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1061. JAMA. 2004 Jan 21;291(3):358-64. doi: 10.1001/jama.291.3.358.

Neuroprotection in Parkinson disease: mysteries, myths, and misconceptions.

Schapira AH(1), Olanow CW.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Free and University 
College Medical School, and Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, 
England. warren.olanow@mssm.edu

Comment in
    JAMA. 2004 May 26;291(20):2430-1; author reply 2431.

Parkinson disease is an age-related neurodegenerative disease that affects 
approximately 1 million persons in the United States. Current therapies provide 
effective control of symptoms, particularly in the early stages of the disease, 
but most patients develop motor complications with long-term treatment, and 
features develop such as postural instability, falling, and dementia that are 
not adequately controlled with existing medications. Accordingly, 
neuroprotective therapy that might slow, stop, or reverse disease progression is 
urgently needed. While many agents appear to be promising based on laboratory 
studies, selecting clinical end points for clinical trials that are not 
confounded by symptomatic effects of the study intervention has been difficult. 
More recently, neuroimaging end points have been used as biomarkers of disease 
progression, but again there are concerns that they may be influenced by 
regulatory effects of the drugs used. We review clinical trials aimed at 
detecting neuroprotection in Parkinson disease and address the controversies 
surrounding the interpretation of these studies.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.291.3.358
PMID: 14734599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1062. Neurology. 2004 Jan 27;62(2):181-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.62.2.181.

DLB fluctuations: specific features that reliably differentiate DLB from AD and 
normal aging.

Ferman TJ(1), Smith GE, Boeve BF, Ivnik RJ, Petersen RC, Knopman D, 
Graff-Radford N, Parisi J, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 
Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. ferman.tanis@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether certain aspects of fluctuations reliably 
distinguish dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
normal aging.
METHODS: Participants included 200 community-dwelling cognitively normal elderly 
persons, 70 DLB patients, and 70 AD patients with collateral informants. A 
19-item questionnaire was administered to the informants that queried about 
symptoms of fluctuations and delirium.
RESULTS: Fluctuations occur infrequently in nondemented elderly persons aged 58 
to 98 years. In contrast, four characteristics of fluctuations were found to 
significantly differentiate AD from DLB. These composite features include 
daytime drowsiness and lethargy, daytime sleep of 2 or more hours, staring into 
space for long periods, and episodes of disorganized speech. The presence of 
three or four features of this composite occurred in 63% of DLB patients 
compared with 12% of AD patients and 0.5% of normal elderly persons. Informant 
endorsement of three or four of these items yielded a positive predictive value 
of 83% for the clinical diagnosis of DLB against an alternate diagnosis of AD. 
Endorsement of fewer than three items had a negative predictive value of 70% for 
the absence of a clinical diagnosis of DLB in favor of AD. The authors present 
evidence of test-retest reliability, convergent validity, and empirical 
verification with a separate cross-validation sample. Fluctuations were not 
associated with any particular combination of hallucinations, parkinsonism, or 
REM sleep behavior disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on informant report, disturbed arousal and disorganized 
speech are specific aspects of fluctuations in dementia with Lewy bodies that 
reliably distinguish dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer's disease and 
normal aging.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.62.2.181
PMID: 14745051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1063. Neurology. 2004 Jan 27;62(2):304-6. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000103283.65914.0b.

PEN2 is not a genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's disease in a large family 
sample.

Bertram L(1), Menon R, Mullin K, Parkinson M, Bradley ML, Blacker D, Tanzi RE.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, Center for Aging, Genetics, and 
Neurodegeneration, Department of Neurology, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

PEN2 is a reasonable Alzheimer's disease (AD) candidate gene because it is a 
necessary component of the gamma-secretase complex that generates beta-amyloid 
peptide. Moreover, its gene (PEN2) maps to a highly significant linkage region 
on chromosome 19q13. Four common polymorphisms in PEN2 were tested for genetic 
association with AD in a large and carefully ascertained AD family sample (789 
subjects from 202 nuclear families) using single-locus and haplotype-based 
analyses. These results do not suggest PEN2 to be a major AD risk factor.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000103283.65914.0b
PMID: 14745076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1064. Annu Rev Med. 2004;55:41-60. doi: 10.1146/annurev.med.55.091902.104422.

The scientific basis for the current treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Olanow CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, Annenberg 14-94, One 
Gustave L. Levy Place, Box 1137, New York, New York 10029, USA. 
warren.olanow@mssm.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) is an age-related neurodegenerative disease that 
affects approximately one million people in the United States. The introduction 
of levodopa revolutionized the treatment for this disorder, but the long-term 
utility of the drug is limited by motor complications, the development of 
features such as postural instability and dementia that do not respond to 
treatment, and continued disease progression. Insights into the organization of 
the basal ganglia in the normal and PD conditions has permitted the design of 
new treatment strategies that reduce the risk of developing motor complications. 
Additionally, increased knowledge of the mechanisms responsible for cell death 
in PD has permitted the development of putative neuroprotective drugs that might 
slow or stop disease progression. No drug has yet been established to alter the 
rate of disease progression, but the rapid pace of research offers reason for 
optimism.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.med.55.091902.104422
PMID: 14746509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1065. Ann Neurol. 2004 Feb;55(2):174-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.10846.

Comparison of kindreds with parkinsonism and alpha-synuclein genomic 
multiplications.

Farrer M(1), Kachergus J, Forno L, Lincoln S, Wang DS, Hulihan M, Maraganore D, 
Gwinn-Hardy K, Wszolek Z, Dickson D, Langston JW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL 32224, 
USA. farrer.matthew@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2004 Feb;55(2):153-6.

Genomic triplication of the alpha-synuclein gene recently has been associated 
with familial Parkinson's disease in the Spellman-Muenter kindred. Here, we 
present an independent family, of Swedish-American descent, with hereditary 
early-onset parkinsonism with dementia due to alpha-synuclein triplication. 
Brain tissue available from affected individuals in both kindreds provided the 
opportunity to compare their clinical, pathological, and biochemical phenotypes. 
Of note, studies of brain mRNA and soluble protein levels demonstrate a doubling 
of alpha-synuclein expression, consistent with molecular genetic data. 
Pathologically, cornu ammonis 2/3 hippocampal neuronal loss appears to be a 
defining feature of this form of inherited parkinsonism. The profound 
implications of alpha-synuclein overexpression for idiopathic synucleinopathies 
are discussed.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10846
PMID: 14755720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1066. Saudi Med J. 2004 Jan;25(1):79-82.

Dementia in Qatar.

Hamad AI(1), Ibrahim MA, Sulaiti EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hamad General Hospital, Doha, Qatar. 
aehamad@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: Dementia is a major public health problem among the elderly in 
developed countries and a growing problem in the underdeveloped countries. There 
are no published data on dementia in any of the Arabic countries. The aim of 
this study was to determine the different sub-types of dementia among Qataris.
METHODS: A retrospective and prospective ongoing hospital-based study in which 
all medical records of the patients with diagnosis of dementia seen at the Hamad 
General Hospital, Doha, Qatar, between June 1997 and June 2003, whether 
inpatient or outpatient were reviewed. Dementia was defined according to 
diagnostic and statistical manual (DSM) IV criteria. Those who had dementia were 
evaluated by a psychologist, psychiatrist, neurologist and a geriatrician. All 
had brain computerized tomography, magnetic resonance imaging or both and 
routine blood tests. Finally, they were classified into sub-types according to 
the cause of dementia.
RESULTS: Out of 300 patients, 134 fulfilled the inclusion criteria, most of them 
were illiterate, married and non-smokers. Among those dementia sub-types were: 
Alzheimer disease (AD) 39 (29%), vascular dementia (VaD) 30 (22%), mixed AD and 
VaD 20 (15%) and Parkinson's disease with dementia 8 (6%) were noted. The rest 
of them had dementia due to other medical conditions.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed that AD is more prevalent than VaD. It also showed 
that patients and their families seek medical help late due to the general 
belief among the public that forgetfulness and other associated cognitive 
impairment are part of the normal aging process. The emergence of new drugs and 
advancement in the prevention of cerebrovascular diseases makes early diagnosis 
of dementia sub-type important. A community based study, to show the real 
prevalence and incidence of sub-types of dementia, is highly indicated. These 
data are necessary for planning and setting up community services and health 
care programs for demented patients.

PMID: 14758386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1067. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2003 Dec;61(4):930-5. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2003000600008. 
Epub 2004 Jan 6.

Frontotemporal dementia with severe thalamic involvement: a clinical and 
neuropathological study.

Radanovic M(1), Rosemberg S, Adas R, Miranda SC, Caramelli P, Caixeta L, Nitrini 
R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of São Paulo, São 
Paulo, SP, Brazil. radano@tecway.com.br

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the third-leading cause of cortical dementia 
after Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body dementia, and is characterized by a 
dementia where behavioral disturbances are prominent and appear early in the 
course of the disease. We report the case of a 58 year-old man affected by 
dementia with behavioral disturbances, in addition to rigid-hypokinetic and a 
lower motor neuron syndrome that were present at later stages of the illness. 
Neuroimaging studies showed frontotemporal atrophy. Neuropathological studies 
revealed intense thalamic neuronal loss and astrocytic gliosis, as well as 
moderate frontotemporal neuronal loss, astrocytosis and spongiform degeneration. 
Thalamic degeneration has previously been described among the wide group of 
neuropathological features of FTD. The aim of the present study is to show the 
clinical and neuropathological aspects of thalamic degeneration in FTD, along 
with its role in behavioral disturbances, a common finding in this condition.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2003000600008
PMID: 14762593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1068. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2003 Dec;61(4):936-41. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2003000600009. 
Epub 2004 Jan 6.

Nightmares without atonia as an early symptom of diffuse Lewy bodies disease.

de Brito-Marques PR(1), de Mello RV, Montenegro L.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Neurology Unit, Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medical 
Sciences, University of Pernambuco, Recife, PE, Brazil. pbrito@truenet.com.br

A male 70 years old patient with diffuse or "pure" Lewy body disease is 
described. The diagnosis was made based on clinical features of nightmares with 
no atonia, attention deficits with fluctuation in cognitive function, incapacity 
to find his way around the neighbourhood and other formerly familiar 
environments and mild neuropsychiatric symptoms. Neuropsychological assessment 
showed memory deficits, visuospatial and visuo-constructive disturbances. He had 
neither parkinsonism nor recurrent visual hallucinations typically well formed 
and detailed. Neuroimaging (computed tomography and magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy) showed mild diffuse cortical atrophy, mostly on the left temporal 
lobe and a decrease of N-acetyl-aspartate levels. A cholinesterase inhibitor was 
prescribed to this patient during 6 months with clinically relevant behavioral 
effect. Diagnosis confirmation was made by post-mortem neuropathological 
findings. Macroscopical features were mild atrophy on the frontal, parietal and 
temporal lobes, notedly on the frontal lobes. Microscopically, there was 
neuronal loss and diffuse classic Lewy bodies. Brainstem (substantia nigra, 
raphe nucleus, locus coeruleus, pedunculopontine nucleus), limbic cortex, and 
neocortex (frontal, parietal and temporal) were the areas of predilection for 
Lewy bodies. Hematoxylin-eosin and Bielschowsky staining did not show neuronal 
swelling (ballooned cell), argyrophilic inclusion (Pick's bodies), 
neurofibrillary tangles nor senile plaques. Immunohistochemical staining for 
anti-tau, anti-beta-amyloid, and anti-prion protein were negative. 
Antiubiquitine reaction was positive for Lewy body in the cerebral cortex and 
brainstem.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2003000600009
PMID: 14762594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1069. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004 Mar;75(3):382-7. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2002.002576.

Fluctuating cognition in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease is 
qualitatively distinct.

Bradshaw J(1), Saling M, Hopwood M, Anderson V, Brodtmann A.

Author information:
(1)Austin Health, Heidelberg, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: To document and illustrate qualitative features of fluctuating 
cognition as described by care givers of patients with probable dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). To determine whether the quality 
of the fluctuations differs between DLB and AD. To examine the clinical utility 
of two recently developed rating scales.
METHODS: Care givers of 13 patients with early probable DLB and 12 patients with 
early probable AD were interviewed using the Clinician Assessment of Fluctuation 
and the One Day Fluctuation Assessment Scale, both developed recently. 
Descriptions of fluctuating cognition were recorded verbatim, analysed, and 
rated.
RESULTS: Descriptions of fluctuating cognition in DLB had a spontaneous, 
periodic, transient quality, which appeared to reflect an interruption in the 
ongoing flow of awareness or attention that impacted on functional abilities. 
Descriptions of fluctuations in AD frequently highlighted episodes of memory 
failure, or a more enduring state shift in the form of "good" and "bad" days, 
typically occurring in response to the cognitive demands of the immediate 
environment. These qualitative differences could be detected reliably by 
independent raters, but were not always captured in standard severity scores.
CONCLUSION: Fluctuations occurring in DLB have particular characteristics that 
are distinguishable from fluctuations occurring in AD. Interpretation and 
application of the fluctuation criterion continues to limit the diagnostic 
sensitivity of the consensus criteria for DLB. Findings suggest that explicit 
documentation and a wider appreciation of these distinctions could improve the 
reliability with which less experienced clinicians identify this core diagnostic 
feature in the clinical setting.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2002.002576
PMCID: PMC1738966
PMID: 14966152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1070. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Apr 1;13 Spec No 1:R123-6. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh093. Epub 
2004 Feb 19.

The law of mass action applied to neurodegenerative disease: a hypothesis 
concerning the etiology and pathogenesis of complex diseases.

Singleton A(1), Myers A, Hardy J.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Building 10, Room 6C103, MSC1589, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Loci underlying autosomal dominant forms of most neurodegenerative disease have 
been identified: prion mutations cause Gerstmann Straussler syndrome and 
hereditary Creuzfeldt-Jakob disease, tau mutations cause autosomal dominant 
frontal temporal dementia, and alpha-synuclein mutations cause autosomal 
dominant Parkinson's disease. In all these cases, the pathogenic mutation is in 
the protein that is deposited in the diseased tissue and in these cases the 
whole protein is deposited. In Alzheimer's disease, mutations in APP or 
presenilin 1 or 2 cause autosomal dominant disease and these are the substrate 
and proteases, respectively, which are responsible for the production of the 
deposited peptide, Abeta. Thus, in all cases, the mutations lead to the disease 
by a mechanism that involves the deposition process. We briefly review this 
remarkably predictable biology, but also point out that it seems sporadic forms 
of all these diseases are predisposed to by genetic variability at the same 
loci, strongly suggesting that the quantity of the normal protein produced 
influences risk for the sporadic forms of the disease. The evidence for this 
assertion is strongest in Parkinson's disease (PD), where genetic variability in 
alpha-synuclein expression affects risk of developing disease, although the 
oldest evidence for the notion that increased expression of normal sequence 
protein can lead to disease comes from the observation of Alzheimer's disease in 
trisomy 21 cases. From these observations, we make predictions concerning the 
etiology and pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases in general.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh093
PMID: 14976159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1071. Gastroenterology. 2004 Jan;126(1 Suppl 1):S3-7. doi: 
10.1053/j.gastro.2003.10.010.

Epidemiology of fecal incontinence.

Nelson RL(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Illinois College of Medicine at Chicago, 
USA. altohorn@uic.edu

Nursing home residence is by far the most prominent association with fecal 
incontinence, with a prevalence approaching 50%. In one major survey, urinary 
incontinence was the greatest risk factor for developing fecal incontinence, and 
fecal incontinence was the greatest risk factor for developing urinary 
incontinence. Immobility, dementia, and the use of physical restraints were also 
important risk factors. Specific diseases associated with fecal incontinence 
include diabetes, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, stroke, and spinal 
cord injury. The surgical procedures lateral internal sphincterotomy for anal 
fissure, fistulotomy, and ileal pouch reconstruction can result in fecal 
incontinence. Children who are born with congenital abnormalities, such as 
imperforate anus, often experience soiling for many years. Future studies to 
determine the prevalence and etiology of fecal and urinary incontinence will 
need to first define these conditions and eliminate referral bias. Epidemiologic 
investigations of both disorders should be performed jointly because the 
conditions are so often comorbid.

DOI: 10.1053/j.gastro.2003.10.010
PMID: 14978632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1072. J Neurol. 2004 Feb;251(2):184-8. doi: 10.1007/s00415-004-0296-4.

The prevalence of oligoclonal bands in the CSF of patients with primary 
neurodegenerative dementia.

Janssen JC(1), Godbolt AK, Ioannidis P, Thompson EJ, Rossor MN.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Group, Institute of Neurology, National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, WC1N 3BG, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Recent guidelines from the United States and Europe on the diagnosis 
and management of dementia include advice that younger patients with dementia 
should undergo CSF examination, which frequently includes analysis for 
oligoclonal bands (OCB). The presence of CNS specific OCB has traditionally been 
considered suggestive of an inflammatory aetiology, although the interpretation 
of such a finding in the presence of a normal CSF white cell count and protein 
is more difficult.
METHODS: We reviewed retrospectively the prevalence of OCB, determined using 
agarose isoelectric focusing, in a series of 131 well characterised patients 
with a final diagnosis of a degenerative dementia who had undergone CSF 
examination.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients was 60.0 (SD 8.4) years. Seventy (53%) 
patients had Alzheimer's disease (AD), forty seven (36 %) had frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration (FTLD), seven (5%) had Dementia with Lewy bodies and the 
remaining seven (5%) patients had other rarer neurodegenerative dementias. 
Neuropathological examination had been performed in fifteen (11%) patients. CNS 
specific OCB were present in nine (7%) patients in this cohort, all of whom had 
normal CSF white cell counts: four AD patients (a prevalence of 6%), four FTLD 
patients (a prevalence of 9%), and one patient with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (a 
prevalence of 25%). Investigation of these patients, including two with 
neuropathologically verified AD and one with post-mortem confirmed CJD, did not 
reveal an alternative aetiology for their dementia.
CONCLUSION: A central immune response can occur in primary neurodegenerative 
dementias, albeit uncommonly.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-004-0296-4
PMID: 14991353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1073. Rev Neurol. 2004 Feb 16-29;38(4):327-31.

[Tourettism, hemiballism and juvenile Parkinsonism: expanding the clinical 
spectrum of the neurodegeneration associated to pantothenate kinase deficiency 
(Hallervorden Spatz syndrome)].

[Article in Spanish]

Carod-Artal FJ(1), Vargas AP, Marinho PB, Fernandes-Silva TV, Portugal D.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Sarah, Brasilia DF, Brasil. 
javier@bsb.sarah.br

INTRODUCTION: Pantothenate kinase deficiency (Hallervorden-Spatz syndrome, HSS) 
triggers cerebral neurodegeneration with iron deposition in the basal ganglia. 
The classical form has an early onset in infancy, a progressive course, the 
presence of extrapyramidal symptoms (dystonia, chorea, rigidity) and pigmentary 
retinitis. There are atypical late onset forms with predominance of symptoms of 
Parkinsonism and dementia, which progress slowly and course somewhat less 
progressively.
CASE REPORT: We describe three patients with HSS and an atypical presentation, 
with onset during the second decade of life. In all cases magnetic resonance 
imaging showed areas of hyposignal in T2 sequences in medial globus pallidus, 
with central hypersignal, which gave rise to a tiger's eye image. Other 
aetiologies, such as Wilson's disease, gangliosidosis GM1, 
hypoprebetalipoproteinemia, hexosaminidase A deficiency, aminoacidurias and 
infantile Huntingdon's chorea, were precluded. In the 20-year-old male the 
initial manifestations at the age of 17 were superposed over Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome, with complex motor and vocal tics, palilalia, behavioural 
disorders and postural instability. The 13-year-old patient presented symptoms 
of chorea, hemiballic movements and dystonia in the lower limbs, which limited 
walking at the age of 12. The 28-year-old female patient presented a progressive 
rigid akinetic syndrome, with dementia and partial response to levodopa.
CONCLUSIONS: The clinical spectrum of HSS is broad and its differential 
diagnosis must include hemiballism, Tourette syndrome and juvenile Parkinsonism.

PMID: 14997456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1074. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Mar 11;357(3):167-70. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.12.052.

The E318G substitution in PSEN1 gene is not connected with Alzheimer's disease 
in a large Polish cohort.

Zekanowski C(1), Pepłońska B, Styczyńska M, Religa D, Pfeffer A, Czyzewski K, 
Gabryelewicz T, Szybińska A, Kijanowska-Haładyna B, Kotapka-Minc S, Łuczywek E, 
Barczak A, Wasiak B, Chodakowska-Zebrowska M, Przekop I, Kuźnicki J, Barcikowska 
M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegeneration, International Institute of Molecular and 
Cell Biology, ul. Ksiecia Trojdena 4, PL-02-109 Warszawa, Poland. 
csarekz@iimcb.gov.pl

Mutations in the presenilin 1 (PSEN1) gene are known to cause nearly 50% of 
early-onset, familial Alzheimer's disease (AD) cases. To determine whether E318G 
mutation is related causally to AD in the Polish population E318G mutation 
frequency was assessed using PCR-RFLP method in a total of 659 subjects: 256 AD 
patients, 210 healthy, age-matched control subjects, 100 Parkinson's disease 
patients and 93 centenarians. When the mutation frequencies were compared to 
healthy controls, no significant differences between the groups were found. It 
could be concluded that E318G mutation is not related causally to AD in the 
Polish population, either as a risk factor or a disease causing mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2003.12.052
PMID: 15003276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1075. Practitioner. 2004 Feb;248(1655):70-3, 75-6, 78 passim.

Diagnosing and managing dementia.

Karim S(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, University of Manchester.

PMID: 15008108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1076. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2004 Mar-Apr;12(2):179-88.

Familial occurrence of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Tsuang DW(1), DiGiacomo L, Bird TD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98108, USA. dwt1@washington.edu

OBJECTIVE: The authors investigated the validity of the designation "familial 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)" by evaluating the clinical, neuropathological, 
and genetic characteristics of previously reported families exhibiting both 
familial parkinsonism and dementia.
METHODS: Several families, including multiple individuals with parkinsonism as 
well as prominent dementia, were identified through a literature search. 
Selected families had at least one member with dementia with autopsy evidence of 
neocortical and/or limbic Lewy-body (LB) pathology. Clinical and 
neuropathological evidence from reports of families with prominent dementia as 
well as parkinsonism was reviewed to further define familial DLB.
RESULTS: All selected families had at least one affected individual with 
dementia and autopsy-proven DLB. Therefore, these families might be considered 
examples of familial DLB. Individuals in the first six families typically 
presented with parkinsonian features, whereas cognitive decline did not appear 
until years later. In contrast, in the other six families, affected individuals 
typically presented with cognitive decline, and parkinsonism developed later.
CONCLUSIONS: Families exist in which one or more persons meet both clinical and 
neuropathological criteria for DLB. They differ as to whether the signs of 
parkinsonism precede or follow signs of dementia. It remains to be determined 
whether this clinical distinction is biologically important. Susceptibility to 
developing LB pathology may be determined by the interaction between genetic 
predisposition and environmental risk factors.

PMCID: PMC1482839
PMID: 15010347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1077. Rev Invest Clin. 2003 Nov-Dec;55(6):677-93.

Nicotine dependence and psychiatric disorders.

Salín-Pascual RJ(1), Alcocer-Castillejos NV, Alejo-Galarza G.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología y Psiquiatría, Instituto Nacional de Ciencias Médicas 
y Nutrición Salvador Zubirán, México, DF. salin@servidor.unam.mx

Nicotine addiction is the single largest preventable cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the Western World. Smoking is not any more just a bad habit, but a 
substance addiction problem. The pharmacological aspects of nicotine show that 
this substance has a broad distribution in the different body compartnents, due 
mainly to its lipophilic characteristic. There are nicotinic receptors as 
members of cholinergic receptors' family. They are located in neuromuscular 
junction and in the central nervous system (CNS). Although they are similar, 
pentameric structure with an ionic channel to sodium, there are some differences 
in the protein chains characteristics. Repeated administration of nicotine in 
rats, results in the sensitization phenomenon, which produces increase in the 
behavioral locomotor activity response. It has been found that most 
psychostimulants-induced behavioral sensitization through a nicotine receptor 
activation. Nicotine receptors in CNS are located mainly in presynaptic membrane 
and in that way they regulated the release of several neurotransmitters, among 
them acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin, and norepinephrine. In some activities 
like sleep-wake cycle, nicotine receptors have a functional significance. 
Nicotine receptor stimulation promotes wake time, reduces both, total sleep time 
and rapid eye movement sleep (REMS). About nicotine dependence, this substance 
full fills all the criteria for dependence and withdrawal syndrome. There are 
some people that have more vulnerability for to become nicotine dependent, those 
are psychiatric patients. Among them schizophrenia, major depression, anxiety 
disorders and attention deficit disorder, represent the best example in this 
area. Nicotine may have some beneficial effects, among them are some 
neuroprotective effects in disorders like Parkinson's disease, and Gilles de la 
Tourette' syndrome. Also there are several evidences that support the role of 
nicotine in cognitive improvement functions like attention, concentration, and 
memory. Finally there are several strategies to deal with nicotine dependence, 
Nicotine Replacement Therapy (NRT), which are nicotine chewing-gum, transdermal 
nicotine patches, and nicotine inhalators device. Also some antidepressants like 
bupropion has shown to be effective in smoking cessation treatment. To know more 
about nicotine phenomenon would be important, because that will allow a more 
mature perspective about the damage and beneficial effects of that substance.

PMID: 15011738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1078. Drugs Aging. 2004;21(4):229-42. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200421040-00002.

Anaesthesia in elderly patients with neurodegenerative disorders: special 
considerations.

Burton DA(1), Nicholson G, Hall GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anaesthesia, St George's Hospital Medical School, London, 
England. dburton@sghms.ac.uk

Neurodegenerative diseases are increasingly common in elderly patients, who 
present a particular anaesthetic challenge. The majority of people over the age 
of 70 years have some degree of cerebral atrophy. The pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative diseases is due to alterations in the transport, degradation 
and aggregation of proteins. Alterations in physiology that occur with advancing 
age affect both the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of drugs used in the 
elderly. Changes in pharmacokinetics result in either increased or reduced drug 
concentrations depending on the variable contributions of absorption, metabolism 
and elimination. The distribution of a drug depends on its protein binding, 
cardiac output and blood volume, which are all altered in the elderly. 
Metabolism and excretion of drugs are also affected due to changes in hepatic 
and renal mass and blood flow in the elderly. A number of drugs are used in 
neurodegenerative disorders including antidepressants, benzodiazepines, 
antipsychotics, acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and levodopa. Polypharmacy is a 
common problem, which can lead to adverse drug interactions and an exacerbation 
of dementia. Levodopa, bromocriptine and tricyclic antidepressants are known to 
cause orthostatic hypotension in patients with neurodegenerative disease. 
Elderly patients are liable to excessive sedation from benzodiazepines in both 
the pre- and postoperative period; therefore these drugs should be prescribed in 
low doses. For induction of general anaesthesia propofol is a suitable agent in 
patients with neurodegenerative disease due to its rapid metabolism, but may not 
be suitable in patients with Parkinson's disease as it can induce spontaneous 
involuntary movements. Volatile inhalational agents should be administered 
carefully in the elderly, as they are more sensitive to the depressant cerebral 
and cardiovascular effects. Levodopa should be avoided in conjunction with 
halothane, which sensitises the heart to catecholamines. Co-administration of 
monoamine oxidase inhibitors and opioids should be avoided as it can cause 
agitation, muscular rigidity, sweating and hyperpyrexia. If an anticholinergic 
agent is required, then glycopyrronium bromide is the drug of choice in this 
group of patients, as it does not cross the blood brain barrier. Patients should 
continue to take their usual medications in hospital and do not let the change 
in routine alter the times at which treatments are administered. This is 
particularly relevant to the timing of levodopa in Parkinson's disease, as 
missed treatment can be detrimental. Regional anaesthesia may, however, have 
significant advantages in patients with Parkinson's disease, who can continue to 
take oral levodopa preoperatively, during surgery, if required, and early in the 
postoperative period. Anti-emetic drugs such as phenothiazines, butyrophenones 
and metoclopramide should be used carefully in the postoperative period in these 
patients as their antidopaminergic effects may induce or exacerbate parkinsonian 
effects.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200421040-00002
PMID: 15012169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1079. Neuroimaging Clin N Am. 2003 Nov;13(4):791-803. doi: 
10.1016/s1052-5149(03)00096-0.

The role of positron emission tomography imaging in movement disorders.

Bohnen NI(1), Frey KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Radiology, University of Pittsburgh School of 
Medicine, 3471 Fifth Avenue, Suite 811, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. 
nbohnen@pitt.edu

PET imaging provides the means to study neurochemical, hemodynamic, or metabolic 
processes that underlie movement disorders in vivo. Because the extent of 
presynaptic nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation can be quantified in PD even 
at an early or preclinical stage of the disease, PET imaging may allow the 
selection of at-risk subjects for neuroprotective intervention trials. These 
techniques may also provide markers to follow progression of disease or evaluate 
the effects of neurorestorative interventions in patients who have more advanced 
disease. PET is expected to play an increasing role in the selection of patients 
who have PD for deep brain stimulation. Dopaminergic studies may have a limited 
clinical role in the diagnosis of patients who have symptoms that suggestive of 
PD yet do not respond to typical dopaminergic drugs, such as patients who have 
vascular parkinsonism or ET with mild resting tremor who may have normal 
dopaminergic innervation. The differential diagnosis between PD and multiple 
system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, or corticobasal degeneration is 
not yet clearly established by PET, but combined pre- and postsynaptic 
dopaminergic imaging may be able to distinguish early idiopathic PD from 
atypical parkinsonian disorders, in general. Huntington's chorea is 
characterized by more prominent striatal dopamine receptor loss, whereas 
nigrostriatal denervation is present to a lesser degree. Patients who have TS 
may have enhanced synaptic dopamine release in the putamen. Functional imaging 
studies have generally failed to demonstrate nigrostriatal denervation in 
essential tremor or idiopathic dystonia. Studies have shown striatal dopamine 
receptor loss in selected subtypes of dystonic patients. In conclusion, it is 
expected that PET will help us to better understand the pathophysiology of 
movement disorders, increase the diagnostic accuracy, allow preclinical 
diagnosis, monitor disease progression, and evaluate the efficacy of therapeutic 
agents. Pharmacologic radioligand displacement studies and the development of 
new nondopaminergic ligands may further aid in the unraveling of cerebral 
mechanisms that underlie movement disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s1052-5149(03)00096-0
PMID: 15024962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1080. Sleep Med. 2004 Mar;5(2):181-7. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2003.10.009.

An overview of parkinsonian syndromes: data from the literature and from an 
Italian data-base.

Pezzoli G(1), Canesi M, Galli C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di 
Perfezionamento, Via Bignami, 1, Milano 20126, Italy. pezzoli@parkinson.it

Recent molecular biology research on neurodegenerative diseases, including 
parkinsonisms, has identified mutations in the genes that code for the proteins 
alpha-synuclein and tau, which have been used to classify them into 
synucleinopathies and tauopathies. The synucleinopathies include, besides the 
most common and well studied Parkinson's disease (PD), dementia with Lewy 
bodies, which accounts for approximately 20% of all cases of dementia in the 
elderly, and multiple system atrophy, whereas the tauopathies include rare and 
rapidly progressive syndromes, such as progressive supranuclear palsy and 
corticobasal degeneration. Data we collected at our center in over 2900 
parkinsonian patients show that PD accounts for no more than 70% of 
parkinsonisms. The various syndromes have many features in common that make the 
differential diagnosis difficult in the early stages of disease. Our data are 
consistent with the findings reported in the international literature and 
provide additional information useful for differential diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2003.10.009
PMID: 15033141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1081. Sleep Med. 2004 Mar;5(2):201-6. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2003.10.013.

PET and SPECT functional imaging in Parkinson's disease.

Antonini A(1), DeNotaris R.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Neuroscienze, Centro per la malattia di Parkinson, Istituti 
Clinici di Perfezionamento, Via Bignami 1, 20125 Milan, Italy. 
angelo@parkinson.it

Neuroimaging studies of the dopaminergic system with positron emission 
tomography and single photon emission computed tomography radioligands are 
useful in the assessment of neuronal degeneration in Parkinson's disease. 
Abnormalities can be identified early in the disease process and used to monitor 
progression as well as the effect of treatment. Studies of dopamine receptors 
and brain metabolism can help identify those patients who have other 
Parkinsonian syndromes, such as multiple system atrophy, progressive 
sopranuclear palsy or diffuse Lewy body dementia. The current available 
diagnostic criteria for these disorders rely solely on the presence of signs and 
symptoms that may require months or years to become fully clinically manifest. 
Conversely, the use of neuroimaging techniques can significantly shorten the 
diagnostic process and prove a useful means to the neurologist in those cases 
presenting with uncertain clinical diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2003.10.013
PMID: 15033144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1082. Chem Phys Lipids. 2004 Mar;128(1-2):117-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2003.10.010.

Isoprostanes and related products of lipid peroxidation in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Montine KS(1), Quinn JF, Zhang J, Fessel JP, Roberts LJ 2nd, Morrow JD, Montine 
TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Harborview Medical Center, 
Box 359791, 325 9th Ave., Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

Lipid peroxidation is a major outcome of free radical-mediated injury to brain, 
where it directly damages membranes and generates a number of oxidized products. 
Some of the chemically and metabolically stable oxidation products are useful in 
vivo biomarkers of lipid peroxidation. These include the isoprostanes (IsoPs) 
and isofurans (IsoFs), derived from arachidonic acid (AA), and neuroprostanes 
(NeuroPs), derived from docosahexaenoic acid (DHA). We have shown increased 
levels of IsoPs, NeuroPs, and IsoFs in diseased regions of brain from patients 
who died from advanced Alzheimer's disease (AD) or Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Increased cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of IsoPs are present in patients with 
AD or Huntington's disease (HD) early in the course of their illness, and CSF 
IsoPs may improve the laboratory diagnostic accuracy for AD. In contrast, 
quantification of IsoPs in plasma and urine of AD patients has yielded 
inconsistent results. These results indicate that brain lipid peroxidation is a 
potential therapeutic target early in the course of AD and HD, that CSF IsoPs 
may aid in the assessment of anti-oxidant experimental therapeutics and 
laboratory diagnosis of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.chemphyslip.2003.10.010
PMID: 15037157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1083. Neurology. 2004 Mar 23;62(6):932-6. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000115145.18830.1a.

Essential tremor course and disability: A clinicopathologic study of 20 cases.

Rajput A(1), Robinson CA, Rajput AH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, University of Saskatchewan and Saskatoon Health 
Region, Saskatchewan, Canada.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2004 Oct 26;63(8):1541-2; author reply 1541-2.

OBJECTIVE: To correlate autopsy findings with the clinical course and disability 
profile in clinically diagnosed longitudinally followed autopsied essential 
tremor (ET) patients.
METHODS: All ET patients followed by one neurologist between 1970 and 2001 who 
came to autopsy were included. Clinical features and disability were recorded 
prospectively. Autopsy studies were performed by a qualified neuropathologist.
RESULTS: Twenty cases (10 men and 10 women) had ET onset between childhood and 
age 68 (median 46.5 years). Six cases had additional features of Parkinson 
syndrome (PS), with presence of bradykinesia, rigidity, and rest tremor (RT). 
These included progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP; n = 2), drug-induced 
parkinsonism (n = 2), idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD; n = 1), and basal 
ganglia status cribrosus (n = 1). Of the remaining 14 ET cases, 6 had additional 
RT but no bradykinesia or rigidity. Ten of these 14 (71%) reported physical 
disability. Eleven of the 14 (79%) had only upper limb (UL) tremor at onset, and 
8 of these 11 (73%) had subsequent cranial extension of tremor. Two patients 
clinically had mild cerebellar ataxia but no cerebellar histologic abnormality. 
There was no consistent brain pathology in the ET or ET + RT cases.
CONCLUSIONS: UL tremor was the most common onset, which often progressed to the 
cranial musculature. Functional disability and psychological distress were 
common in these patients. Functional disability was related to the UL tremor. 
Six of 20 (30%) had additional features of PS. Six of the remaining 14 (43%) had 
ET and RT; there was no identifiable pathology in these cases. The risk of PD in 
ET cases was comparable with that in the general population. PSP in two cases 
was incidental comorbidity.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000115145.18830.1a
PMID: 15037695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1084. BMC Med Genet. 2004 Mar 24;5:7. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-5-7.

Glutathione S-Transferase Omega 1 variation does not influence age at onset of 
Huntington's disease.

Arning L(1), Jagiello P, Wieczorek S, Saft C, Andrich J, Epplen JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Ruhr-University, 44780 Bochum, Germany. 
larissa.arning@rub.de

BACKGROUND: Huntington's disease (HD) is a fully penetrant, autosomal dominantly 
inherited disorder associated with abnormal expansions of a stretch of perfect 
CAG repeats in the 5' part of the IT15 gene. The number of repeat units is 
highly predictive for the age at onset (AO) of the disorder. But AO is only 
modestly correlated with repeat length when intermediate HD expansions are 
considered. Circumstantial evidence suggests that additional features of the HD 
course are based on genetic traits. Therefore, it may be possible to investigate 
the genetic background of HD, i.e. to map the loci underlying the development 
and progression of the disease. Recently an association of Glutathione 
S-Transferase Omega 1 (GSTO1) and possibly of GSTO2 with AO was demonstrated 
for, both, Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD).
METHODS: We have genotyped the polymorphisms rs4925 GSTO1 and rs2297235 GSTO2 in 
232 patients with HD and 228 controls.
RESULTS: After genotyping GSTO1 and GSTO2 polymorphisms, firstly there was no 
statistically significant difference in AO for HD patients, as well as secondly 
for HD patients vs. controls concerning, both, genotype and allele frequencies, 
respectively.
CONCLUSION: The GSTO1 and GSTO2 genes flanked by the investigated polymorphisms 
are not comprised in a primary candidate region influencing AO in HD.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2350-5-7
PMCID: PMC394327
PMID: 15040808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1085. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2004 May;6(3):201-207. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-004-0012-9.

Dementia in Parkinson's Disease.

Anderson KE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Movement Disorders Division, University of Maryland 
School of Medicine, 22 South Greene Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA. 
kanderson@psych.umaryland.edu

One of the more recently recognized problems in treatment of patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) is development of cognitive dysfunction and, in many 
cases, frank dementia. As patients with PD live longer, because of improved care 
and treatment of motor symptoms, dementia in PD is becoming a major contributor 
to morbidity in the illness. Prevalence studies suggest that up to 30% of 
patients with PD develop dementia. Dementia in PD patients is often a 
multifactorial condition. Neuropathologic changes caused by PD itself may cause 
memory loss. However, some patients with PD and memory decline also have 
pathologic changes that are more consistent with Alzheimer's disease. Many PD 
patients have a mix of the two types of pathology. Other factors, such as 
underlying illnesses, medication side effects, and interaction of therapeutic 
agents, may contribute to cognitive changes in PD patients. Predictors of 
development of dementia in PD include advancing age and severity of neurologic 
symptoms, which may interact with one another to produce this effect. Recent 
work suggests that tobacco use also may increase risk of PD dementia, despite 
its possible protective effect against development of PD itself. Presence of 
psychiatric illness, especially depression, may interfere with cognition and 
exacerbate memory loss. Reduction in the dose of dopaminergic agents and of 
other medications may be helpful in partially improving cognitive function in 
some cases. The balance between improvement of motor function and preservation 
of cognitive abilities must be weighed, and it is important for clinicians to 
discuss this trade-off with patients and their families. At this time, there is 
no US Food and Drug Administration-approved pharmacologic treatment for dementia 
in PD. However, medication used to treat Alzheimer's disease, such as 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, may slow progression of memory loss in some PD 
patients. Based on work from small double-blind studies, open-label trials, and 
case reports, cholinesterase inhibitors may be tried for treatment of dementia 
in PD, as long as the patient and caregivers understand that these agents are 
being used on an off-label basis. Surgical intervention, such as deep brain 
stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or globus pallidus internus, although 
useful for treatment of motor symptoms in some PD patients, does not improve 
cognitive function in most cases and may actually worsen cognition in patients 
with pre-existing dementia. There is no specific exercise regimen or dietary 
guidelines for patients with PD who develop dementia. However, patients should 
be encouraged to lead a healthy lifestyle; this may improve overall well-being, 
which could impact positively on cognition function. Similarly, although 
assistive devices have not been developed for people with PD who have memory 
loss, any aid that increases mobility will probably improve mental and physical 
function. Clinicians should be mindful of the increased caregiver burden posed 
by PD patients who also have dementia. They should intervene appropriately to 
prevent caregiver distress and "burn out." Herbal and nutritional supplements 
have not been shown in clinical trials to be beneficial for treatment of any 
type of dementia, and thus are not recommended for PD patients with cognitive 
decline.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-004-0012-9
PMID: 15043803


1086. Neurobiol Dis. 2004 Apr;15(3):449-60. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2003.12.009.

Microtubule-associated protein tau gene: a risk factor in human 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Schraen-Maschke S(1), Dhaenens CM, Delacourte A, Sablonnière B.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U422 and Département de Biochimie et de Biologie moléculaire, Faculté 
de Médecine, Université de Lille 2, Place de Verdun, 59045, Lille Cedex, France.

Tau is a microtubule-associated protein mainly expressed in neurons of central 
nervous system, which is crucial in the maintenance of these cells. It has a 
central role in the polymerization and stabilization of microtubules and in the 
traffic of organelles along axons and dendrites. Aggregates of 
hyperphosphorylated forms of tau protein participate in the formation of 
neurofibrillary tangles, which characterize numerous neurodegenerative disorders 
named tauopathies. The analysis of tau gene and the study of familial cases of 
tauopathies have led to the discovery of tau gene mutations that cause inherited 
dementia designated as Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) with parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). However, these familial cases remain rare compared to 
the sporadic tauopathies, the later involving both genetic and environmental 
etiologic factors. As tau pathology represents a primary pathogenic event in 
various neurodegenerative diseases, the hypothesis that tau genotype could 
influence the development of these diseases was tested by several groups. This 
review summarizes advances in the molecular genetics of the tau gene, as well as 
recent studies addressing the disease incidence of novel tau polymorphisms in 
different neurodegenerative diseases. Hopefully, the identification of several 
genetic defects of the tau gene will be helpful in improving our understanding 
of the role of tau protein in the pathogenesis of various neurodegenerative 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2003.12.009
PMID: 15056452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1087. Braz J Psychiatry. 2004 Mar;26(1):50-6. doi: 10.1590/s1516-44462004000100013. 
Epub 2004 Mar 30.

[Homocysteine and neuropsychiatric disorders].

[Article in Portuguese]

Sachdev P(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculdade de Psiquiatria, Universidade de New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. 
p.sachdev@unsw.edu.au

The author presents an overview of the current literature on homocysteine as a 
risk factor for neuropsychiatric disorders. The databases MEDLINE, Current 
Contents and EMBASE were searched (between 1966 and 2002) for English language 
publications with the key words 'Homocysteine' and 'Stroke'; 'Alzheimer 
Disease'; 'Cognitive Impairment'; 'Epilepsy'; 'Depression'; or 'Parkinson's 
disease'. Individual articles were hand searched for relevant cross-references. 
It is biologically plausible that high homocysteine levels may cause brain 
injury and neuropsychiatric disorders. Homocysteine is proatherogenic and 
prothrombotic, thereby increasing the risk of cerebrovascular disease, and may 
have a direct neurotoxic effect. Evidence for homocysteine as a risk factor for 
cerebral microvascular disease is conflicting but warrants further study. 
Cross-sectional and some longitudinal studies support increased prevalence of 
stroke and vascular dementia in hyperhomocysteinemic individuals. The evidence 
of increased neurodegeneration is accumulating. The relationship with depression 
is still tentative, as it is with epilepsy. Currently, treatment studies are 
necessary to place the evidence on a stronger footing, and maybe high-risk 
patients should be screened for hyperhomocysteinemia and this should be treated 
with folic acid. More research evidence is necessary before population screening 
can be recommended.

DOI: 10.1590/s1516-44462004000100013
PMID: 15057841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1088. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2004 Apr;19(4):371-7. doi: 10.1002/gps.1094.

Pentagon drawing and neuropsychological performance in Dementia with Lewy 
Bodies, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's disease with 
dementia.

Cormack F(1), Aarsland D, Ballard C, Tovée MJ.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, The Henry Wellcome Building For Neuroecology, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK.

OBJECTIVES: Early and accurate diagnosis of Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) to 
allow the appropriate clinical treatment is a priority, given reports of severe 
neuroleptic sensitivity and a preferential response to cholinesterase inhibitors 
in these patients. There have been suggestions that constructional apraxia is 
prevalent in DLB, and may provide a sensitive marker of the disease.
METHODS: This study examined the pentagon drawings of 100 DLB patients, 50 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, 81 Parkinson's disease (PD) patients of whom 
36 suffered from dementia (PDD). Performance on this task was correlated with 
cognitive performance on the MMSE and CAMCOG scales.
RESULTS: Patients with DLB were found to draw significantly worse pentagons than 
those with AD or PD, but not those with PDD. Drawing scores were significantly 
correlated with MMSE scores for the AD and PDD groups but not those with DLB. 
More detailed analysis of the neuropsychological correlates of constructional 
performance for patients with AD and DLB, revealed that those with AD showed a 
broad cognitive basis to their impairment, in DLB drawing was linked only to 
perception and praxis.
CONCLUSIONS: This study has suggests that DLB subjects show an impairment of 
pentagon copying that is dissociable from more global cognitive impairments, 
whereas PD patients are relatively unimpaired on pentagon copying and AD and PDD 
patients show a linkage of their impairment in copying with more global 
cognitive deficits.

Copyright 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1094
PMID: 15065231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1089. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2004;18(1):94-100. doi: 10.1159/000077816. Epub 2004 
Apr 14.

Hallucinations predict attentional improvements with rivastigmine in dementia 
with lewy bodies.

McKeith IG(1), Wesnes KA, Perry E, Ferrara R.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK. i.g.mckeith@ncl.ac.uk

The aim of this analysis of the effects of cholinergic therapy in dementia with 
Lewy bodies was to determine whether rivastigmine-induced benefits in attention 
and memory could be predicted by the presence of visual hallucinations. At study 
entry, 74% of patients were hallucinators and 26% were non-hallucinators. The 
population was analyzed for two-factor scores: power of attention (PoA) and 
quality of memory (QoM). A significant effect over placebo on PoA was observed 
in hallucinators at weeks 12 (p = 0.023) and 20 (p = 0.0019), while no treatment 
effects were seen in non-hallucinators. Significant treatment effects on QoM 
were not observed in either subgroup. Visual hallucinations predicted greater 
improvements in PoA, but not QoM. This may reflect the greater cholinergic 
deficits in areas of the brain responsible for visual hallucinations, offering 
greater potential for attentional improvement.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000077816
PMID: 15087584 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1090. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2004 Jan-Feb;27(1):4-5. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-200401000-00003.

Aripiprazole for drug-induced psychosis in Parkinson disease: preliminary 
experience.

Fernandez HH(1), Trieschmann ME, Friedman JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Florida College of Medicine, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.Fernandez@neurology.ufl.edu

Aripiprazole is the newest atypical antipsychotic (AA) drug to be released in 
the US. It is the only AA that is a partial agonist at the D2 and 5HT1a 
receptors and an antagonist at 5HT2a receptors. It also has a high 5HT2/D2 ratio 
and may therefore carry a low risk of extrapyramidal side effects and alleviate 
psychosis in Parkinson-vulnerable populations. We report our preliminary 
experience in 8 patients with probable Parkinson disease (PD) treated with 
aripiprazole for drug-induced psychosis. Two patients were neuroleptic-naive, 5 
patients were "quetiapine failures", and 1 patient was switched from olanzapine 
to aripiprazole. Aripiprazole was started at 5 mg to 10 mg a day and slowly 
increased over 3 to 7 days until side effects or improvement of psychosis 
occurred. Only 2 out of 8 patients experienced near complete resolution of their 
psychosis using aripiprazole. The other six patients discontinued aripiprazole 
within 40 days, 2 of whom discontinued due to motor worsening. Our preliminary 
experience with aripiprazole is mixed but not very encouraging. Controlled 
studies are needed to evaluate aripiprazole in parkinsonian patients.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-200401000-00003
PMID: 15090928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1091. Rev Neurol. 2004 Apr 1-15;38(7):675-81.

[Clinical heterogeneity of Alzheimer's disease. Different clinical profiles can 
predict the progression rate].

[Article in Spanish]

Mangone CA(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Asistencia e Investigación del Deterioro Cognitivo, Hospital 
Santojani, Buenos Aires, Argentina. camangone@fibertel.com.ar

INTRODUCTION: Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a degenerative dementia that may 
disclose different cognitive, behavioral, psychiatric and functional symptoms 
since onset. These distinct cognitive profiles support the conception of 
clinical heterogeneity and account for AD's highly variable rate of progression. 
In spite of strict diagnostic criteria NINCS ADRDA's and DSM IV the clinical 
certainty is only about 85%. Mayeux define 4 subtypes: a). Benign: mild 
cognitive and functional impairment without focal signs and late onset 
behavioral signs, slow progression; b). Myoclonic: usually of presenile onset 
with severe cognitive deterioration, mutism and early onset myoclonus; c). 
Extrapyramidal: early onset akineto rigid signs with severe cognitive, 
behavioral and psychiatric involvement; d). Typical: gradual and progressive 
cognitive, behavioral and functional impairment. The differentiation of these 
subtypes will allow us to define discrete patterns of progression, to define 
prognostic subgroups, and to homogenize them for clinical research and drug 
trials.
DEVELOPMENT: We examined 1000 charts of probable AD patients from the Santojanni 
Center. We found 42% extrapyramidal, 35% typical, 15% benign and 8% myoclonic. 
The early onset of parkinsonism and myoclonus predict a rapidly evolving 
cognitive impairment and a more severe rate of progression with psychiatric 
disorders and dependency in activities of daily living. (DADL) Patients with low 
level of education, low cognitive performance at entry as well as those with 
rapid rate of cognitive deterioration had a faster rate of progression to DADL.
CONCLUSION: Delusions, low level of education, extrapyramidal signs and motor 
hyperactivity but not hallucinations, and anosognosia were the best non 
cognitive predictors of DADL.

PMID: 15098191 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1092. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2003;37 Suppl 5:103-15.

[Depression and dementia: the most frequent non-motor symptoms of Parkinson 
disease].

[Article in Polish]

Sławek J(1), Derejko M.

Author information:
(1)Klinika Neurochirurgii-Oddział Neurochirurgii Czynnościowej i Chorób Układu 
Pozapiramidowego, Akademia Medyczna w Gdańsku. jaroslawek@amg.gda.pl

The aim of our study was to assess the frequency, risk factors, and 
interrelations between depression and dementia in P.D.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 100 consecutive patients with P.D. with good response to 
L-dopa and normal CT/MRI scans, mean age: 66 (41-81) years, mean disease 
duration 6.7 (0-24) years. Rating scales: for stage of disease and motor 
disability: Hoehn-Yahr (HY), Schwab-England (SE), Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale (UPDRS), for depression: Montgomery-Asberg Depression Rating Scale 
(MADRS), for dementia: Mini Mental State Examination (MMSE), for quality of 
life: Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39) and own questionnaire 
(demographic data and treatment).
RESULTS: Depression (MADRS > 19) was revealed in 35% and dementia (MMSE < or = 
23) in 19% of patients. Depressed and demented patients had significantly more 
advanced motor disability (UPDRS, HY, SE) and poor quality of life (PDQ-39). In 
group with dementia disease duration was longer (9.4 vs 6.0 years; p < 0.009), 
mean age was higher (71.3 vs 64.7 years; p < 0.002) and sleep disturbances, 
depression and hallucinations more frequent (p < 0.04). Groups with and without 
depression did not differ significantly in terms of dementia (MMSE).
CONCLUSIONS: Depression and dementia are more frequent in patients with greater 
motor disability and correlated significantly with poor quality of life. Old 
age, longer disease duration, hallucinations and sleep disturbances are risk 
factors for dementia in P.D. In demented patients with P.D. depression is more 
frequent.

PMID: 15098337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1093. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2003;37 Suppl 5:155-64.

[Clinical correlation of vascular parkinsonism].

[Article in Polish]

Honczarenko K(1), Budzianowska A.

Author information:
(1)Katedry i Kliniki Neurologii Pomorskiej Akademii Medycznej w Szczecinie.

Vascular parkinsonism has not been well defined and the clinical correlation of 
vascular parkinsonism is still not clear. The aim of the study was to estimate 
prevalence of occurrence of vascular parkinsonism, analysis of risk factors 
leading to its development and to identify clinical features that suggest a 
vascular origin. 214 patients with Parkinson's disease were examined. Their ages 
ranged from 37 to 88 years (median 66.4 years). Evidence of vascular 
parkinsonism was assessed using a vascular rating scale previously described by 
Winikates and Jankovic. Statistical analysis was performed with Mann-Whitney U 
test, chi 2 Pearson test, chi 2 Yates test, Spearman rank correlation and 
Student's t test. Out of 214 patients 8 were proved to have developed 
Parkinson's disease due to vascular disease, what gave 3.74%. Out of risk 
factors for stroke 5 patients had hypertension, 3 had diabetes mellitus, 2 
suffered from heart disease, 2 had infarctus myocardii, 1 had hyperlipidemia, 1 
had atrial fibrillation. Additionally, those patients had neuroimaging (CT or 
MRI) evidence of vascular disease in one or more vascular territories. Patients 
with vascular parkinsonism were older, had shorter duration of disease, were 
more likely to present rigidity rather than tremor. Dementia and incontinence 
were more common in vascular group than in Parkinson's disease group. Patients 
with vascular parkinsonism were also significantly more likely to have 
corticospinal findings. Proving that Parkinson's disease had vascular etiology 
is extremely difficult. The test results are inconclusive.

PMID: 15098342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1094. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Mar;1012:224-36. doi: 10.1196/annals.1306.019.

Brain ferritin iron as a risk factor for age at onset in neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Bartzokis G(1), Tishler TA, Shin IS, Lu PH, Cummings JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UCLA, Los Angeles, California, USA. gbar@ucla.edu

Tissue iron can promote oxidative damage. Brain iron increases with age and is 
abnormally elevated early in the disease process in several neurodegenerative 
disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Higher iron levels in males may contribute to higher risk for younger-onset PD 
and recent studies have linked the presence of the hemochromatosis gene with a 
younger age at onset of AD. We examined whether age at onset of PD and AD was 
associated with increased brain ferritin iron. Ferritin iron can be measured 
with specificity in vivo with MRI utilizing the field-dependent relaxation rate 
increase (FDRI) method. FDRI was assessed in three basal ganglia regions 
(caudate, putamen, and globus pallidus) and frontal lobe white matter for 
younger- and older-onset male PD and AD patients and healthy controls. 
Significant increases in basal ganglia FDRI levels were observed in the 
younger-onset groups of both diseases compared to their respective control 
groups, but were absent in the older-onset patients. The results support the 
suggestion that elevated ferritin iron and its associated toxicity is a risk 
factor for age at onset of neurodegenerative diseases such as AD and PD. 
Clinical phenomena such as gender-associated risk of developing 
neurodegenerative diseases and the age at onset of such diseases may be 
associated with brain iron levels. In vivo MRI can measure and track brain 
ferritin iron levels and provides an opportunity to design therapeutic 
interventions that target high-risk populations early in the course of illness, 
possibly even before symptoms appear.

DOI: 10.1196/annals.1306.019
PMID: 15105269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1095. Hum Genet. 2004 Jun;115(1):29-35. doi: 10.1007/s00439-004-1123-9. Epub 2004 Apr 
24.

Mitochondrial DNA polymorphisms as risk factors for Parkinson's disease and 
Parkinson's disease dementia.

Autere J(1), Moilanen JS, Finnilä S, Soininen H, Mannermaa A, Hartikainen P, 
Hallikainen M, Majamaa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital and University of Kuopio, 
Kuopio, Finland.

The activity of complex I of the mitochondrial respiratory chain has been found 
to be decreased in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), but no mutations have 
been identified in genes encoding complex I subunits. Recent studies have 
suggested that polymorphisms in mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-encoded complex I 
genes (MTND) modify susceptibility to PD. We hypothesize that the risk of PD is 
conveyed by the total number of nonsynonymous substitutions in the MTND genes in 
various mtDNA lineages rather than by single mutations. To test this 
possibility, we determined the number of nonsynonymous substitutions of the 
seven MTND genes from 183 Finns. The differences in the total number of 
nonsynonymous substitutions and the nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution 
rate ratio ( K(a)/ K(s)) of MTND genes between the European mtDNA haplogroup 
clusters (HV, JT, KU, IWX) were analysed by using a statistical approach. 
Patients with PD ( n=238) underwent clinical examination together with mtDNA 
haplogroup analysis and the clinical features between patient groups defined by 
the number of nonsynonymous substitutions were compared. Our analysis revealed 
that the haplogroup clusters HV and KU had a lower average number of amino acid 
replacements and a lower K(a)/ K(s) ratio in the MTND genes than clusters JT and 
IWX. Supercluster JTIWX with the highest number of amino acid replacements was 
more frequent among PD patients and even more frequent among patients with PD 
who developed dementia. Our results suggest that a relative excess of 
nonsynonymous mutations in MTND genes in supercluster JTWIX is associated with 
an increased risk of PD and the disease progression to dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00439-004-1123-9
PMID: 15108120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1096. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2004 May;10 Suppl 1:S19-26. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2004.02.003.

Caribbean parkinsonism and other atypical parkinsonian disorders.

Tolosa E(1), Calandrella D, Gallardo M.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Institut 
Clinic Malaltias del Sistema Nervios, Hospital Clínic Universitari, University 
of Barcelona, Spain. etolosa@clinic.ub.es

Atypical parkinsonism (AP) is a term applied to disorders characterized by 
parkinsonism that evolves rapidly, with poor or transient response to levodopa, 
or has other associated features such as early falls and postural instability, 
early autonomic failure, supranuclear gaze palsy, pyramidal or cerebellar signs, 
alien hand syndrome or severe ideomotor apraxia. The most common AP are multiple 
system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD). Other APs include Caribbean parkinsonism (CP) and 
parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam (PDC). In this review we provide an update 
in etiology, neuropathology, diagnosis and treatment of atypical parkinsonian 
disorders associated with protein tau deposit, also known as tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2004.02.003
PMID: 15109583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1097. Neurology. 2004 Apr 27;62(8):1317-22. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000120548.24298.db.

Evaluation of visual recognition memory in MCI patients.

Barbeau E(1), Didic M, Tramoni E, Felician O, Joubert S, Sontheimer A, Ceccaldi 
M, Poncet M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurophysiologie et Neuropsychologie, Inserm EMI-U 9926, 
Faculté de Médecine, Univ. Mediterranee, Marseille, France. 
emmanuel.barbeau@medecine.univ-mrs.fr

BACKGROUND: Neurofibrillary tangles seen early in Alzheimer disease (AD) 
initially appear in a subregion of the perirhinal cortex. In the monkey, damage 
to the perirhinal cortex impairs performance on visual recognition memory tasks. 
The authors evaluated impairment of visual recognition memory as a potential 
early diagnostic marker of AD.
METHODS: The authors developed a visual delayed matching-to-sample task (DMS48) 
designed to assess visual recognition memory in humans. Twenty-three patients 
fulfilling the criteria of amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) (mean 
Mini-Mental State Examination [MMSE]: 26.6, SD = 1.6) were recruited. All 
underwent a full neuropsychological evaluation, which included the Free and Cued 
Selective Reminding (FCSR) test. Their performance was compared with that of 10 
patients with mild AD, 20 patients with moderate AD, 20 patients with Parkinson 
disease (PD), and 40 age-matched controls.
RESULTS: Control subjects and patients with PD performed close to ceiling. 
Patients with mild AD had very low scores, while patients with moderate AD 
answered at random. MCI patients obtained scores that were between those of 
control subjects and patients with mild AD (78%, SD = 16%). MCI patients who 
failed on the DMS48 had lower scores on free recall (p < 0.05) and received less 
benefit from cueing (p < 0.01) on the FCSR than the other MCI, suggesting a 
profile of genuine memory impairment related to medial temporal lobe lesions.
CONCLUSION: The DMS48, a test of visual recognition memory, is impaired early in 
the course of patients with MCI. Further studies are necessary to determine 
whether the evaluation of visual recognition memory may contribute to the 
identification of patients with AD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000120548.24298.db
PMID: 15111668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1098. No To Shinkei. 2004 Mar;56(3):205-23.

[Cigarette smoking and neurological disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Nagata K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Research Institute for Brain and Blood Vessels, 6-10 
Senshu-Kubota-Machi, Akita 010-0874, Japan.

PMID: 15112445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1099. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Jun 15;13(12):1219-24. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddh134. Epub 2004 
Apr 28.

Somatic and germline mosaicism in sporadic early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Beck JA(1), Poulter M, Campbell TA, Uphill JB, Adamson G, Geddes JF, Revesz T, 
Davis MB, Wood NW, Collinge J, Tabrizi SJ.

Author information:
(1)MRC Prion Unit and Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, Institute of 
Neurology UCL, Queen Square, London, UK.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the commonest neurodegenerative disease worldwide. 
Rare familial cases may be caused by mutations in one of three genes-amyloid 
precursor protein, presenilin-1 and presenilin-2; however, the molecular basis 
of >99% of AD cases is unknown. Somatic mutation has been considered to be a 
mechanism that may account for a proportion of sporadic cases of AD, but to date 
there has been no evidence for this. We now report a sporadic early-onset 
patient with AD, and show that this individual is a somatic mosaic for a 
mutation in the presenilin-1 gene, suggesting a novel molecular mechanism for 
AD. Quantification of the mosaicism demonstrated the degree of mosaicism at 8% 
in peripheral lymphocytes and 14% in cerebral cortex in the index patient; a 
clear gene dosage effect on age of presentation and clinical phenotypic 
presentation is demonstrated. This finding has important implications for the 
aetiology of sporadic AD, and for other apparently sporadic neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Parkinson's disease, motor neuron disease and Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddh134
PMID: 15115757 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1100. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2004 Apr;160(4 Pt 2):S31-43. doi: 
10.1016/s0035-3787(04)70942-x.

[Hallucinations and dementia. Prevalence, clinical presentation and 
pathophysiology].

[Article in French]

Fénelon G(1), Mahieux F.

Author information:
(1)Service de neurologie, Hôpital Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. 
gilles.fenelon@hmn.ap-hop-paris.fr

Hallucinations are a common feature of certain degenerative diseases with a risk 
of dementia such as Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body dementia, and Parkinson's 
disease. Obtaining valid epidemiological data is nevertheless quite difficult 
because of methodological problems. As a rule, hallucinations are more prevalent 
in Lewy body disease than Parkinson's disease or Alzheimer's disease. The 
prevalence in parkinsonian dementia is about the same as in Lewy body disease. 
Complex visual hallucinations predominate, auditory or tactile hallucinations 
are more exceptional. Minor forms (illusions, sensation of presence) are also 
observed. Recurrence is common, mainly in the evening or at night. Patients with 
advanced mental impairment generally take the hallucinations for reality. The 
hallucinations can be associated with psychological and behavioral disorders 
such as delusionnal idea or identification disorders. It is important to search 
for other causes of hallucinations such as drugs, ocular disorders, or 
depression, but many of these disorders are common comorbidities in elderly 
patients with degenerative disease. There is no unique model fitting all the 
hypothesized pathogenic mechanisms. Complex visual hallucinations most likely 
arise from abnormal activation of the extra-striat temporal associative regions, 
but only hypothetical mechanisms have been proposed. Genetic studies and 
functional imaging have not provided convincing evidence. Current focus is 
placed on an imbalance between deficient cholinergic transmission and preserved 
or augmented monoaminergic transmission at the cortical level, but other 
neurotransmission systems could be involved. The dream dysregulation mechanism 
proposed in Parkinson's disease cannot be generalized. The link between 
cognitive disorders and hallucination is also poorly understood: hallucinations 
are associated with more severe cognitive impairments or more rapid cognitive 
deline in Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease, but the association with 
specific cognitive disorders remains to be fully explored.

DOI: 10.1016/s0035-3787(04)70942-x
PMID: 15118551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


