2101. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2009;84:21-33. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7742(09)00402-4.

Subcortical ischemic cerebrovascular dementia.

Menon U(1), Kelley RE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, LSU Health Sciences Center, Shreveport, Louisiana 
71103, USA.

It has become increasingly apparent, especially with the advent of MRI brain 
scanning, that a large number of patients develop signal intensity changes in 
the subcortical white matter and periventricular region as they age. This 
appears to be accelerated by risk factors for small vessel cerebrovascular 
disease such as hypertension, smoking, diabetes mellitus and hyperlipidemia. The 
major question becomes when such changes become clinically significant. It is 
obvious that subcortical lacunar-type infarction can be identified by the 
clinical presentation. For example, typical examples of so-called "lacunar 
syndrome" include pure motor hemiparesis, pure sensory stroke, sensorimotor 
stroke, clumsy hand-dysarthria, and hemiataxia-hemiparesis. The issue becomes a 
measure of impact on functional ability. This is influenced by several factors. 
Baseline IQ and educational level, as well as expectations of age, certainly 
play a role. A person who develops cognitive impairment and long tract signs in 
their 50s or 60s is certainly going to be recognized as more impaired than an 80 
year old individual who is retired and primarily is engaged in recreational 
activity. It would be expected that a person born with limited intellectual 
capacity and/or limited educational opportunity would be less likely to be 
identified as impaired than a person who has achieved substantial economic 
achievement through their innate talents. The concept of tissue loss or lesion 
load becomes important when determining how pronounced the ischemic 
cerebrovascular changes translate into functional impairment. Correlative 
pathology may include cortical atrophy and ventricular dilatation. Loss of 
either cortical or subcortical tissue function is expected to be related to 
functional compromise. In addition, there are potential features such as the 
coexistence of small vessel cerebrovascular disease and Alzheimer's disease. 
Small vessel cerebrovascular disease might also play a contributing factor in 
patients susceptible to Dementia with Lewy Bodies or patients susceptible to 
fronto-temporal dementia or any other dementing process. Thus, the concept of 
tissue loss or lesion burden of disease becomes increasingly important as we 
recognize the potential for multifactorial issues, including genetic factors, to 
contribute to the phenotypic expression. The relationships between cognitive 
impairment, dementia and subcortical vascular lesions are poorly understood. 
There have been several papers on the different aspects of cerebral insults and 
their impact on cognition, the various kinds of dementia and different methods 
of analyzing the impact of the various insults to the brain. This chapter is an 
attempt to review all pertinent information currently available on the poorly 
understood condition of "subcortical ischemic cerebrovascular dementia."

DOI: 10.1016/S0074-7742(09)00402-4
PMID: 19501711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2102. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2009;84:229-44. doi: 10.1016/S0074-7742(09)00412-7.

Dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Robottom BJ(1), Weiner WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland 21230, USA.

Parkinson's disease is the second most common neurodegenerative illness 
diagnosed in the United States. Dementia is recognized as a common component of 
advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). In patients with early PD, cognitive changes 
occur and primarily reflect impairment in executive function. It is unknown if 
the early cognitive changes detected on neuropsychological testing in 
Parkinson's disease are predictive of the subsequent development of Parkinson's 
disease with dementia (PDD). Many patients with PD develop dementia 
characterized by a wide range of cognitive deficits distinct from those seen in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Neuropsychiatric problems frequently accompany PDD. 
This chapter reviews the epidemiology, clinical characteristics of early and 
late cognitive changes, pathology, neuroimaging, diagnosis, and treatment of 
PDD.

DOI: 10.1016/S0074-7742(09)00412-7
PMID: 19501721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2103. Neurology. 2009 Jun 9;72(23):2024-8. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181a92c4c.

Characterization of DCTN1 genetic variability in neurodegeneration.

Vilariño-Güell C(1), Wider C, Soto-Ortolaza AI, Cobb SA, Kachergus JM, Keeling 
BH, Dachsel JC, Hulihan MM, Dickson DW, Wszolek ZK, Uitti RJ, Graff-Radford NR, 
Boeve BF, Josephs KA, Miller B, Boylan KB, Gwinn K, Adler CH, Aasly JO, Hentati 
F, Destée A, Krygowska-Wajs A, Chartier-Harlin MC, Ross OA, Rademakers R, Farrer 
MJ.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Laboratory and Core, Morris K. Udall Parkinson's Disease 
Research Center of Excellence, Mayo Clinic, Department of Neuroscience, 4500 San 
Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. VilarinoGuell.Carles@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: Recently, mutations in DCTN1 were found to cause Perry syndrome, a 
parkinsonian disorder with TDP-43-positive pathology. Previously, mutations in 
DCTN1 were identified in a family with lower motor neuron disease, in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and in a family with ALS/frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), suggesting a central role for DCTN1 in neurodegeneration.
METHODS: In this study we sequenced all DCTN1 exons and exon-intron boundaries 
in 286 samples diagnosed with Parkinson disease (PD), frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (FTLD), or ALS.
RESULTS: This analysis revealed 36 novel variants (9 missense, 5 silent, and 22 
noncoding). Segregation analysis in families and association studies in PD, 
FTLD, and ALS case-control series did not identify any variants segregating with 
disease or associated with increased disease risk.
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that pathogenic mutations in DCTN1 are rare and 
do not play a common role in the development of Parkinson disease, 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181a92c4c
PMCID: PMC2692178
PMID: 19506225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2104. Nihon Rinsho. 2009 Jun;67(6):1078-82.

[Genetic basis for dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuwano R(1), Takei N, Miyashita A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Center for Bioresources, Brain Research 
Institute, Niigata University.

A goal of genetic research is to identify risk factor loci for complex 
disorders, and to understand a molecular mechanism of the factor on development 
of the disease. Dementia is the most common neurodegererative disorder in the 
elderly. Three frequent neurodegererative dementias are Alzheimer disease, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration, characterized 
by senile plaque with amyloid beta and neurofibrillary tangles with tau, Lewy 
body with alpha-synuclein, tau or tau-negative ubiquitin-immunoreactive neuronal 
inclusions with TDP-43, respectively. Overlapping symptoms, progress and 
neuropathological findings often complicate the diagnosis. Genetic risk factors 
obtained by genome-wide association study might provide new insight into 
etiology common to dementia.

PMID: 19507496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2105. Brain Nerve. 2009 May;61(5):558-68.

[Historical overview of REM sleep behavior disorder in relation to its 
pathophysiology].

[Article in Japanese]

Tachibana N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Center for Sleep-related Disorders, Kansai 
Electric Power Hospital, 2-1-7 Fukushima, Fukushima-ku, Osaka 553-0003, Japan.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD), which is characterized 
by dream-enacted, sometimes violent and aggressive, behaviors was firstly 
reported by Schenck and his colleagues in 1986; thereafter, it was incorporated 
as parasomnia in the International Classification of Sleep Disorders 1st edition 
(ICSD-1). The polysomnographical hallmarks of RBD include intermittent/sustained 
loss of the skeletal muscle atonia of REM sleep (REM sleep without atonia 
[RWA]); further, this finding has been mandatory in the diagnostic criterion 
(requiring polysomnographic [PSG] monitoring) in the ICSD-2 in 2005. The animal 
equivalent of RBD was previously described by Jouvet's and Morrison's groups, 
dated back to 1965, when Jouvet's group firstly created experimentally lesioned 
cats (in the bilateral pontine tegmentum areas) presenting with "oneiric 
behaviors". In 1970s Hishikawa's group had also described peculiar sleep state 
in alcoholics and other subjects of drug withdrawal with rapid eye movements and 
tonically increased chin muscle activity (reffered to as "Stage 1-REM with tonic 
EMG" [Stage 1-REM]). It was difficult to determine from the polysomnographical 
features whether Stage 1-REM was REM sleep or not, as this state did not 
preserve proper cyclic appearance of REM sleep. They also reported Stage 1-REM 
in patients with Shy-Drager syndrome in 1981. The latter finding of Hishikawa's 
group, together with RBD observed in multiple system atrophy (MSA) reported by 
other groups, could be best explained by the experimental cat model because of 
its presumed extensive brainstem pathology. However, neurophysiology of 
withdrawal states has not been well understood; therefore, Stage 1-REM should be 
reappraised from new perspectives. After 1990, more extensive studies on RBD 
revealed that about half of RBD cases were associated with neurological 
disorders, especially neurodegenerative diseases pathologically known as 
syncleiopathies (Parkinson disease [PD], dementia with Lewy bodies, and MSA). In 
addition, it has been shown that a substantial number of idiopathic RBD (iRBD) 
patients eventually developed Parkinsonian diseases. In accordance with 
accumulative data indicating that various non-parkinsonian features can precede 
the onset of motor symptoms of PD (or pathologically Lewy body diseases), a 
search of early PD markers in patients with iRBD has been performed. The results 
of the studies support the hypothesis of RBD as an early sign of a 
neurodegenerative disorder. More recently, it was reported that RBD is 
frequently symptomatic of narcolepsy, although the pathophysiological mechanism 
of this state was still unknown. RBD in stroke patients have been anecdotal; 
however, under such conditions, specific lesion studies can be possible, as data 
in the experimental RBD rats have been accumulated during these few years. In 
conclusion, RBD is observed in a wide range of neurological disorders, and the 
causative mechanism of RWA and behavioral manifestations may not only be 
attributable to brainstem lesions. RBD is not a homogeneous clinical entity, and 
further refinement of its diagnostic classification is warranted to avoid 
diagnostic confusion.

PMID: 19514516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2106. BMC Neurol. 2009 Jun 10;9:23. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-9-23.

Dopamine Agonists and their risk to induce psychotic episodes in Parkinson's 
disease: a case-control study.

Ecker D(1), Unrath A, Kassubek J, Sabolek M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Ulm 89081, Germany. 
daniel.ecker@focus-cdd.de

BACKGROUND: Psychosis is rare in untreated patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) but the prevalence rises to 40% during dopaminergic treatment. So far, no 
systematic comparison of the psychogenic potential of different dopaminergic 
drugs had been performed.
METHODS: Eighty PD patients with psychotic episodes were compared to an 
age-matched control group of PD patients without psychotic episodes (n = 120) in 
a cross-sectional retrospective study.
RESULTS: We found a positive correlation between psychotic episodes and 
dementia, number of concomitant medication, and pergolide intake. Odds ratio 
calculation confirmed the association with dementia. With respect to 
dopaminergic treatment, pergolide showed the highest odds ratio, levodopa the 
lowest. An adjusted logistic regression model confirmed the strong association 
with psychotic episodes and pergolide and no association with levodopa (adjusted 
odds ratio 2.01 and 0.11, respectively).
CONCLUSION: The analysis indicates that dementia and concomitant medication are 
factors in PD associated with psychotic symptoms. Furthermore, different 
dopaminergic drugs showed markedly different associations with psychotic 
symptoms.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-9-23
PMCID: PMC2704166
PMID: 19515253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2107. Behav Brain Res. 2009 Dec 1;204(1):1-31. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.06.008. Epub 
2009 Jun 10.

In vivo imaging of synaptic function in the central nervous system: I. Movement 
disorders and dementia.

Nikolaus S(1), Antke C, Müller HW.

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Düsseldorf, Heinrich-Heine 
University, Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. 
susanne.nikolaus@uni-duesseldorf.de

This review gives an overview of those in vivo imaging studies on synaptic 
neurotransmission, which so far have been performed on patients with movement 
disorders and/or dementia. Thereby, the focus is on disease-related deficiencies 
within the functional entity of the dopaminergic, serotonergic, cholinergic, 
glutamatergic, GABAergic or opioid synapse. In vivo investigations have yielded 
highly consistent results on the dysfunction of synaptic constituents in the 
majority of diseases covered by this overview. Findings show presynaptic 
dysfunctions in idiopathic as well as early-onset Parkinson's disease with 
decreases in striatal dopamine synthesis (57 out of a total of 59 reports on 
both types of Parkinson's disease), storage (nine out of nine reports), release 
(two out of three reports) and transporter binding (95 out of 95 reports). In 
contrast, the "Parkinson plus" syndromes multiple system atrophy and progressive 
supranuclear palsy are characterized by both pre- and postsynaptic deficiencies 
with reductions in striatal dopamine synthesis (11 out of a total of 11 reports 
on both types of "Parkinson plus" syndromes), storage (four of four reports), 
and transporter binding (27 out of 27 reports) as well as D1 (two out of two 
reports) and D2 receptor binding (34 out of 36 reports). This does not hold for 
the "Parkinson plus" syndromes dementia with Lewy bodies and corticobasal 
degeneration. For these diseases, for the time being, firm evidence of 
alterations in D1 and/or D2 receptor binding is lacking. In patients with 
Huntington's disease, mainly postsynaptic dysfunctions with reductions of 
striatal D1 (six out of six reports) and D2 receptor binding (15 out of 15 
reports) were observed. Alzheimer's disease is characterized by both pre-and 
postsynaptic deficiencies of the cholinergic system with decreases of cortical 
acetylcholine storage (one out of two reports) and both musarinic (seven out of 
10 reports) and nicotinic cholinergic receptor binding (three out of six 
reports). Moreover, reductions in cortical (one out of three reports) and limbic 
5-HT1A (three out of three reports) and cortical (four out of four reports) and 
limbic 5-HT2A receptor binding (one out of two reports) were observed. Moreover, 
there is evidence for a cortical (four out of six reports) and cingulate (three 
out of three reports) increase of peripheral benzodiazepine receptor binding 
indicative of microglial activation. In the majority of investigations on 
patients with Alzheimer's disease, no alterations of presynaptic dopamine 
function were found, whereas all other forms of dementia including corticobasal 
degeneration, dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease dementia and 
frontotemporal dementia were characterized by presynaptic dopaminergic 
deficiencies with reductions in striatal dopamine synthesis (10 out of a total 
of 10 reports on these types of dementia), storage (four out of four reports) 
and transporter binding (29 out of 29 reports). Taken together, in vivo imaging 
methods can be employed for the diagnosis of idiopathic and early-onset 
Parkinson's disease as well as "Parkinson plus" syndromes and Huntington's 
disease. Moreover, differentiation is feasible between, firstly, Parkinson's 
disease and the "Parkinson plus" syndromes multiple system atrophy and 
progressive supranuclear palsy, secondly, multiple system atrophy/progressive 
supranuclear palsy and the other "Parkinson plus" syndromes dementia with Lewy 
bodies and corticobasal degeneration, and, thirdly, Alzheimer's disease and 
other forms of dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.06.008
PMID: 19523490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2108. Neurochem Int. 2009 Sep;55(4):214-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.02.017. Epub 
2009 Mar 5.

Improved discrimination of autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer's disease (AD) from 
non-AD dementias using CSF P-tau(181P).

Koopman K(1), Le Bastard N, Martin JJ, Nagels G, De Deyn PP, Engelborghs S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Memory Clinic, Middelheim General Hospital (ZNA), 
Antwerp, Belgium; Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands.

To establish diagnostic accuracy (acc) and optimal cut-off levels of CSF tau 
phosphorylated at threonine 181 (P-tau(181P)) for discriminating Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) from non-AD dementias in autopsy-confirmed dementia patients, CSF 
levels of beta-amyloid peptide (Abeta(1-42)), total tau protein (T-tau) and 
P-tau(181P) from patients with definite AD (n=95) and non-AD dementias (n=50) 
were determined with single-parameter ELISA kits. Optimal P-tau(181P) cut-off 
levels for differentiating AD from pooled non-AD dementias, dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) were 50.4pg/mL (acc=0.73), 
52.8pg/mL (acc=0.73) and 35.3pg/mL (acc=0.90), respectively. The optimal CSF 
P-tau(181P) cut-off level for discriminating AD from non-AD dementias was 
50.4pg/mL. Optimal CSF P-tau(181P) cut-off levels differed between non-AD 
diagnostic dementia categories.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.02.017
PMID: 19524111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2109. BMC Geriatr. 2009 Jun 15;9:22. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-9-22.

Lewy bodies and neuronal loss in subcortical areas and disability in 
non-demented older people: a population based neuropathological cohort study.

Byford M(1), Brayne C, McKeith I, Chatfield M, Ince P, Matthews F; MRC CFAS 
Neuropathology group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 
Cambridge, UK. michelle.byford@cantab.net

BACKGROUND: Functional disability, the loss of ability to carry out daily tasks 
unaided, is a major adverse outcome more common with increasing age. The 
potential contribution of neuropathological changes in subcortical areas of the 
brain associated with normal ageing may be a contributing factor to this loss of 
function. This study investigates the clinicopathological relationship between 
functional ability during life and pathological correlates identified at post 
mortem in an UK population of older people (66-102 years).The aim is to examine 
the clinicopathological correlates of functional disability in subcortical 
neuronal populations of non-demented elderly individuals.
METHODS: 156 non-demented participants in the brain donation programme of the 
Medical Research Council Cognitive Function and Ageing Study (MRC-CFAS) were 
included in this study. Neuropathological examination was based on the CERAD 
protocol; pathologies of interest were amyloid plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, 
Lewy bodies, vascular disease and neuronal loss. Self-reported functional 
ability was scored according to a combined activities of daily living and 
instrumental activities of daily living scale.
RESULTS: Functional disability was equally common in men and women over 65 
years, and in both sexes disability was more common at older ages. Neuronal loss 
in several subcortical regions elevated the risk of functional disability by 
three-fold (95% CI 1.3-6.6). There was evidence for a relationship between Lewy 
bodies in the SN and functional disability.
CONCLUSION: Neuronal loss in subcortical regions is associated with functional 
disability in the older population. The causal relationships are not defined and 
require further investigation.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-9-22
PMCID: PMC2706837
PMID: 19527486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2110. Brain Pathol. 2010 Mar;20(2):412-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00296.x. Epub 
2009 Jun 15.

Association between lifetime cigarette smoking and lewy body accumulation.

Tsuang D(1), Larson EB, Li G, Shofer JB, Montine KS, Thompson ML, Sonnen JA, 
Crane PK, Leverenz JB, Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Washington, 
Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

Cigarette smoking has been associated repeatedly in observational studies with 
decreased risk of Parkinson's disease (PD), but its relationship to the risk of 
dementia or Alzheimer's disease (AD) is inconsistent. All of these studies have 
used clinical diagnoses of disease. We tested the hypothesis that lifetime 
cigarette use might be associated with reduced risk of neuropathologic changes 
of Lewy-related pathology (LRP) in multiple brain regions or with reduced risk 
of consensus neuropathologic changes of AD in a prospective community-based 
study of brain aging and dementia, the Adult Changes in Thought (ACT) study. We 
observed that heavy lifetime cigarette smoking (>50 pack years) was associated 
with significantly reduced relative risk (RR) for LRP, but not AD-type 
pathologic changes, after correcting for selection bias, and with significantly 
reduced frequency of LRP in the substantia nigra. These findings are the first 
of which we are aware to associate reduced LRP in human brain with any exposure, 
and substantiate observational studies that have associated cigarette smoking 
with reduced risk of PD. Although cigarette smoking is too toxic to suggest as a 
treatment, if confirmed, these findings may guide future therapeutic strategies 
that attempt to suppress LRP in human brain by other means.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2009.00296.x
PMCID: PMC2864364
PMID: 19531100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2111. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2009 Jul;77(7):376-88. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1109464. 
Epub 2009 Jun 16.

[Neuropsychological differential diagnosis of degenerative dementias].

[Article in German]

Wolf SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Universitätsklinikum Magdeburg. 
si.wolf@klinikum-stuttgart.de

Neuropsychological differential diagnosis of degenerative dementias is 
characterized by high sensitivity and specificity which allows syndrome 
assignment in most instances in early stages. According to the empirical 
evidence, Alzheimer's disease can be discriminated from frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration and from vascular dementia by quality and severity of memory 
deficits and also by the presence of visuo-perceptive and visuo-constructive 
deficits. In frontotemporal lobar degeneration and vascular dementia executive 
dysfunctions predominate in most controlled empirical studies. Moreover, in 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration severe aphasic and semantic impairments can be 
observed. Neuropsychological assessment contributes to the early detection, 
differential diagnosis and evidence-based treatment of dementia syndromes to a 
considerable extent. Once more specific treatments are available, the early 
differential diagnosis of degenerative dementias will become highly important.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0028-1109464
PMID: 19533573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2112. Neurology. 2009 Jul 28;73(4):256-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b0bd3d. Epub 2009 
Jun 17.

Cholinergic denervation occurs early in Parkinson disease.

Bohnen NI, Albin RL.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2009 Jul 28;73(4):273-8.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181b0bd3d
PMID: 19535769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2113. Eur J Neurol. 2009 Dec;16(12):1278-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02707.x. 
Epub 2009 Jun 15.

Cognitive function in early Parkinson's disease: a population-based study.

Elgh E(1), Domellöf M, Linder J, Edström M, Stenlund H, Forsgren L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Medicine and Rehabilitation, Geriatric Medicine, Umeå 
University, Umeå, Sweden. eva.elgh@germed.umu.se

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The study aims to describe the frequency, pattern and 
determinants of cognitive function in patients with newly diagnosed Parkinson's 
disease (PD); to compare patients with impaired cognition to patients with 
intact cognition; and to compare to matched healthy controls.
METHODS: Patients were identified in a longitudinal population based study of 
idiopathic non-drug induced parkinsonism. Eighty-eight newly diagnosed patients 
with PD and no dementia were included during a four year period. The patients 
and 30 age- and sex-matched healthy control subjects underwent a comprehensive 
neuropsychological assessment.
RESULTS: Patients performed significantly worse than healthy controls in a 
majority of neuropsychological tests. Test results in attention, psychomotor 
function, episodic memory (free recall), executive function and category fluency 
were significantly lower in the patient group. Comparison with normative data 
revealed that 30% of the patients had deficits in > or =1 cognitive domain 
(episodic memory, executive function and verbal function). Seventy per cent of 
the patients had normal performance. Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale 
(UPDRS) III sub scores; speech, facial expression, rigidity and bradykinesia 
were significantly higher, and disease duration shorter amongst the cognitively 
impaired than amongst the cognitively intact patients. Tremor showed no 
difference. Education level was an independent predictor of dysfunction in 
patients with > or =2 cognitive domains affected.
CONCLUSION: Cognitive dysfunction is common in untreated patients in early PD, 
affecting attention, psychomotor function, episodic memory, executive function 
and category fluency. Education level was an independent predictor of severe 
cognitive dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02707.x
PMID: 19538208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2114. Arch Intern Med. 2009 Jun 22;169(12):1139-46. doi: 
10.1001/archinternmed.2009.135.

Association between late-life social activity and motor decline in older adults.

Buchman AS(1), Boyle PA, Wilson RS, Fleischman DA, Leurgans S, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurological Sciences, Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush 
University Medical Center, Armour Academic Facility, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. 
Aron_S_Buchman@rush.edu

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 2009 Nov 9;169(20):1931-2; author reply 1932.

BACKGROUND: Loss of motor function is a common consequence of aging, but little 
is known about the factors that predict idiopathic motor decline. Our objective 
was to test the hypothesis that late-life social activity is related to the rate 
of change in motor function in old age.
METHODS: Longitudinal cohort study with a mean follow-up of 4.9 years with 906 
persons without stroke, Parkinson disease, or dementia participating in the Rush 
Memory and Aging Project. At baseline, participants rated the frequency of their 
current participation in common social activities from which a summary measure 
of social activity was derived. The main outcome measure was annual change in a 
composite measure of global motor function, based on 9 measures of muscle 
strength and 9 motor performances.
RESULTS: Mean (SD) social activity score at baseline was 2.6 (0.58), with higher 
scores indicating more frequent participation in social activities. In a 
generalized estimating equation model, controlling for age, sex, and education, 
global motor function declined by approximately 0.05 U/y (estimate, 0.016; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], -0.057 to 0.041 [P = .02]). Each 1-point decrease in 
social activity was associated with approximately a 33% more rapid rate of 
decline in motor function (estimate, 0.016; 95% CI, 0.003 to 0.029 [P = .02]). 
The effect of each 1-point decrease in the social activity score at baseline on 
the rate of change in global motor function was the same as being approximately 
5 years older at baseline (age estimate, -0.003; 95% CI, -0.004 to -0.002 
[P<.001]). Furthermore, this amount of motor decline per year was associated 
with a more than 40% increased risk of death (hazard ratio, 1.44; 95% CI, 1.30 
to 1.60) and a 65% increased risk of incident Katz disability (hazard ratio, 
1.65; 95% CI, 1.48 to 1.83). The association of social activity with the rate of 
global motor decline did not vary along demographic lines and was unchanged 
(estimate, 0.025; 95% CI, 0.005 to 0.045 [P = .01]) after controlling for 
potential confounders including late-life physical and cognitive activity, 
disability, global cognition depressive symptoms, body composition, and chronic 
medical conditions.
CONCLUSION: Less frequent participation in social activities is associated with 
a more rapid rate of motor function decline in old age.

DOI: 10.1001/archinternmed.2009.135
PMCID: PMC2775502
PMID: 19546415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests: The authors have no 
conflicts of interest to report.


2115. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Sep 4;386(4):645-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.110. Epub 2009 Jun 24.

Synthesis of fluorescent-maghemite nanoparticles as multimodal imaging agents 
for amyloid-beta fibrils detection and removal by a magnetic field.

Skaat H(1), Margel S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel. 
ch348@mail.biu.ac.il

Early diagnosis in Alzheimer's disease (AD), before the onset of marked clinical 
symptoms, is critical in preventing the irreversible neuronal damage that 
eventually leads to dementia and ultimately death. Therefore, there is an urgent 
need for in vivo imaging agents, which are valuable as specific biomarkers to 
demonstrate the location and density of amyloid plaques in the living human 
brain. The present manuscript describes a novel method for selective marking of 
Abeta(40) fibrils by non-fluorescent gamma-Fe(2)O(3) and fluorescent-magnetic 
gamma-Fe(2)O(3)-rhodamine or gamma-Fe(2)O(3)-Congo red nanoparticles, and the 
complete removal of the magnetized fibrils from the aqueous continuous phase by 
a magnetic field. These fluorescent-maghemite nanoparticles as multimodal 
imaging agents have a great advantage due to the combination of the magnetic and 
fluorescence imaging into one nanostructured system. This hybrid system, which 
selectively marks Abeta(40) fibrils, might enable the early detection of plaques 
using both MRI and fluorescence microscopy, and therefore may be applied in in 
vivo AD diagnosis studies. These fluorescent-magnetic nanoparticles may also be 
useful as selective biomarkers to detect the location and the removal of other 
amyloid plaques derived from different amyloidogenic proteins that lead to 
neurodegenerative diseases, e.g., Parkinson's, Huntington's, mad cow, and prion 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.06.110
PMID: 19559008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2116. Am J Med. 2009 Jul;122(7):614-22. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.01.025.

Pharmacological management of psychosis in elderly patients with parkinsonism.

Hasnain M(1), Vieweg WV, Baron MS, Beatty-Brooks M, Fernandez A, Pandurangi AK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Regional Integrated Health Authority, Sir 
Thomas Roddick Hospital, Stephenville, Newfoundland, Canada. 
mehrul_hasnain@yahoo.com

Comment in
    Am J Med. 2010 Apr;123(4):e19; author reply e21.

Parkinsonism is a characteristic feature of Parkinson's disease and dementia 
with Lewy bodies and is commonly seen in Alzheimer's disease. Psychosis commonly 
appears during the course of these illnesses. Treatment of parkinsonism with 
antiparkinsonian medications constitutes an additional risk factor for the 
appearance or worsening of psychosis. Conversely, treatment of psychosis with 
antipsychotic drugs in patients with parkinsonism might worsen the underlying 
movement disorder, especially in the elderly. In this article, we review 
parkinsonian conditions in the elderly and offer guidelines to assess and manage 
comorbid psychosis. We focus on the pharmacologic management of psychosis with 
atypical antipsychotic medications and briefly review the role of 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2009.01.025
PMID: 19559160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2117. J Rural Health. 2009 Summer;25(3):320-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1748-0361.2009.00237.x.

Exceptional brain aging in a rural population-based cohort.

Kaye J(1), Michael Y, Calvert J, Leahy M, Crawford D, Kramer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, OR, 
USA.

CONTEXT: The 2000 US Census identified 50,454 Americans over the age of 100. 
Increased longevity is only of benefit if accompanied by maintenance of 
independence and quality of life. Little is known about the prevalence of 
dementia and other disabling conditions among rural centenarians although this 
information is important to clinicians caring for them.
PURPOSE: To determine the prevalence of disabling conditions, including 
cognitive impairment, among the very elderly in a rural setting to guide 
clinicians in their care.
METHODS: We performed a population-based cohort study of all residents 97 years 
and older in the Klamath Basin, a rural region in southern Oregon. The 
prevalence of disabling conditions was determined by in-person examination.
FINDINGS: About 100% of the target sample was identified. Of the eligible 67 
individuals > or =97 years old, 31 were evaluated in-person. The prevalence of 
dementia (probable or possible Alzheimer's disease or vascular dementia) was 
61.3% (95% CI: 43.8, 76.2), mild cognitive impairment was 29.0% (95% CI: 16.1, 
46.6), and no dementia was 9.7% (95% CI: 3.4, 25.0). Parkinsonism and the APOEe4 
allele were rare. Systemic vascular disease was almost universally present.
CONCLUSIONS: While cognitive impairment was nearly universal in this rural 
population of very elderly persons, almost 40% had not progressed to full 
dementia. Determining risk factors for dementia in this population can identify 
strategies to prevent progression to dementia among younger elderly populations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1748-0361.2009.00237.x
PMCID: PMC3357309
PMID: 19566620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2118. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2009 Oct-Dec;23(4):347-51. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e31819e6b28.

Frequency and causes of early-onset dementia in a tertiary referral center in 
Athens.

Papageorgiou SG(1), Kontaxis T, Bonakis A, Kalfakis N, Vassilopoulos D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Eginition Hospital, Medical School, Athens National 
University, Greece. sokpapa@med.uoa.gr

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequency and causes of early-onset dementia (EOD) 
in consecutive patients in a highly specialized dementia referral center, 
focusing on unusual cases, particularly with early and/or rapid onset, in 
Athens, Greece.
METHODS: Patients referred for dementia diagnosis according to specific referral 
criteria during a 3 years period. We examined the distribution of patients 
diagnosis and differences in sex, education, dementia severity, cognitive 
function, and the duration of disease (from onset to referral) between the EOD 
(<65 y) and the late-onset dementia (LOD) groups.
RESULTS: From a total of 260 consecutive demented patients, there were 114 EOD 
patients or 44% of all demented patients. No significant differences were 
observed between the EOD and LOD groups in cognitive or behavioral measures. 
However, the duration from onset to consultation was significantly longer in the 
EOD group. Also, in the EOD group, the rates of patients with Alzheimer disease 
and Parkinson disease dementia were relatively low and the rate of patients with 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration was relatively high and the proportion of 
secondary dementias was high.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that EOD patients are more likely to be seen in 
specialized settings. The underlying diseases are considerably different in EOD 
compared with LOD. Secondary causes are often found in patients with EOD. 
Patients with EOD had an unexpectedly longer time-to-diagnosis than patients 
with LOD. This argues for a need of better education about the clinical 
presentation of dementia in the young and middle aged.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e31819e6b28
PMID: 19568157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2119. J Investig Med. 2009 Dec;57(8):830-6. doi: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3181af59c4.

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome: clinical phenotype, diagnosis, and 
treatment.

Leehey MA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado Denver, Aurora, CO 80045, 
USA. Maureen.leehey@ucdenver.edu

Fragile X-associated tremor/ataxia syndrome (FXTAS) is a neurodegenerative 
disorder caused by a CGG repeat expansion in the premutation range (55-200) in 
the fragile X mental retardation 1 gene. Onset is typically in the early seventh 
decade, and men are principally affected. The major signs are cerebellar gait 
ataxia, intention tremor, frontal executive dysfunction, and global brain 
atrophy. Other frequent findings are parkinsonism (mild), peripheral neuropathy, 
psychiatric symptoms (depression, anxiety, and agitation), and autonomic 
dysfunction. The clinical presentation is heterogeneous, with individuals 
presenting with varied dominating signs, such as tremor, dementia, or 
neuropathy. Magnetic resonance imaging shows atrophy and patchy white matter 
lesions in the cerebral hemispheres and middle cerebellar peduncles. The latter 
has been designated the middle cerebellar peduncle sign, which occurs in about 
60% of affected men, and is relatively specific for FXTAS. Affected females 
generally have less severe disease, less cognitive decline, and some symptoms 
different from that of men, for example, muscle pain. Management of FXTAS is 
complex and includes assessment of the patient's neurological and medical 
deficits, treatment of symptoms, and provision of relevant referrals, especially 
genetic counseling. Treatment is empirical, based on anecdotal experience and on 
knowledge of what works for symptoms of other disorders that also exist in 
FXTAS. Presently, the disorder is underrecognized because the first published 
report was only in 2001 and because the presentation is variable and mainly 
consists of a combination of signs common in the elderly. However, accurate 
diagnosis is critical for the patient and for the family because they need 
education regarding their genetic and health risks.

DOI: 10.2310/JIM.0b013e3181af59c4
PMCID: PMC2787702
PMID: 19574929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2120. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010 Mar;25(3):258-65. doi: 10.1002/gps.2331.

Pilot study of a three-step diagnostic pathway for young and old patients with 
Parkinson's disease dementia: screen, test and then diagnose.

Robben SH(1), Sleegers MJ, Dautzenberg PL, van Bergen FS, ter Bruggen JP, 
Rikkert MG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Jeroen Bosch Hospital, 's-Hertogenbosch, 
The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To pilot a three-step diagnostic model for young and old patients 
with Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD).
METHODS: Prospective investigator-blinded study. We developed a screening 
questionnaire for patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and their caregivers. 
Further, patients were subjected to three screening instruments (Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment (MoCA), Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB), Addenbrooke's 
Cognitive Examination-revised (ACE-R) and a detailed neuropsychological 
examination (NPE). Based on the NPE, patients were divided in a PD (without 
dementia) and a PDD-group.
RESULTS: Forty-one PD patients, aged 37-94 years, participated in this study. 
Patients were divided in a young group, < or = 65 (n = 22) and an old group >65 
years (n = 19). In the young group (PDD, n = 5) the patient-screening 
questionnaire predicted PDD with a sensitivity/specificity of 100.0%/94.1%; in 
the old group (PDD, n = 10) the proxy-screening questionnaire predicted PDD with 
a sensitivity/specificity of 88.9%/66.7%. In the young group, ACE-R had the 
largest Area Under the Curve (AUC) 0.88 (0.70-1.00), in the old group MoCA (AUC 
1.00). However, the three instruments did not differ significantly.
CONCLUSIONS: It seems feasible and efficient to use three consecutive diagnostic 
steps for PDD: (1) a screening questionnaire, (2) if positive: MoCA, FAB or 
ACE-R as screening instrument and (3) if positive: a detailed NPE for diagnosing 
PDD.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.2331
PMID: 19582760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2121. Genet Epidemiol. 2010 Jan;34(1):92-9. doi: 10.1002/gepi.20439.

Visualizing disease associations: graphic analysis of frequency distributions as 
a function of age using moving average plots (MAP) with application to 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Payami H(1), Kay DM, Zabetian CP, Schellenberg GD, Factor SA, McCulloch CC.

Author information:
(1)Genomics Institute, New York State Department of Health, Wadsworth Center, PO 
Box 22002, Albany, NY 12201-2002, USA. hpayami@wadsworth.org

Age-related variation in marker frequency can be a confounder in association 
studies, leading to both false-positive and false-negative findings and 
subsequently to inconsistent reproducibility. We have developed a simple method, 
based on a novel extension of moving average plots (MAP), which allows 
investigators to inspect the frequency data for hidden age-related variations. 
MAP uses the standard case-control association data and generates a birds-eye 
view of the frequency distributions across the age spectrum; a picture in which 
one can see if, how, and when the marker frequencies in cases differ from that 
in controls. The marker can be specified as an allele, genotype, haplotype, or 
environmental factor; and age can be age-at-onset, age when subject was last 
known to be unaffected, or duration of exposure. Signature patterns that emerge 
can help distinguish true disease associations from spurious associations due to 
age effects, age-varying associations from associations that are uniform across 
all ages, and associations with risk from associations with age-at-onset. 
Utility of MAP is illustrated by application to genetic and epidemiological 
association data for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. MAP is intended as a 
descriptive method, to complement standard statistical techniques. Although 
originally developed for age patterns, MAP is equally useful for visualizing any 
quantitative trait.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.20439
PMCID: PMC2796703
PMID: 19582778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2122. Brain. 2009 Sep;132(Pt 9):2350-5. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp166. Epub 2009 Jul 7.

Functional involvement of central cholinergic circuits and visual hallucinations 
in Parkinson's disease.

Manganelli F(1), Vitale C, Santangelo G, Pisciotta C, Iodice R, Cozzolino A, 
Dubbioso R, Picillo M, Barone P, Santoro L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University Federico II of Naples, 
Naples, Italy.

Visual hallucinations (VHs) represent a frequent and disturbing complication of 
Parkinson's disease. Evidence suggests that VH can be related to central 
cholinergic dysfunction. Short-latency afferent inhibition (SAI) technique gives 
the opportunity to test an inhibitory cholinergic circuit in the human cerebral 
motor cortex. This inhibition of motor-evoked potentials can be observed when 
transcranial magnetic stimulation is delivered with a delay ranging from 2 to 8 
ms, after a peripheral nerve afferent input has reached the somatosensory 
cortex. We applied SAI technique in 10 non-demented patients with Parkinson's 
disease with VHs, in 12 non-demented patients with Parkinson's disease without 
VHs (NVH-pts) and in 11 age-matched normal controls. All patients with 
Parkinson's disease underwent a battery of neuropsychological tests to assess 
frontal and visuospatial functions, memory and attention. SAI was significantly 
reduced in patients with VHs compared with controls and patients without VHs. 
Neuropsychological examination showed a mild cognitive impairment in 16 out of 
22 patients with Parkinson's disease. In addition, we found that in our patients 
with VHs, performance of some tasks evaluating visuospatial functions and 
attentional/frontal lobe functions was significantly more impaired than in 
patients without VHs. SAI abnormalities, presence of VH and neuropsychological 
results strongly support the hypothesis of cholinergic dysfunction in some 
patients with Parkinson's disease, who will probably develop a dementia. A 
follow-up study of our patients is required to verify whether SAI abnormalities 
can predict a future severe cognitive decline. Moreover, SAI can also be very 
useful to follow-up the efficacy of anti-cholinesterase therapies.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp166
PMCID: PMC2800383
PMID: 19584099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2123. Lakartidningen. 2009 May 13-19;106(20):1374-6.

[Lewy body dementia--big risk of wrong treatment and death].

[Article in Swedish]

Boström F(1), Palmqvist S, Andersson M, Londos E.

Author information:
(1)Universitetssjukhuset MAS, Malmö.

PMID: 19585833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2124. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2009;11(2):191-9. doi: 
10.31887/DCNS.2009.11.2/pscheltens.

Imaging in Alzheimer's disease.

Scheltens P(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept Neurology and Alzheimer Center, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. p.scheltens@vumc.nl

Neuroimaging in the early differential diagnosis of dementia has gained 
considerable interest over the last decade. From being used for exclusive 
purposes only, neuroimaging is now in the forefront of aiding in the diagnosis 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal dementia, vascular dementia, and and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). With the exception of dopamine transporter 
single photon-emission computed tomography imaging in DLB, imaging has not yet 
been incorporated into the diagnostic criteria for the various dementia 
syndromes, but that will soon change. The recently formulated research criteria 
for early AD recently formulated by Dubois et al explicitly mention magnetic 
resonance imaging and positron emission tomography for AD, and are an example of 
a new diagnostic process developing. In this review, the various imaging 
techniques will be highlighted, with an emphasis on their ability to diagnose 
Alzheimer's disease and separate it from other entities.

En la última década, las neuroimágenes han ganado considerable interés para el 
diagnóstico diferencial precoz de la demencia. Las neuroimágenes, que 
inicialmente se utilizaron sólo con propósitos exclusivos, actualmente están en 
primer plano como ayuda para el diagnóstico de la Enfermedad de Alzheimer (EA), 
la demencia frontotemporal, la demencia vascular y la demencia por cuerpos de 
Lewy (DCL). Con exceptión de la tomografía computada por emisión de fotón único 
(SPECT) que permite identificar el transportador de dopamina en la DCL, las 
neuroimágenes aun no han sido incorporadas entre los criterios diagnósticos de 
los diversos síndromes de demencia, pero esto cambiará pronto. Los criterios de 
investigación para la EA precoz, recientemente formulados por Dubois et al 
mencionan explícitamente las imágenes de resonancia magnética y de la tomografía 
por emisión de positrones para la EA, y constituyen un ejemplo de un nuevo 
proceso diagnóstico en desarrollo. En esta revisión se destacarán las diversas 
técnicas de imágenes, con un énfasis en su capacidad para diagnosticar 
Enfermedad de Alzheimer y separarla de otras entidades.

Ces 10 dernières années, le diagnostic différentiel précoce de la démence par 
neuro-imagerie a acquis ses lettres de noblesse. Utilisée auparavant à des fins 
très spécifiques, la neuro-imagerie se place maintenant à la pointe des 
technologies pour le diagnostic de la maladie d'Alzheimer (MA), de la démence 
frontotemporale, de la démence vasculaire et de la démence à corps de Lewy 
(DCL). Mis à part le marquage par transporteur de dopamine en tomographie par 
émission monophotonique (TEMP) dans la DCL, l'imagerie n'est pas encore entrée 
dans les critères diagnostiques des différents syndromes démentiels, ce qui va 
bientôt changer. Les critères de recherche récemment formulés pour le diagnostic 
précoce de la MA recommandent de façon explicite l'imagerie par résonance 
magnétique et la tomographie par émission de positrons et sont un exemple du 
développement des nouvelles techniques diagnostiques. Nous présenterons dans cet 
article les différentes techniques d'imagerie, en insistant sur leur aptitude à 
diagnostiquer la MA et à la distinguer des autres pathologies.

DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2009.11.2/pscheltens
PMCID: PMC3181915
PMID: 19585954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2125. Arch Clin Neuropsychol. 2009 May;24(3):237-44. doi: 10.1093/arclin/acp029. Epub 
2009 Jul 8.

The contribution of executive control on verbal-learning impairment in patients 
with Parkinson's disease with dementia and Alzheimer's disease.

O'Brien TJ(1), Wadley V, Nicholas AP, Stover NP, Watts R, Griffith HR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, 
AL, USA.

Deficits in learning, memory, and executive functions are common cognitive 
sequelae of Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD); however, the pattern of deficits within these populations is distinct. 
Hierarchical regression was used to investigate the contribution of two measures 
with executive function properties (Verbal Fluency and CLOX) on list-learning 
performance (CVLT-II total words learned) in a sample of 25 PDD patients and 25 
matched AD patients. Executive measures were predictive of list learning in the 
PDD group after the contribution of overall cognition and contextual verbal 
learning was accounted for, whereas in the AD group the addition of executive 
measures did not add to prediction of variance in CVLT-II learning. These 
findings suggest that deficits in executive functions play a vital role in 
learning impairments in patients with PDD; however, for AD patients, learning 
difficulties appear relatively independent of executive dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1093/arclin/acp029
PMCID: PMC2765349
PMID: 19587066 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2126. Neurologist. 2009 Jul;15(4):234-7. doi: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3181a968df.

Efficacy of rivastigmine for cognitive symptoms in Parkinson disease with 
dementia.

Almaraz AC(1), Driver-Dunckley ED, Woodruff BK, Wellik KE, Caselli RJ, 
Demaerschalk BM, Adler CH, Caviness JN, Wingerchuk DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, Arizona 85259, USA.

BACKGROUND: Impairment of multiple neurotransmitter networks, including 
acetylcholine, may contribute to the cognitive impairment in patients with 
Parkinson disease with dementia (PDD). Therefore, cholinesterase inhibitors 
might improve cognitive function in PDD. On the other hand, enhancing 
cholinergic function could plausibly worsen features of parkinsonism.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if oral cholinesterase inhibitors improve measures of 
cognitive outcome and are tolerated by people with PDD.
METHODS: We addressed the question through the development of a critically 
appraised topic. Participants included consultant and resident neurologists, 
clinical epidemiologists, a medical librarian, and behavioral neurology and 
movement disorder specialists. Participants began with a structured clinical 
question, devised search strategies, compiled the best evidence, performed a 
critical appraisal, summarized the evidence, provided commentary, and declared 
bottom-line conclusions.
RESULTS: A randomized controlled trial (n = 541) showed that, compared with 
placebo, rivastigmine (mean, 8.6 mg/d) significantly improved scores on 2 
coprimary cognitive outcome scales in PDD, including the Alzheimer disease 
Cooperative Study-Clinician's Global Impression of Change. When dichotomized to 
evaluate clinically significant benefit (moderate or marked improvement), this 
outcome was not significant (risk difference = 5.3%; 95% confidence interval 
(CI) = -1.6 to 12.1). The number needed to treat (NNT) to avoid clinically 
significant worsening of cognition was 10 (95% CI = 6-28). The NNT for the 
combined outcome of either achieving clinically significant benefit or avoiding 
significant worsening was 7. The numbers needed to harm for cholinergic side 
effects were 9 (95% CI = 5-24) for parkinsonian symptoms and 11 (95% CI = 6-32) 
for rivastigmine discontinuation due to any side effect.
CONCLUSION: Rivastigmine therapy for PDD is associated with significant 
tradeoffs in efficacy and adverse effects. Carefully monitored trials of 
rivastigmine may provide meaningful benefits for a minority of PDD patients.

DOI: 10.1097/NRL.0b013e3181a968df
PMID: 19590387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2127. Arch Neurol. 2009 Jul;66(7):870-5. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.89.

Elevated serum pesticide levels and risk of Parkinson disease.

Richardson JR(1), Shalat SL, Buckley B, Winnik B, O'Suilleabhain P, 
Diaz-Arrastia R, Reisch J, German DC.

Author information:
(1)Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway, New Jersey, USA. 
jricha3@eohsi.rutgers.edu

BACKGROUND: Exposure to pesticides has been reported to increase the risk of 
Parkinson disease (PD), but identification of the specific pesticides is 
lacking. Three studies have found elevated levels of organochlorine pesticides 
in postmortem PD brains.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether elevated levels of organochlorine pesticides are 
present in the serum of patients with PD.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: An academic medical center.
PARTICIPANTS: Fifty patients with PD, 43 controls, and 20 patients with 
Alzheimer disease.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Levels of 16 organochlorine pesticides in serum samples.
RESULTS: beta-Hexachlorocyclohexane (beta-HCH) was more often detectable in 
patients with PD (76%) compared with controls (40%) and patients with Alzheimer 
disease (30%). The median level of beta-HCH was higher in patients with PD 
compared with controls and patients with Alzheimer disease. There were no marked 
differences in detection between controls and patients with PD concerning any of 
the other 15 organochlorine pesticides. Finally, we observed a significant odds 
ratio for the presence of beta-HCH in serum to predict a diagnosis of PD vs 
control (odds ratio, 4.39; 95% confidence interval, 1.67-11.6) and PD vs 
Alzheimer disease (odds ratio, 5.20), which provides further evidence for the 
apparent association between serum beta-HCH and PD.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that beta-HCH is associated with a diagnosis of 
PD. Further research is warranted regarding the potential role of beta-HCH as a 
etiologic agent for some cases of PD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.89
PMCID: PMC3383784
PMID: 19597089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2128. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;27(6):564-71. doi: 10.1159/000228258. Epub 2009 
Jul 11.

Cognitive and noncognitive neurological features of young-onset dementia.

Kelley BJ(1), Boeve BF, Josephs KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA. 
kelleyb3@uc.edu

BACKGROUND: The rarity of young-onset dementia (YOD), the broad differential 
diagnosis and unusual clinical presentations present unique challenges to 
correctly recognize the condition and establish an accurate diagnosis. Limited 
data exist regarding clinical features associated with dementia prior to the age 
of 45.
METHODS: We retrospectively assessed cognitive and noncognitive neurological 
characteristics of 235 patients who presented for evaluation of YOD to 
investigate the clinical characteristics of YOD compared to later-onset 
dementias and to identify clinical features associated with specific etiologies 
that may aid in the evaluation of YOD.
RESULTS: Multiple cognitive domains were affected in most patients, and no 
significant differences in affected domains existed between groups. Early 
psychiatric and behavioral features occurred at very high frequencies. Nearly 
80% of this YOD cohort had additional noncognitive symptoms or signs as a 
feature of their disease. Chorea was strongly associated with Huntington 
disease. Parkinsonism was not seen in patients having an autoimmune/inflammatory 
etiology.
CONCLUSIONS: The rarity of YOD and the high frequency of early psychiatric 
features led to frequent misdiagnosis early in the clinical course. The high 
frequency of noncognitive symptoms and signs may aid clinicians in 
distinguishing patients requiring a more extensive evaluation for YOD.

DOI: 10.1159/000228258
PMCID: PMC2820319
PMID: 19602884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2129. Isr Med Assoc J. 2009 Apr;11(4):238-43.

Olfaction--a window to the mind.

Kivity S(1), Ortega-Hernandez OD, Shoenfeld Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine A, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Although our knowledge of the brain, the olfactory sense and autoimmunity 
continues to evolve, examining the olfaction ability is not yet routinely 
applied by clinicians in the process of diagnosis and treatment. Moreover, 
assessment of the sense of smell and olfactory impairments is usually overlooked 
by patients and their clinicians. Given the clinical data reviewed here, 
clinicians should be encouraged to screen for olfactory impairments, which can 
help in the early diagnosis of CNS diseases such as Parkinson, dementia and 
schizophrenia, as well as CNS-autoimmune diseases such as neuropsychiatric 
lupus.

PMID: 19603599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2130. Psychogeriatrics. 2009 Jun;9(2):56-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2009.00292.x.

Depression associated with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and the effect of 
somatotherapy.

Takahashi S(1), Mizukami K, Yasuno F, Asada T.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroscience, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human Sciences, 
University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan. shotaka72@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a common type of dementia. It is 
difficult to make an initial diagnosis of DLB because of a variety of early 
symptoms, including psychosis-like and depressive states. In this study, we 
examined the characteristic depressive symptoms of the prestage of DLB and the 
efficacy and safety of somatotherapy for depression accompanying DLB.
METHODS: Subjects in the study were 167 consecutive clinical cases aged 50 years 
or more, hospitalized at Tsukuba University Hospital from December 2002 to 
September 2007. At the time of admission, patients were diagnosed with certain 
types of mood disorders according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders Fourth Edition Text Revision. For each subject, a series of 
neuropsychological tests, along with a standard psychiatric and neurological 
assessment and biological examinations, were conducted. Using the data from 
these exams, we diagnosed probable and possible DLB according to the criteria 
for dementia with Lewy bodies established by McKeith et al. 1 We compared 
patients' depressive symptoms according to the Hamilton Depression Scale, and 
distinguished between patients with depression associated with DLB and those 
with other mood disorders. 2 We also examined the efficacy and safety of 
somatotherapy (electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) and transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS)) for patients with drug therapy-resistant depression 
associated with DLB.
RESULTS: 1 The characteristic symptoms of patients with DLB were classified into 
two groups: psychotic and non-psychotic. The former consisted of patients with 
states such as delusion and agitation, and the latter included patients 
exhibiting psychomotor retardation, loss of insight and hypochondriasis. 2 Eight 
DLB patients with therapy-resistant depression underwent ECT. After ECT, 
significant improvement was observed, with no remarkable safety hazards. Six 
patients with drug therapy-resistant DLB underwent TMS. TMS appears to be an 
effective, safe remedy for this kind of patient.
CONCLUSIONS: A total of 13.8% of patients came to be re-diagnosed as having DLB 
as a consequence of a thorough examination after admission. Patients with 
depression associated with DLB were classified into psychotic and non-psychotic 
clusters. ECT and TMS are effective and safe therapeutic tools for drug 
therapy-resistant depression observed in DLB patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2009.00292.x
PMID: 19604326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2131. Psychogeriatrics. 2009 Jun;9(2):67-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2009.00274.x.

What is 'early onset dementia'?

Miyoshi K(1).

Author information:
(1)Jinmeikai Research Institute for Mental Health, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. 
koho.miyoshi@gmail.com

There are two types of dementia with early onset: (i) presenile dementias; and 
(ii) senile dementias with early onset. Most patients who develop dementia 
before 65 years of age have Alzheimer's disease (AD). The remainder are likely 
to have vascular dementia (VaD), frontotemporal dementia, head injury, alcohol 
intoxication, or metabolic disorder. Presenile dementias, caused by 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, and 
corticobasal degeneration, usually occur in patients of presenile and are rarely 
seen in patients of senile age. Although the factors responsible for the 
accelerated onset of the illness are not fully known, genetic abnormalities 
appear to be important in some types of presenile dementia, such as 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. Conversely, 
senile dementias such as sporadic AD and VaD commonly occur in patients of 
senile age. These disorders may also occur in patients of presenile age, 
although less frequently. Alzheimer's disease was originally classified as a 
'presenile dementia'. Since the 1980s, 'senile dementia of Alzheimer type' 
(SDAT) and 'Alzheimer's disease' have been considered to belong to the same 
pathological entity and both are now known as 'dementia of Alzheimer's type 
(DAT)' or merely 'Alzheimer's disease'. Rapid progression of cognitive 
impairment with neuropsychological syndromes and neurological symptoms has been 
considered a characteristic of early onset AD. However, recently, neurological 
symptoms such as spastic paraparesis, seizures, and myoclonic convulsions have 
been reported to occur infrequently in early onset AD, although language 
problems and visuospatial dysfunctions are common. There are at least three 
dominant genes that have been identified in cases of familial Alzheimer's 
disease with early onset, namely the amyloid precursor gene (APP), and the genes 
encoding presenilin 1 (PSEN1) and presenilin 2 (PSEN2). Therefore, genetic 
abnormalities are important factors contributing to the earlier onset of the 
illness. It is also important to investigate the pathophysiological mechanism in 
relation to genetic abnormalities, environmental factors, physical illnesses, 
and metabolic disturbances to understand the processes underlying the 
development of dementia with early onset.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2009.00274.x
PMID: 19604328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2132. Psychogeriatrics. 2009 Jun;9(2):85-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2009.00283.x.

Neuropsychological profile of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Oda H(1), Yamamoto Y, Maeda K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, 
Hyogo, Japan. oda72742@yahoo.co.jp

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) accounts for 10-25% of all dementia cases in 
clinical populations and is considered to be the second most common degenerative 
dementia in elderly people after Alzheimer's disease (AD). Dementia with Lewy 
bodies is characterized by the presence of cognitive, psychiatric, and motor 
symptoms. Although the neuropsychological profiles of patients with DLB often 
differ from those of patients with AD, the diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, 
and predictive values of these profiles remain largely unknown. The present 
paper reviews the neuropsychological profiling of DLB and attempts the 
neuropsychological differentiation of DLB from AD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2009.00283.x
PMID: 19604331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2133. Pract Neurol. 2009 Aug;9(4):241-51. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.182477.

Dementia: the bare essentials.

Kester MI(1), Scheltens P.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer Centre, VU University Medical Centre Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2009.182477
PMID: 19608778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2134. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2010 Feb;166(2):235-41. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.05.007. 
Epub 2009 Jul 18.

[Neurological diseases detected in the Lille Multidisciplinary Falls 
Consultation].

[Article in French]

Guillochon A(1), Crinquette C, Gaxatte C, Pardessus V, Bombois S, Deramecourt V, 
Boulanger E, Puisieux F.

Author information:
(1)Pôle de gérontologie, hôpital gériatrique Les Bateliers, CHRU de Lille, 23, 
rue des Bateliers, 59037 Lille cedex, France. aguillochon@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: People with neurological disorders including stroke, dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, and polyneuropathy are known to have an increased risk of 
falls.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the prevalence and nature of neurological risk factors 
among the patients attending the Multidisciplinary Falls Consultation of the 
University Hospital of Lille (France), and to analyze the characteristic 
features of patients termed "neurological fallers" with neurological risk 
factors.
METHODS: The study included 266 consecutive patients who were initially assessed 
by a geriatrician, a neurologist and a physiatrist, and again, six months later, 
by the same geriatrician.
RESULTS: Two out of three patients had neurological signs that can be regarded 
as neurological risk factors of falling. These neurological signs had not been 
diagnosed before the consultation in 85% of cases. The most common conditions 
were deficit of lower extremity proprioception (59% of patients) and cognitive 
impairment (43%). The most frequently evoked neurological diseases were dementia 
(40% of patients), polyneuropathy (17%) and stroke (8%). Compared with other 
patients, "neurological fallers" were more frequently living in a nursing home, 
had lower ADL and MMSE scores at baseline, had experienced more falls in the six 
preceding months, had a lower probability of having a timed Up-and-Go test less 
than 20 seconds and a single limb stance equal to 5 seconds. In the follow-up, 
"neurological fallers" reported hospitalizations more often.
CONCLUSION: The findings show that a large proportion of old persons presenting 
at the Multidisciplinary Falls Consultation have unrecognized neurological 
disorders. Comprehensive neurological examination including an evaluation of 
cognition is required in every elderly faller.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.05.007
PMID: 19616814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2135. Expert Opin Drug Metab Toxicol. 2009 Aug;5(8):941-55. doi: 
10.1517/17425250903105420.

Rivastigmine in Parkinson's disease dementia.

Chitnis S(1), Rao J.

Author information:
(1)UT Southwestern Medical Center-Neurology, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, 
Texas 75390-9036, USA. shilpa.chitnis@utsouthwestern.edu

Parkinson's disease has now evolved beyond what was considered to be a 
traditional motor disorder. It is being increasingly recognized that non-motor 
symptoms such as cognitive impairment, frank dementia, psychosis, depression, 
autonomic dysfunction and sleep disturbances are just as integral to the disease 
spectrum. The cholinergic system has been proposed to play a pivotal role in 
cognitive dysfunction. Based on interpretation of clinical studies in patients 
with Alzheimer's, cholinesterase inhibitors have also been studied for dementia 
associated with Parkinson's disease. Most of these include large and small 
placebo-controlled studies and several pilot studies have indicated that 
cholinesterase inhibitors have a favorable effect on cognition, psychiatric 
symptoms and global function in Parkinson's disease dementia. A large randomized 
placebo-controlled clinical trial showed that rivastigmine had moderate 
improvement in dementia associated with Parkinson's disease. The magnitude of 
effects in terms of scores for the cognitive subscale of the Alzheimer's disease 
assessment scale and Alzheimer's disease cooperative study-clinicians global 
impression of change were similar to those observed among patients with 
Alzheimer's disease who were treated with cholinesterase inhibitors. A 
transdermal patch which gradually releases rivastigmine over the application 
period is now available for use in mild to moderate dementia associated with 
Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1517/17425250903105420
PMID: 19619073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2136. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;18(3):677-89. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1169.

Neuropathologic findings of dementia with lewy bodies (DLB) in a 
population-based Vantaa 85+ study.

Oinas M(1), Polvikoski T, Sulkava R, Myllykangas L, Juva K, Notkola IL, Rastas 
S, Niinistö L, Kalimo H, Paetau A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Helsinki, and Helsinki University 
Central Hospital, P.O. Box 21 (Haartmaninkatu 3), FI-00014 Helsinki, Finland. 
minna.oinas@helsinki.fi

The consortium on dementia with Lewy bodies has established consensus guidelines 
for the neuropathologic diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) including 
the likelihood that the neuropathologic findings associate with the clinical 
syndrome. Nevertheless, clinico-pathological correlations remain controversial. 
We applied the consensus guidelines for determining Lewy-related pathology (LRP) 
and evaluated the clinical presentation in the prospective, population-based 
Vantaa 85+ study consisting of individuals at least 85 years of age. LRP was 
seen in 36% of 304 subjects and categorized as follows: 3% 
brainstem-predominant, 14% limbic, 15% diffuse neocortical type (4% could not be 
categorized). The likelihood that the neuropathology predicts the DLB clinical 
syndrome was low in 6%, intermediate in 13%, and high in 13% of all 304 
subjects. In the latter two groups, 77% were demented, 35% had at least one 
extrapyramidal symptom, and 15% had visual hallucinations. Surprisingly, DLB 
clinical features associated better with high neurofibrillary stage than with 
diffuse neocortical LRP. Moreover, the neurofibrillary stage, substantia nigra 
neuron loss, and grade of Lewy neurites in hippocampal CA2-3 region, each showed 
a significant association with the extent of LRP. In conclusion, the 
neuropathologic DLB in this very elderly population was common, but the clinical 
symptoms tended to associate better with severe neurofibrillary pathology than 
with extensive LRP.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1169
PMID: 19625740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2137. J Genet Genomics. 2009 Jul;36(7):425-34. doi: 10.1016/S1673-8527(08)60132-0.

Mitochondrial haplogroups associated with Japanese centenarians, Alzheimer's 
patients, Parkinson's patients, type 2 diabetic patients and healthy non-obese 
young males.

Takasaki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Toyo University, Ouragun Itakuracho, Gunma 374-0193, Japan. 
takasaki@khh.biglobe.ne.jp

The relationships between five classes of Japanese people (i.e., 96 
centenarians, 96 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, 96 Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients, 96 type 2 diabetic (T2D) patients, and 96 healthy non-obese young 
males) and their mitochondrial single nucleotide polymorphism (mtSNP) 
frequencies at individual mtDNA positions of the entire mitochondrial genome 
were examined using the radial basis function (RBF) network and the modified 
method. New findings of mitochondrial haplogroups were obtained for individual 
classes. The five classes of people were associated with the following 
haplogroups: Japanese centenarians-M7b2, D4b2a, and B5b; Japanese AD 
patients-G2a, B4c1, and N9b1; Japanese PD patients-M7b2, B4e, and B5b; Japanese 
T2D patients-B5b, M8a1, G, D4, and F1; and Japanese healthy non-obese young 
males- D4g and D4b1b. From the points of common haplogroups among the five 
classes, the centenarians have the common haplogroups M7b2 and B5b with the PD 
patients and common haplogroup B5b with the T2D patients. In addition, the 112 
Japanese semi-supercentenarians (over 105 years old) recently reported were also 
examined by the method proposed. The results obtained were the haplogroups D4a, 
B4c1a, M7b2, F1, M1, and B5b. These results are different from the previously 
reported haplogroup classifications. As the proposed analysis method can predict 
a person's mtSNP constitution and the probabilities of becoming a centenarian, 
AD patient, PD patient, or T2D patient, it may be useful in initial diagnosis of 
various diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/S1673-8527(08)60132-0
PMID: 19631917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2138. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2010 Jan;25(1):55-65. doi: 10.1002/gps.2297.

Detection of Lewy body disease in patients with late-onset depression, anxiety 
and psychotic disorder with myocardial meta-iodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy.

Kobayashi K(1), Sumiya H, Nakano H, Akiyama N, Urata K, Koshino Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Awazu Neuropsychiatric Sanatorium, 88 Yatano-machi, 
Komatsu-shi, Ishikawa-ken, 923-0342, Japan.

PURPOSE: Lewy body disease (LBD) is comprised of a spectrum of diseases that 
includes Parkinson's disease (PD), PD dementia (PDD) and dementia with LBD 
(DLBD), an array of dementia, and motor symptoms. Low uptake of myocardial 
meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) validates diagnosis of LBD. Psychiatric symptoms 
sometimes precede atypical Parkinsonian syndromes in LBD. Of 34 patients with 
low MIBG uptake, late-onset depressive, anxiety, or psychotic symptoms were 
analyzed in term of clinical profiles.
METHOD: Thirty-four patients were classed into three groups according to three 
main symptoms, 11 patients with visual hallucination (VH), 13 with 
depression-anxiety (DA), and 10 with psychosis with cognitive disturbance (PCD). 
Cutoff values of heart-to-mediastinum (HM) ratio of MIBG were set at 1.78 in 
early phase or 1.68 in late phase.
RESULTS: Group VH patients showed a trend toward higher age at onset and 
occipital lobe hypoperfusion. Group DA patients lacked central and core features 
of DLBD and five of them showed frontal lobe hypoperfusion. Group PCD patients 
had the highest frequencies of suggestive symptoms and UPDRS scores and showed 
temporal lobe hypoperfusion. HM ratio was not associated with clinical profiles 
of three groups. Cognitive function was more severely disturbed in atypical 
Parkinsonian syndrome cases at an initial visit.
CONCLUSION: Group VH was considered to DLBD, and Group PCD was regarded as PDD 
or DLBD with early psychotic presentation. Group DA has a possibility of early 
depression or anxiety disorder of LBD although it lacked DLBD criteria. Atypical 
Parkinsonian syndromes are associated with cognitive disturbance irrespective of 
psychiatric profiles.

(c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.2297
PMID: 19637401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2139. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2009 Oct;24(10):1072-8. doi: 10.1002/gps.2223.

Economic evaluation of cholinesterase inhibitor therapy for dementia: comparison 
of Alzheimer's disease and Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Gustavsson A(1), Van Der Putt R, Jönsson L, McShane R.

Author information:
(1)i3 Innovus, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the cost effectiveness of cholinesterase inhibitor (ChEI) 
treatment in patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB).
METHOD: We used 4-month open label follow-up data from routine memory clinic 
patients. There were 852 patients with AD and 112 with DLB. We applied three 
predictive models to estimate clinical and economic outcomes at five years, 
comparing AD and DLB patients with hypothetical untreated controls.
RESULTS: The mean improvement in MMSE in 852 AD patients was 0.57 (SD 3.4) at 4 
months, and in the subgroup with baseline MMSE of 10-20 (moderate) was 1.6 (SD 
3.7). Overall, the 112 DLB patients improved by 1.4 (SD 3.7). DLB patients with 
an MMSE 10-20 improved by 3.1 (SD 4.5) points. These efficacy data were input 
into the SHTAC, microsimulation and Markov models and produced estimated costs 
per QALY gained (CQG) for all AD of pound194,066, pound67,904 and pound123,935 
respectively. In comparison, the CQGs for all DLB were pound46,794, pound2,706 
and pound35,922. For the moderate subgroups only the SHTAC and microsimulation 
models were applicable. These gave CQG estimates for moderate AD of pound39,664 
and cost saving respectively. For moderate DLB, both estimates were cost saving.
CONCLUSION: The cost per QALY gained of cholinesterase treatment of all patients 
with DLB (including those with MMSE outside the 10-20 range) is comparable to 
that of patients with moderate AD, and is probably cost saving.

Copyright (c) 2009 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.2223
PMID: 19639600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2140. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jan;16(1):28-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.06.009. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Analysis of the LRRK2 Gly2385Arg variant in Alzheimer's disease in Taiwan.

Chang TY(1), Kuo HC, Lu CS, Wu-Chou YH, Huang CC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung 
University, Taoyuan, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the Gly2385Arg (G2385R) mutation in Taiwanese Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) patients.
BACKGROUND: The leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene is well known to 
predispose subjects to Parkinson's disease (PD). The Gly2385Arg (G2385R) variant 
of LRRK2 is believed to be "East Asian"-specific, particularly in the Han 
Chinese population; however, whether the LRRK2 G2385R is associated with a risk 
of AD in pure Han-Chinese patients has not often been studied.
METHODS: A total of 209 AD patients (87 men, 122 women) and 180 age- and 
gender-matched controls were recruited and the demographic data of the AD 
patients were analyzed. Genotyping of the Gly2385Arg variant was studied using 
matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight (MALDI-TOF) mass 
spectrometry.
RESULTS: Subjects with the Gly2385Arg variant were all heterozygous carriers. 
The frequency of Gly2385Arg carriers did not differ significantly between the AD 
patients and controls (4.78% versus 4.44%, odds ratio=1.04, 95% CI=0.62-1.77, 
P=0.87). In the AD patient group, the age of symptom onset, the length of 
education, or the MMSE score showed no significant differences between wild-type 
carriers and heterozygous variant carriers (P=0.51, 0.43, and 0.09).
CONCLUSION: The Gly2385Arg variant of LRRK2 may not be a major risk factor for 
AD in pure Han Chinese patient. Among the AD patients, Gly2385Arg carriers were 
not clinically different from wild-type carriers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.06.009
PMID: 19640773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2141. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;28(1):56-62. doi: 10.1159/000230036. Epub 2009 
Jul 29.

Association between a genetic variant of the alpha-7 nicotinic acetylcholine 
receptor subunit and four types of dementia.

Fehér A(1), Juhász A, Rimanóczy A, Csibri E, Kálmán J, Janka Z.

Author information:
(1)University of Szeged, Department of Psychiatry, Szeged, Hungary. 
fehera@nepsy.szote.u-szeged.hu

We tested the hypothesis whether the partially duplicated variant of alpha7 
nicotinic acetylcholine receptor subunit gene (CHRFAM7A) 2-bp deletion (-2 bp) 
polymorphism and apolipoprotein E (ApoE) epsilon4 allele confer susceptibility 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Pick's disease 
(PiD) and vascular dementia (VD). The study included 175 AD, 35 DLB patients, 38 
PiD, 96 VD and 175 healthy control (HC) probands. The CHRFAM7A genotype without 
the -2 bp allele was significantly over-represented in AD (p = 0.011), DLB (p = 
0.001) and PiD (p < 0.0001) compared to HC, but there were no statistical 
differences in VD (p = 0.407) compared to HC. We confirmed again that the ApoE 
epsilon4 allele is a risk factor for dementias. The -2 bp polymorphism of 
CHRFAM7A can be implicated in AD, DLB and PiD. However, it is unlikely that it 
plays an important role in the pathogenesis of VD.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000230036
PMID: 19641318 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2142. Biostatistics. 2009 Oct;10(4):729-43. doi: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxp027. Epub 
2009 Jul 31.

Estimating dementia-free life expectancy for Parkinson's patients using Bayesian 
inference and microsimulation.

van den Hout A(1), Matthews FE.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Biostatistics Unit, Institute of Public Health, 
Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 OSR, UK. ardo.vandenhout@mrc-bsu.cam.ac.uk

Interval-censored longitudinal data taken from a Norwegian study of individuals 
with Parkinson's disease are investigated with respect to the onset of dementia. 
Of interest are risk factors for dementia and the subdivision of total life 
expectancy (LE) into LE with and without dementia. To estimate LEs using 
extrapolation, a parametric continuous-time 3-state illness-death Markov model 
is presented in a Bayesian framework. The framework is well suited to allow for 
heterogeneity via random effects and to investigate additional computation using 
model parameters. In the estimation of LEs, microsimulation is used to take into 
account random effects. Intensities of moving between the states are allowed to 
change in a piecewise-constant fashion by linking them to age as a 
time-dependent covariate. Possible right censoring at the end of the follow-up 
can be incorporated. The model is applicable in many situations where 
individuals are followed over a long time period. In describing how a disease 
develops over time, the model can help to predict future need for health care.

DOI: 10.1093/biostatistics/kxp027
PMCID: PMC2742499
PMID: 19648228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2143. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2010 Feb;166(2):188-95. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.05.016. 
Epub 2009 Aug 4.

[Gait and balance disorders in patients with atypical parkinsonian syndromes].

[Article in French]

Welter ML(1), Westby GW, Chastan N.

Author information:
(1)Département des maladies du système nerveux, hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
groupe hospitalier universitaire Est, Assistance publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 47, 
boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France. marie-laure.welter@psl.aphp.fr

The degenerative Parkinsonian "Plus" syndromes form a heterogeneous spectrum of 
pathologies comprising multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, 
Lewy body disease and cortico-basal degeneration. Their developmental profile is 
distinguished from that of Parkinson's disease by the early appearance of gait 
and balance disorders, isolated freezing of gait, primary progressive freezing 
of gait or an isolated or "pure" akinesia. The origin of these symptoms however 
remains poorly understood. The association of nigrostriatal dopamine neuron loss 
with either cortical lesions, in the case of cortico-basal degeneration and Lewy 
body disease, and/or of the brainstem, in the case of progressive supranuclear 
palsy, explains both the severity of the motor symptoms and the lack of, or 
minimal, improvement following levodopa therapy. Other symptomatic drug and 
surgical treatments have been proposed, but with generally disappointing 
results. Physiotherapeutic techniques targeting balance control can bring some 
temporary improvements.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2009.05.016
PMID: 19656539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2144. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;18(3):645-58. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1182.

Neuropathological correlates of dementia in over-80-year-old brain donors from 
the population-based Cambridge city over-75s cohort (CC75C) study.

Brayne C(1), Richardson K, Matthews FE, Fleming J, Hunter S, Xuereb JH, Paykel 
E, Mukaetova-Ladinska EB, Huppert FA, O'Sullivan A, Dening T; Cambridge City 
Over-75s Cohort Cc75c Study Neuropathology Collaboration.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Primary Care, University of Cambridge, 
Institute of Public Health, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0SR, UK. 
carol.brayne@medschl.cam.ac.uk

Key neuropathological changes associated with late-onset dementia are not fully 
understood. Population-based longitudinal studies offer an opportunity to step 
back and examine which pathological indices best link to clinical state. CC75C 
is a longitudinal study of the population aged 75 and over at baseline in 
Cambridge, UK. We report on the first 213 participants coming to autopsy with 
sufficient information for an end of life dementia diagnosis. Clinical diagnosis 
was ascertained by examining retrospective informant interviews, survey 
responses, and death certificates according to DSM-IV criteria. The 
neuropathological protocol was based on the Consortium to Establish a Registry 
of Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD). Clinical dementia was present in 113 
participants (53%): 67% with Alzheimer's disease, 4% vascular dementia, 22% 
mixed dementia, and 1% dementia with Lewy bodies. As Alzheimer-type pathology 
was common, the mutually blinded clinical and neuropathological diagnoses were 
not strongly related. Multivariable analysis identified associations between 
dementia during life and entorhinal cortex neuritic plaques, hippocampal diffuse 
plaques, neocortical neurofibrillary tangles, white matter pallor, Lewy bodies, 
and hippocampal atrophy. These results were consistent in those with clinical 
Alzheimer's disease. Vascular pathologies, especially microinfarcts, were more 
common in those with clinical diagnoses including vascular dementia. 
Alzheimer-type and cerebrovascular pathology are both common in the very old. A 
greater burden of these pathologies, Lewy bodies, and hippocampal atrophy, are 
associated with a higher risk of, but do not define, clinical dementia in old 
age.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1182
PMID: 19661624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2145. J Alzheimers Dis. 2009;18(3):665-75. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1179.

Neuropathologic studies of the Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA).

O'Brien RJ(1), Resnick SM, Zonderman AB, Ferrucci L, Crain BJ, Pletnikova O, 
Rudow G, Iacono D, Riudavets MA, Driscoll I, Price DL, Martin LJ, Troncoso JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University, 
Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

The Baltimore Longitudinal Study of Aging (BLSA) was established in 1958 and is 
one the oldest prospective studies of aging in the USA and the world. The BLSA 
is supported by the National Institute of Aging (NIA) and its mission is to 
learn what happens to people as they get old and how to sort out changes due to 
aging from those due to disease or other causes. In 1986, an autopsy program 
combined with comprehensive neurologic and cognitive evaluations was established 
in collaboration with the Johns Hopkins University Alzheimer's Disease Research 
Center (ADRC). Since then, 211 subjects have undergone autopsy. Here we review 
the key clinical neuropathological correlations from this autopsy series. The 
focus is on the morphological and biochemical changes that occur in normal 
aging, and the early neuropathological changes of neurodegenerative diseases, 
especially Alzheimer's disease (AD). We highlight the combined clinical, 
pathologic, morphometric, and biochemical evidence of asymptomatic AD, a state 
characterized by normal clinical evaluations in subjects with abundant AD 
pathology. We conclude that in some individuals, successful cognitive aging 
results from compensatory mechanisms that occur at the neuronal level (i.e., 
neuronal hypertrophy and synaptic plasticity) whereas a failure of compensation 
may culminate in disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2009-1179
PMCID: PMC2978421
PMID: 19661626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2146. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Jan;16(1):46-50. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.07.011. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

Behavioural assessment of dysexecutive syndrome in Parkinson's disease without 
dementia: a comparison with other clinical executive tasks.

Perfetti B(1), Varanese S, Mercuri P, Mancino E, Saggino A, Onofrj M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Oncology and Neurosciences, University G. d'Annunzio, 
Chieti-Pescara, Italy. bperfetti@ccny.cuny.edu <bperfetti@ccny.cuny.edu>

The Behavioural Assessment of the Dysexecutive Syndrome (BADS) is a 
neuropsychological battery developed with the intent of measuring a wide range 
of executive impairments. Although the psychometric characteristics of BADS have 
previously been investigated in distinct neurological disorders, data on its 
validity in Parkinson's Disease (PD) without dementia are still lacking. The 
principal aim of the study was to address this issue. Twenty-five non-demented 
PD patients and 24 demographically-matched controls were administered BADS and 
other commonly used executive tools. Comparisons between groups indicated that 
two of the six BADS subtests (Temporal Judgement and Action Program) did not 
have sufficient sensitivity to executive impairments. However, when we explored 
group-predictive capabilities among the tests, the BADS total score was the most 
sensitive, followed by the Tower of London (TOL). We obtained similar results 
when we disentangled the sensitivity of the six BADS subtests. The BADS Six 
Elements task was the best group predictor followed by the TOL. Our findings 
showed that BADS is more sensitive to executive dysfunction than some of the 
tools commonly used to assess this construct in PD. However, we also 
demonstrated that, to assess executive impairments in PD without dementia 
adequately, this battery should be administered in combination with the TOL.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.07.011
PMID: 19665420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2147. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2009 Dec;22(4):228-34. doi: 
10.1177/0891988709342721. Epub 2009 Aug 7.

Assessing cognition in Parkinson disease: use of the cognitive linguistic quick 
test.

Parashos SA(1), Johnson ML, Erickson-Davis C, Wielinski CL.

Author information:
(1)Struthers Parkinson's Center, Golden Valley, Minnesota 55427, USA. 
paras001@umn.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test (CLQT) as a cognitive 
screening tool in Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: A total of 93 patients with PD were evaluated with the Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and the CLQT. The CLQT provides separate ratings for 5 
cognitive domains. Descriptive statistics, correlations between the tests, and 
diagnostic value for dementia were analyzed.
RESULTS: Cognitive Linguistic Quick Test correlated well with MMSE. Diagnostic 
values for dementia were similar for the 2 instruments. Unlike the MMSE, the 
CLQT also provided domain-specific information on cognitive deficits. Cognitive 
domains were differentially affected between and within the demented and 
nondemented patient groups with PD: memory was the weakest domain in the 
demented group and attention in the nondemented.
CONCLUSIONS: The CLQT is a valuable instrument in assessing cognitive 
dysfunction in PD. The CLQT is superior to the MMSE as it also provides 
cognitive domain-specific information.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988709342721
PMID: 19666882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2148. Ann Neurol. 2009 Jul;66(1):39-47. doi: 10.1002/ana.21680.

Mild cognitive impairment in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder and 
Parkinson's disease.

Gagnon JF(1), Vendette M, Postuma RB, Desjardins C, Massicotte-Marquez J, 
Panisset M, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'étude du Sommeil et des Rythmes Biologiques, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur 
de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. jean-francois.gagnon.5@umontreal.ca

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequency and subtypes of mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) 
and Parkinson's disease (PD) in association with RBD.
METHODS: One hundred and twelve subjects without dementia or major depression 
including 32 idiopathic RBD patients, 22 PD patients with 
polysomnography-confirmed RBD, 18 PD patients without RBD, and 40 healthy 
control subjects, underwent a comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation. We 
compared the proportion of patients with MCI between groups using standard 
diagnostic criteria.
RESULTS: MCI was found in 50% of idiopathic RBD patients and 73% of PD patients 
with RBD. In contrast, only 11% of PD patients without RBD and 8% of control 
subjects had MCI. The presence of MCI was significantly greater in idiopathic 
RBD patients and PD patients with RBD than in PD patients without RBD and 
control subjects. PD patients with RBD also performed worse than idiopathic RBD 
patients on neuropsychological tests assessing visuoconstructional and 
visuoperceptual abilities.
INTERPRETATION: In both its association with PD and its idiopathic form, RBD is 
an important risk factor for MCI. Except for visuoconstructional and 
visuoperceptual problems, RBD may be an important determinant of cognitive 
impairment in PD. Ann Neurol 2009;66:39-47.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21680
PMID: 19670440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2149. J Neurol Sci. 2009 Dec 15;287(1-2):291-3. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.07.011. Epub 
2009 Aug 14.

Progranulin plasma levels as potential biomarker for the identification of GRN 
deletion carriers. A case with atypical onset as clinical amnestic Mild 
Cognitive Impairment converted to Alzheimer's disease.

Carecchio M(1), Fenoglio C, De Riz M, Guidi I, Comi C, Cortini F, Venturelli E, 
Restelli I, Cantoni C, Bresolin N, Monaco F, Scarpini E, Galimberti D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Dino Ferrari Centre, IRCCS Fondazione 
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, University of Milan, Milan, Italy. 
mcarecchio@gmail.com

Progranulin (GRN) mutations are associated with different clinical phenotypes, 
including Frontotemporal Lobar Degeneration (FTLD), Corticobasal Degeneration 
and Alzheimer's disease (AD). In addition, the range of age at onset is very 
wide and patients presenting initial symptoms around eighty years have been 
described. Previous studies demonstrated that progranulin plasma levels 
determination may be a reliable method to identify GRN deletion carriers. We 
thus evaluated progranulin plasma levels in all patients followed at our 
Alzheimer's Centre whose plasma was available (n=176) and found four patients 
displaying low values. Three of them carried the CACT deletion in exon 7 and 
their clinical diagnosis was behavioral variant Frontotemporal Dementia. We also 
identified a patient carrying a previously reported CAGT deletion in exon 5. 
Here, we report on this case. The onset of symptoms was at 77 years and the 
initial diagnosis was of amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment (aMCI), which 
converted to AD six months later. In the following years, the patient also 
developed behavioral disturbances, gait apraxia and parkinsonian symptoms. At 
present, she is 84 years old and is still followed-up periodically. This case 
confirms progranulin plasma levels as a reliable biomarker to identify GRN 
deletion carriers and discriminate between FTLD and other dementias which may 
mimic it. We thus encourage the inclusion of this non-invasive and easy test in 
clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.07.011
PMID: 19683260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2150. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Jul;1170:644-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04492.x.

Symposium overview: Chemical senses and mechanisms of neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Murphy C(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, San Diego State University, San Diego, California 
92120-4913, USA. cmurphy@sciences.sdsu.edu

Olfactory function is significantly and early impaired in neurodegenerative 
diseases such as Alzheimer’s disease and Parkinson’s disease. Epigenetic 
regulation and adult neurogenesis are some of the major cutting edge research 
directions in studying the mechanisms underlying neurodegenerative diseases. 
Leading scientists in these research areas were invited to participate in this 
symposium to introduce to the chemical senses community their novel insights 
into the mechanisms underlying neurodegenerative diseases. Insight into the 
mechanisms underlying olfactory system impairment in neurodegenerative diseases 
may facilitate both the identification of individuals likely to develop 
cognitive impairment or dementia who will benefit most from interventions at the 
earliest incidence of impairment, and the identification of new treatments for 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.04492.x
PMCID: PMC2729767
PMID: 19686206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2151. Consult Pharm. 2009 Aug;24(8):601-10. doi: 10.4140/tcp.n.2009.601.

Developing explicit positive beers criteria for preferred central nervous system 
medications in older adults.

Stefanacci RG(1), Cavallaro E, Beers MH, Fick DM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Medicare MEdication Managment, University of the Sciences in 
Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. r.stefan@usp.edu

Erratum in
    Consult Pharm. 2009 Sep;24(9):636.

Comment in
    Consult Pharm. 2009 Nov;24(11):792; author reply 792, 794.

BACKGROUND: The Beers criteria have been extensively used over the past decade 
to identify and evaluate potentially inappropriate medication use in adults 65 
years of age and older in the United States. In contrast to the Beers criteria, 
the purpose of this pilot initiative was to develop a new set of explicit 
criteria for determining preferred (rather then potentially inappropriate) 
medications to use in older adults, using similar methodology as used in the 
three iterations of the Beers criteria. This initiative organized its 
evaluations around classes of medications that are both frequently used and 
associated with drug-related problems in older adults-central nervous system 
(CNS) medications.
METHODS: This pilot study used a modified Delphi method-a set of procedures and 
methods for reaching group consensus for a subject matter in which precise 
information is lacking-to determine medications that are preferred for use in 
persons 65 years of age or older known to have specific medical conditions. 
Medications were selected as preferred because they are both effective, based 
upon a thorough evaluation of the clinical evidence, and pose less risk for 
older persons compared with alternative medications for the condition. Expert 
panelists evaluated 78 individual medications within four medical conditions 
(dementia, depression, Parkinson's disease, and psychosis).
RESULTS: This study identified 13 preferred medications to be used in older 
adults with these conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study expands explicit criteria to more precisely define 
preferred medication use in older adults. This refinement of the Beers criteria 
will enable providers to select medications with the greatest benefit-to-risk 
ratio for older adults, thereby minimizing drug-related problems. These criteria 
will need to be expanded to include other medication classes and medical 
conditions frequently encountered in older adults.

DOI: 10.4140/tcp.n.2009.601
PMID: 19689175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2152. J Neurol. 2010 Jan;257(1):79-84. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5268-2. Epub 2009 Aug 
19.

Cognitive complaints in Parkinson's disease: its relationship with objective 
cognitive decline.

Dujardin K(1), Duhamel A, Delliaux M, Thomas-Antérion C, Destée A, Defebvre L.

Author information:
(1)Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, EA2683, Faculty of Medicine and 
University Medical Center, Lille, France. k-dujardin@chru-lille.fr

Cognitive complaint interviews (CCI) have been shown to be useful in the early 
detection of dementia in elderly people. Surprisingly, CCIs are rarely used in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), despite a six-fold higher risk of dementia than in 
healthy subjects. The present study sought to determine whether a structured CCI 
could detect cognitive decline in PD. A validated CCI was added to the usual 
clinical interview for 180 PD patients. Objective cognitive status was assessed 
by the Mattis dementia rating scale score. The CCIs ability to detect cognitive 
decline in PD patients was determined using a receiver operating characteristic 
(ROC) curve. 58 (32.22%) patients had a significant, subjective cognitive 
complaint (CCI score >3). Of these, 48.27% had objective cognitive decline. 
Objective cognitive decline was significantly more frequent in the patients with 
subjective cognitive complaint. However, the ROC curve for discriminating 
between patients with and without objective cognitive deficits as a function of 
their subjective cognitive complaint had low sensitivity (0.50, 95% CI: 
0.36-0.64) and moderate specificity (0.74, 95% CI: 0.69-0.84). Logistic 
regression incorporating the main demographical and clinical variables showed 
that the CCI score's discriminant power was improved by adding age and the 
number of years in education to the predictive model. Objective cognitive 
decline and dementia are more frequent among PD patients reporting a cognitive 
complaint than among patients not reporting a complaint. However, the CCI does 
not enable more accurate screening for PD-associated dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5268-2
PMID: 19690907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2153. Neuroepidemiology. 2009;33(3):286-92. doi: 10.1159/000235641. Epub 2009 Aug 20.

Antihypertensive agents and risk of Parkinson's disease, essential tremor and 
dementia: a population-based prospective study (NEDICES).

Louis ED(1), Benito-León J, Bermejo-Pareja F; Neurological Disorders in Central 
Spain (NEDICES) Study Group.

Collaborators: Vega S, Morales JM, Gabriel R, Portera-Sánchez A, Berbel A, 
Martínez-Salio A, Díaz-Guzmán J, Olazarán J, Pardo J, Porta-Etessam J, Pérez del 
Molino F, Rivera-Navarro J, Alonso M, Gómez C, Saiz C, Fernández G, Rodríguez P, 
Sánchez-Sánchez F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, GH Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Research on 
Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Recent interest in antihypertensive agents, especially calcium 
channel blockers, has been sparked by the notion that these medications may be 
neuroprotective. A modest literature, with mixed results, has examined whether 
these medications might lower the odds or risk of Parkinson's disease (PD) or 
dementia. There are no data for essential tremor (ET).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the association between antihypertensive use (defined 
broadly and by individual subclasses) and ET, PD and dementia. For each 
disorder, we used cross-sectional data (association with prevalent disease) and 
prospective data (association with incident disease).
METHODS: Prospective population-based study in Spain enrolling 5,278 
participants at baseline.
RESULTS: Use of antihypertensive medications (aside from beta-blockers) was 
similar in prevalent ET cases and controls. Baseline use of antihypertensive 
agents was not associated with reduced risk of incident ET. Antihypertensive 
medication use was not associated with prevalent or incident PD. Calcium channel 
blocker use was marginally reduced in prevalent dementia cases (OR(adjusted) = 
0.63, p = 0.06) but was not associated with reduced risk of incident dementia 
(RR(adjusted) = 1.02, p = 0.95).
CONCLUSIONS: We did not find evidence of a protective effect of antihypertensive 
medications in these three neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000235641
PMCID: PMC2826448
PMID: 19696520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2154. Womens Health (Lond). 2009 Sep;5(5):565-76. doi: 10.2217/whe.09.42.

Effect of bilateral oophorectomy on women's long-term health.

Parker WH(1), Jacoby V, Shoupe D, Rocca W.

Author information:
(1)John Wayne Cancer Institute at Saint John's Medical Center, 2200 Santa Monica 
Blvd., Santa Monica, CA 90404, USA. wparker@prrgyn.com

Bilateral oophorectomy at the time of hysterectomy for benign disease is 
commonly practiced in order to prevent the subsequent development of ovarian 
cancer or other ovarian pathology that might require additional surgery. At 
present, bilateral oophorectomy is performed in 78% of women aged between 45 and 
64 years having a hysterectomy, and a total of approximately 300,000 
prophylactic oophorectomies are performed in the USA every year. Estrogen 
deficiency resulting from pre- and post-menopausal oophorectomies has been 
associated with higher risks of coronary heart disease, stroke, hip fracture, 
Parkinsonism, dementia, cognitive impairment, depression and anxiety in many 
studies. While ovarian cancer accounts for 14,800 deaths per year in the USA, 
coronary heart disease accounts for 350,000 deaths per year. In addition, 
100,000 cases of dementia may be attributable annually to prior bilateral 
oophorectomy. At present, observational studies suggest that bilateral 
oophorectomy may do more harm than good. In women who are not at high risk of 
developing ovarian or breast cancer, removing the ovaries at the time of 
hysterectomy should be approached with caution.

DOI: 10.2217/whe.09.42
PMID: 19702455 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2155. Exp Neurol. 2010 Jun;223(2):252-66. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.07.035. Epub 
2009 Aug 27.

Targeting Abeta and tau in Alzheimer's disease, an early interim report.

Golde TE(1), Petrucelli L, Lewis J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo 
Rd., Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. tgolde@mayo.edu

The amyloid beta (Abeta) and tau proteins, which misfold, aggregate, and 
accumulate in the Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain, are implicated as central 
factors in a complex neurodegenerative cascade. Studies of mutations that cause 
early onset AD and promote Abeta accumulation in the brain strongly support the 
notion that inhibiting Abeta aggregation will prevent AD. Similarly, genetic 
studies of frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17 MAPT) showing that mutations in the MAPT gene encoding tau lead to 
abnormal tau accumulation and neurodegeneration. Such genetic studies clearly 
show that tau dysfunction and aggregation can be central to neurodegeneration, 
however, most likely in a secondary fashion in relation to AD. Additional 
pathologic, biochemical, and modeling studies further support the concept that 
Abeta and tau are prime targets for disease modifying therapies in AD. Treatment 
strategies aimed at preventing the aggregation and accumulation of Abeta, tau, 
or both proteins should therefore be theoretically possible, assuming that 
treatment can be initiated before either irreversible damage is present or 
downstream, self-sustaining, pathological cascades have been initiated. Herein, 
we will review recent advances and also potential setbacks with respect to the 
myriad of therapeutic strategies that are designed to slow down, prevent, or 
clear the accumulation of either "pathological" Abeta or tau. We will also 
discuss the need for thoughtful prioritization with respect to clinical 
development of the preclinically validated modifiers of Abeta and tau pathology. 
The current number of candidate therapies targeting Abeta is becoming so large 
that a triage process is clearly needed to insure that resources are invested in 
a way such that the best candidates for disease modifying therapy are rapidly 
moved toward clinical trials. Finally, we will discuss the challenges for an 
appropriate "triage" after potential disease modifying therapies targeting tau 
and Abeta have entered clinical trials.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2009.07.035
PMCID: PMC2864363
PMID: 19716367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2156. J Neurol. 2009 Aug;256 Suppl 3:270-9. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5243-y.

Formation and development of Lewy pathology: a critical update.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Kenyongasse 18, 1070, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Filamentous protein inclusions in neurons (Lewy bodies, LB) and dystrophic 
neurites containing pathologic alpha-synuclein (alpha Syn) are the morphologic 
hallmarks of sporadic Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB), but are also found in aged subjects and in a variety of neurogenerative 
disorders. They occur in the central, peripheral, and autonomic nervous system 
as an essential or coincident feature. Their formation runs through several 
phases from initial dust-like particles cross-linked with alpha Syn to 
aggregation of ubiquitinated dense filaments, formation of LBs, finally 
degradation and death of the afflicted neurons. Pathologic accumulation of alpha 
Syn/LBs proposed by Braak et al. (Neurobiol Aging 24:197-211, 2003), following a 
predictable sequence of lesions in six stages with ascending progression from 
medullary and olfactory nuclei to the cortex, has been considered to be linked 
to clinical dysfunctions. The consensus pathologic guidelines of DLB (Neurology 
65:1863-1872, 2005), by semiquantitative scoring to alpha Syn pathology (LB 
density and distribution) in specific brain regions, distinguish three 
phenotypes (brainstem, transitional/limbic, and diffuse neocortical), and also 
consider concomitant Alzheimer-related pathology. alpha Syn pathology in the 
amygdala is often associated with Alzheimer disease. Although some retrospective 
clinico-pathologic studies have largely confirmed the Braak LB staging system, 
it shows neither correlation to the clinical severity and duration of 
parkinsonism nor to nigral alpha Syn burden and cell loss which significantly 
correlates with resulting striatal loss of dopamine, dopamine transporter and 
tyrosine hydroxylase, duration and severity of motor dysfunction. Between 6.3 
and 43% of clinically manifested PD cases did not follow this pattern, and in 
7-8.3% of those with alpha Syn-positive inclusions in midbrain and cortex the 
medullary nuclei were spared. On the other hand, 30-55% of elderly subjects with 
widespread Lewy pathology revealed no neuropsychiatric symptoms or were not 
classifiable. Therefore, detection and staging of Lewy pathology without 
assessment of neuronal loss in specific areas may not have clinical impact and 
its predictive validity is questionable. For demented patients, modified 
criteria for categorization of Lewy pathology were proposed. If robust 
correlations between clinical course and Lewy/alpha Syn pathology are to be 
confirmed by future studies, the currently used morphologic 
staging/classification systems should be revised accordingly.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5243-y
PMID: 19711116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2157. J Neurol. 2009 Aug;256 Suppl 3:286-92. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5246-8.

Neurotoxic conversion of beta-synuclein: a novel approach to generate a 
transgenic mouse model of synucleinopathies?

Fujita M(1), Sekigawa A, Sekiyama K, Sugama S, Hashimoto M.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Chemistry and Metabolism, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute for 
Neuroscience, Tokyo, 183-8526, Japan.

Many groups have generated alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) transgenic (tg) mice as a 
rodent model for human synucleinopathies, including Parkinson's disease and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Indeed, some of the lines displayed limited 
evidence of neurodegeneration, such as alpha-syn deposits, compromised function 
of dopaminergic neurons, fibrillization of alpha-syn, and astrogliosis. However, 
none of them fully replicate the pathological features of synucleinopathies. To 
better understand the pathogenesis of the synucleinopathies and to develop new 
therapeutic strategies, improvement of the current version of alpha-syn tg mice 
may be required. We predict that beta-synuclein (beta-syn), the homologue of 
alpha-syn, might be a key molecule for this purpose. Although beta-syn is a 
neuroprotective molecule counteracting the alpha-syn pathology in tg mice, it 
was previously shown that both beta-syn and gamma-synuclein were associated with 
axonal pathology in the hippocampus of sporadic cases of Parkinson's disease and 
DLB. Furthermore, two missense mutations (P123H and V70M) of beta-syn were 
recently identified in DLB. These mutants of beta-syn were prone to aggregate in 
vitro and overexpression of these mutant beta-syn proteins in neuroblastoma 
cells resulted in enhanced lysosomal pathology. Taken together, these results 
suggest that a toxic gain of function of beta-syn might be involved in the 
pathogenesis of synucleinopathies. In this context, it is of considerable 
interest to determine if mutant beta-syn-overexpressing tg mice could exhibit 
neuropathological features distinct from those in conventional alpha-syn tg 
mice. Furthermore, it is expected that a bigenic mouse model for mutant 
beta-syn/alpha-syn might be characterized by a more accelerated phenotype of 
synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5246-8
PMID: 19711118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2158. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):18-22. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.034. Epub 
2009 Sep 4.

The epidemiology of dementia associated with Parkinson disease.

Aarsland D(1), Kurz MW.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders/Psychiatric Clinic, Stavanger 
University Hospital, Stavanger, Norway. daarsland@gmail.com

Several recent studies have shown that dementia is common in Parkinson's disease 
(PD), and that in some patients, cognitive impairment occurs even at the time of 
diagnosis. The point prevalence of dementia in PD is close to 30% and the 
incidence rate is increased 4-6 times as compared to controls. The cumulative 
prevalence is very high, at least 75% of PD patients who survive for more than 
10 years will develop dementia. The mean time from onset of PD to dementia is 
approximately 10 years. However, there are considerable variations, and some 
patients develop dementia early in the disease course. Earlier onset of dementia 
is associated with more structural brain changes. The most established risk 
factors for early dementia are old age, severity of motor symptoms, in 
particular postural and gait disturbances, mild cognitive impairment and visual 
hallucinations. The genetic contributions to dementia are currently not clear 
and need to be explored in future studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.034
PMID: 19733364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2159. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):138-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.036. Epub 
2009 Sep 5.

Behavior and cognition in corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear 
palsy.

Kertesz A(1), McMonagle P.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Cognitive Neurology, University of Western Ontario, St Joseph's 
Hospital, Ontario, Canada. Andrew.Kertesz@sjhc.london.on.ca

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD), 
previously described as Parkinsonian syndromes are also cognitive disorders, and 
biologically related to the frontotemporal dementia or Pick's disease. PSP and 
CBD overlap clinically, pathologically and genetically, sharing tau haplotypes 
and mutations. In our series of CBD/PSP patients with cognitive presentation 
(n=36), primary progressive aphasia (PPA) was particularly common, but 
behavioral onset occurred also. CBD or PSP as motor presentations developed 
significant language disorder in 17/19. The underlying pathology is predictably 
tau positive in these clinical combinations, regardless of the presentation. 
Other cognitive features of CBDS include apraxia, alien hand and apathy, but 
often frontal lobe dementia with disinhibition develops also. CBDS also has 
visuospatial deficit, because of the parietal involvement. PSP was considered 
the prototype of subcortical dementia, with bradyphrenia, poor recall and 
executive deficit, but cortical features were recognized to be important also. 
Language testing and a behavioral inventory should be part of neuropsychological 
tests to facilitate diagnosis and to quantify the deficit. The clinical, genetic 
and pathological relationship is strong between CBD /PSP and the aphasic and 
behavioral components of the Pick complex.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.036
PMID: 19733862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2160. Mov Disord. 2009 Oct 30;24(14):2042-58. doi: 10.1002/mds.22675.

Hereditary parkinsonism: Parkinson disease look-alikes--an algorithm for 
clinicians to "PARK" genes and beyond.

Klein C(1), Schneider SA, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany. 
christine.klein@neuro.uni-luebeck.de

In the past decade, a number of genetic causes of parkinsonism have been 
identified. As a consequence, clinicians have to consider an increasing range of 
differential diagnoses when confronted with a patient with parkinsonism with a 
positive family history. While well-established monogenic forms with PARK 
acronyms have been reviewed extensively, less emphasis has been placed on other 
inherited conditions that may also present with signs of parkinsonism or even 
mimic idiopathic Parkinson's disease clinically. In this review, we focus on 
three different scenarios in patients with an overall early age of onset of 
parkinsonism: (i) atypical features in patients with mutations in one of the 
"PARK" genes; (ii) classical parkinsonism due to mutations in "other than-PARK" 
genes or yet other genes where parkinsonism may be a well-recognized, 
concomitant, or even an isolated feature; (iii) atypical parkinsonism in other 
genetic disorders which are, however, typically characterized by features other 
than parkinsonism. Atypical features in patients from Group I include, for 
example, a slower disease course (PARK2, PARK6, PARK7) or dementia (PARK1/4, 
PARK14). Conditions in Group II have been designated by a DYT or SCA acronym 
(for example, DYT5 or SCA3) and also include patients with heterozygous GBA 
mutations, mitochondrial gene mutations. Group III comprises mutations in the 
FMR1, MAPT, GRN, ATP7B, PANK2, FBXO7, CHAC, FTL1, Huntingtin, JPH3 genes, and a 
number of even rarer, miscellaneous conditions.

(c) 2009 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22675
PMID: 19735092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2161. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):123-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.027. Epub 
2009 Sep 6.

Transcranial sonography findings related to non-motor features of Parkinson's 
disease.

Walter U(1), Skoloudík D, Berg D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rostock, Rostock, Germany. 
uwe.walter@med.uni-rostock.de

Transcranial sonography (TCS) allows high resolution imaging of deep brain 
structures, provided sufficient imaging conditions and adequate qualification of 
the investigator. Since TCS can display changes of midbrain structures and basal 
ganglia that are not or only heavily detected with other neuroimaging methods, 
TCS has yielded new insights into the pathogenesis also of non-motor features of 
PD. Abnormal increased echogenicity ('hyperechogenicity') of substantia nigra is 
not only a characteristic finding in PD, but is also related to increased risk 
of depression in PD patients (relative risk [RR], 1.9). Reduced echogenicity 
('hypoechogenicity') of midbrain raphe indicated increased risk of depression 
(RR, 2.0) and urinary incontinence (RR, 4.7) in PD patients. Caudate nucleus 
hyperechogenicity was associated with drug-induced psychosis (RR, 2.4), and 
frontal-horn dilatation >20mm with dementia (RR, 3.6). TCS findings support the 
hypothesis of a pathogenetic link between depression and PD. Further studies are 
warranted to find out whether TCS is useful for detecting increased risk for 
non-motor complications, such as depression, psychosis, or urinary incontinence, 
already before they become clinically obvious.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.027
PMID: 19735925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2162. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):12-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.014. Epub 
2009 Sep 8.

Epidemiology of psychosis in Parkinson's disease.

Fénelon G(1), Alves G.

Author information:
(1)AP-HP, CHU Henri Mondor, Créteil, France.

Psychotic symptoms are frequent and disabling in patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Methodological issues in the epidemiology of PD associated 
psychosis (PDP) include differences in the symptoms assessed, the methods of 
assessment, and the selection of patients. Most studies are prospective 
clinic-based cross-sectional studies providing point prevalence rates in samples 
on dopaminergic treatment. Visual hallucinations are present in about one 
quarter to one third of the patients, auditory in up to 20%. Tactile/somatic, 
and olfactory hallucinations are usually not systematically sought. Minor 
phenomena such as sense of presence and visual illusions affect 17 to 72% of the 
patients, and delusions about 5%. Lifetime prevalence of visual hallucinations 
reaches approximately 50%. Prospective longitudinal cohort studies suggest that 
hallucinations persist and worsen in individual patients, and that their 
prevalence increases with time. A facilitating role of treatment on PDP is 
demonstrated at least for dopaminergic agonists, but there is no simple 
dose-effect relationship between dopaminergic treatment and the presence or 
severity of hallucinations. The main endogenous non-modifiable risk factor is 
cognitive impairment. Other associated factors include older age/longer duration 
of PD, disease severity, altered dream phenomena, daytime somnolence, and 
possibly depression and dysautonomia. PDP reduces quality of life in patients 
and increases caregiver distress, and is an independent risk factor for nursing 
home placement and development of dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.014
PMID: 19740486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2163. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):23-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.015. Epub 
2009 Sep 8.

Are genetic and sporadic Parkinson's disease patients equally susceptible to 
develop dementia?

Inzelberg R(1), Polyniki A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The Sagol Neuroscience Center, Sheba Medical Center, 
Tel Hashomer and Tel Aviv University, Israel. inzelber@post.tau.ac.il

The occurrence of dementia in genetic Parkinson's disease is heterogeneous. The 
onset and progression of diverse forms of familial Parkinson's disease might be 
different than that of sporadic disease. Since dementia is an age related 
process, its risk increases with advanced disease severity and duration. The 
onset and progression of dementia is expected to vary between genetic forms, 
which present at diverse ages with different symptomatologies. It seems that 
genetic Parkinson's disease variants in which Lewy bodies are the prominent 
pathological hallmark - such as in PARK1, PARK4 and PARK8 - dementia is part of 
the phenotype. On the contrary, in PARK2 which is not accompanied by Lewy body 
accumulation, patients do not show a systematic cognitive decline. This review 
presents information on dementia in genetic forms of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.015
PMID: 19740488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2164. Encephale. 2009 Sep;35(4):361-9. doi: 10.1016/j.encep.2008.03.012. Epub 2008 Oct 
1.

[Depression and frontal dysfunction: risks for the elderly?].

[Article in French]

Thomas P(1), Hazif Thomas C, Billon R, Peix R, Faugeron P, Clément JP.

Author information:
(1)Service universitaire de psychogériatrie, centre mémoire de ressources et de 
recherches, centre hospitalier Esquirol, 87025 Limoges, France. 
philippe.thomas@ch-esquirol-limoges.fr

BACKGROUND: Frontal lobe syndromes include reduced activity, particularly a 
diminution of spontaneous activity, lack of drive, inability to plan ahead, and 
induce a lack of concern. These last points constitute the executive dysfunction 
syndrome. That executive dysfunction could be the core defect in patients with 
geriatric or vascular depression, and might be related to frontal-subcortical 
circuit dysfunction. Sometimes frontal lobe syndromes are associated with 
restless, aimless, uncoordinated behavior or even disinhibition, increasing the 
risks of falls and of malnutrition. Some authors have distinguished between 
lesions of the lateral frontal cortex, most closely linked to the motor 
structures of the brain, which lead to disturbances of movement and action with 
perseveration and inertia, and lesions of the orbital and medial areas, 
interlinked with limbic and reticular systems, damage to which leads to 
disinhibition and changes of affect. The medial frontal syndrome is marked by 
akinesia, associated with gait disturbances, and loss of autonomy. For these 
reasons, it has been proposed that a subtype of depression, 
"depression-executive dysfunction syndrome" could occur in late life. This 
assertion was based on clinical, neuropathological, and neuroimaging findings 
suggesting that frontostriatal dysfunctions contribute to the development of 
both depression and executive dysfunction and influence the course of 
depression. Depressive symptomatology, and especially psychomotor retardation 
and loss of interest in activities, contributed to disability in 
depression-executive dysfunction syndrome patients. This study is not restricted 
to major depression. It examined the relationship of executive impairment to the 
course of depressive symptoms among a psychogeriatric population with dementia 
or depression in order to assess the consequences of these pathologies on 
disabilities of aged persons.
METHODS: The study was carried out in Limoges (France) during 2006 and 2007. 
Three hundred and twenty one psychogeriatric outpatients were included after 
their written agreement. They were assessed using different scales for autonomy, 
cognition, depression, frontal impairment and these results were compared with 
the risk of fall, a possible loss of autonomy and a proteino-energical 
malnutrition. The statistical study was made using the Systat 11 software. The 
following tests were used: Student Test, Chi(2) test, and the Manova test, which 
was adjusted to the duration of the disease, the caregiver's age, his/her 
education level, and level of cognitive impairment. The regression method used 
was the multiple linear regression method as well as a descending step-by-step 
analysis.
RESULTS: One hundred and thirty six males (77.3+/-7.09 years old) and 185 
females (80.4+/-6.5 years old) were recruited. Patients mainly presented with 
Alzheimer's disease (n=123) and 65 presented an associated depression, 25 
presented vascular dementia, 30 a Lewy bodies dementia, 27 a fronto-temporal 
dementia. Twenty-seven presented psychosis and 40 a Mild Cognitive Impairment. A 
control group was composed of 33 persons presumed without psychogeriatric 
pathologies. Depression associated with an executive dysfunction syndrome 
increased loss of autonomy, the risk of fall and of malnutrition, especially in 
the case of cognitive impairment. The multivariate regression analysis 
step-by-step shows an increasing risk of fall in the presence of a 
depression-executive dysfunction syndrome. Motivation is altered when the 
patient is depressed. In demented patients, depression significantly increases 
behavioral disorders, social and familial relationships, and instrumental acts 
of daily life. It precipitates the risks of falls and of malnutrition.
DISCUSSION: The principal finding of this study is that geriatric depression is 
characterized by impaired executive functioning. In the present study, depressed 
patients also had a greater tendency to fall and to suffer from malnutrition. 
Executive processes are fundamental to the daily functioning of depressed older 
adults, and dysfunction may lead to a lack of compensatory strategies that would 
improve the outcomes of late-life depression or of increasing dependency as 
well. In demented patients, depression triggers loss of motivation and executive 
dysfunction as well.
CONCLUSIONS: Depression and executive dysfunction triggers the loss of autonomy, 
the risk of fall and of malnutrition in elderly patients. The clinical 
significance of this study is that the delineation of specific executive in 
depressed elderly patients may facilitate the development of effective treatment 
interventions, including treatment for geriatric depression.

DOI: 10.1016/j.encep.2008.03.012
PMID: 19748373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2165. Encephale. 2009 Sep;35(4):386-93. doi: 10.1016/j.encep.2008.06.008. Epub 2008 
Sep 23.

[Is late-onset schizophrenia related to neurodegenerative processes? A review of 
literature].

[Article in French]

Lagodka A(1), Robert P.

Author information:
(1)Service du Pr Pringuey, clinique de psychiatrie et de psychologie 
médicale-Abbaye de Saint-Pons, CHU Pasteur, Nice, France. 
aurelielagodka@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: Since 1943 when, for the first time, M. Bleuler used the term 
late-onset schizophrenia (LOS) to refer to diagnostic groups gathering some 
clinical features of schizophrenia, but with onset after the age of 40, opinions 
on this entity are divided. The main question is whether LOS and schizophrenia, 
with onset in early adulthood (early-onset schizophrenia EOS), have the same 
etiopathogeny. This discussion became more complex with the introduction, in 
2000, of a new entity, the "very-late-onset schizophrenia-like psychosis" 
(VLOSP), which took the place of "late paraphrenia" and grouped together 
schizophrenia, delusional disorders and paranoid psychosis with age of onset 
after 60 years. Neuropathological processes underlying these entities have not 
beed determined. In particular, neurodegenerative processes could be explored.
METHOD: A literature review between 1 January 1995 and 30 April 2008, based on a 
research on PubMed with the terms "late-onset schizophrenia", "paraphrenia", 
"late paraphrenia", "VLOSP", and "late psychosis", takes stock of the various 
studies and hypotheses which have investigated the link between LOS/VLOSP and 
neurodegenerative processes.
RESULTS: Clinical approach: there is no greater family history of dementia 
disorders in LOS/VLOSP than in the general population. Neuropsychological 
pattern between LOS and Alzheimer's disease (AD) seems different, with more 
impairment in delayed recall in AD, and in short-term memory in LOS. Some 
longitudinal studies, however, have argued that a part of patients with LOS 
would develop dementia at 10 years. These patients would have a later onset of 
disorders (> 60 years). Anatomopathological approach: anatomopathological 
studies show that LOS is not consecutive to AD, and might be related to a 
restricted limbic tauopathy. Neuroimaging approach: Magnetic Resonance Imaging 
(MRI) morphological neuroimaging studies show little differences between LOS and 
EOS. The thalamus volume was significantly smaller, and cortical atrophy was 
more important in LOS. MRI neuroimaging studies regarding white matter 
hyperintensities (WMH), which are considered as a macroscopic manifestation of 
cerebrovascular disease (CD), show inconsistent results. Positive results are 
observed with LOS subjects with later onset of disease. In addition, WMH were 
not located on cerebral tracts, which are implicated in EOS, but were 
periventricular.
DISCUSSION: It is notable that the studies conducted do not differentiate 
between LOS and VLOSP, since these two groups of patients are generally mixed. 
Furthermore, an attempt to analyse the data has to take into account only the 
studies which have included subjects with strict criteria of schizophrenia, 
independently of the disorders' age of onset. In addition, we found no study 
comparing LOS and Lewy Bodies Dementia, which is however an important 
differential diagnosis. The two main hypotheses tested appear to be: (1): is LOS 
a prodrome of AD? (2): is LOS consecutive to CD? This review permits a partial 
answer to these questions. First, LOS as a prodrome of AD seems very unlikely, 
considering anatomopathological studies. However, it is possible that subjects 
with later age of onset of the disease develop dementia at 10 years. Second, CD 
seems not to be altered by the cerebral tracts which are implicated in EOS. A 
hypothesis could be that the tracts implicated in LOS and EOS differ. This might 
explain the differences found in clinical (less formal thought disorders and 
negative symptoms in LOS compared with EOS) and electroencephalographical 
studies (no reduction of P300's amplitude in LOS, which has however been 
proposed as trait marker of schizophrenia in EOS) between LOS and EOS. These 
tracts could be related to a limbic tauopathy found in anatomopathological 
studies. More vulnerable subjects would develop LOS with ageing. Other subjects 
would develop LOS secondary to CD. This could explain the later age of onset of 
the disease in these subjects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.encep.2008.06.008
PMID: 19748376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2166. Arch Neurol. 2009 Sep;66(9):1114-9. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.170.

Comparison of risk factor profiles in incidental Lewy body disease and Parkinson 
disease.

Frigerio R(1), Fujishiro H, Maraganore DM, Klos KJ, DelleDonne A, Heckman MG, 
Crook JE, Josephs KA, Parisi JE, Boeve BF, Dickson DW, Ahlskog JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN 55902, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To explore whether associations of potential risk factors for 
incidental Lewy body disease (iLBD) are similar to those for Parkinson disease 
(PD).
DESIGN: Brain autopsy study (1988-2004) of subjects without evidence of 
neurodegenerative disease or tremor who were evaluated by at least 1 physician 
within 1 year of death. Researchers analyzed incidental Lewy pathology blinded 
to clinical abstraction.
SETTING: Olmsted County, Minnesota. Subjects Residents of Olmsted County and the 
immediate vicinity aged older than 60 years.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Whether risk factors previously associated with PD in 
Olmsted County are also associated with iLBD.
RESULTS: Of 235 subjects, 34 had iLBD (14.5%). The overall risk factor profiles 
for iLBD and PD were fairly similar between the 2 sets of odds ratio (OR) 
estimates, with 11 of 16 ORs in the same direction. Prior Olmsted County studies 
documented 7 risk factors with statistically significant associations with PD; 
for physician occupation and caffeine intake, the ORs for iLBD were in the same 
direction and statistically significant, whereas for education, head injury, and 
number of children, they were in the same direction but not significant; they 
were in the opposite direction but not statistically significant for depression 
and anxiety. Incidental Lewy body disease was not associated with various 
end-of-life conditions or causes of death, though these patients were slightly 
older and more likely cachectic.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on this exploratory study, iLBD and PD appear to have similar 
risk factor profiles. Thus, at least some cases of iLBD could represent 
preclinical PD, arrested PD, or a partial syndrome due to a lesser burden of 
causative factors. Incidental Lewy body disease is not explained by nonspecific 
end-of-life brain insults.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.170
PMCID: PMC2813519
PMID: 19752300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2167. Arch Neurol. 2009 Sep;66(9):1120-6. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.196.

Extrapyramidal signs before and after diagnosis of incident Alzheimer disease in 
a prospective population study.

Portet F(1), Scarmeas N, Cosentino S, Helzner EP, Stern Y.

Author information:
(1)Memory Research Resource Center for Alzheimer's Disease, Neurology 
Department, U 888 Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, 
Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Montpellier, France. Floportet@aol.com

BACKGROUND: Extrapyramidal signs (EPSs) are commonly accepted as a feature of 
Alzheimer disease (AD) and may influence both the profile of impairment and 
prognosis.
OBJECTIVE: To examine rates of occurrence and risk factors for all types of EPSs 
and to describe the impact of EPSs over time on the clinical course of AD.
DESIGN: Longitudinal study.
SETTING: The Washington Heights Hamilton Heights Inwood Columbia Aging Project. 
Patients A total of 388 patients with incident AD (mean age, 79 years; 71.4% 
female).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Extrapyramidal signs rated by means of a standardized 
portion of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale; prevalence and 
incidence rates and cumulative risk for non-drug-induced EPSs; and rates of 
change in EPSs over time, taking into account potential covariates.
RESULTS: Extrapyramidal signs were detected in 12.3% of patients at first 
evaluation and 22.6% at last evaluation. In a multivariate-adjusted generalized 
estimating equation model of change, total EPS score increased at an annual rate 
of 1.3%. Women (relative risk [RR], 1.57; P = .03), older patients (RR, 1.03; P 
= .02), and those with EPSs at baseline (RR, 2.07; P = .001) had greater rates 
of cognitive decline.
CONCLUSIONS: Extrapyramidal signs occur frequently and progress significantly in 
AD. Patients with incident AD and concomitant EPSs have a greater rate of 
cognitive decline than do patients with incident AD but without EPSs.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2009.196
PMCID: PMC2896248
PMID: 19752301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2168. Psychopharmacol Bull. 2009;42(3):99-105.

Switching to duloxetine remits ziprasidone - associated urinary incontinence and 
improves neuropsychiatric behavior in dementia: possible relationship of 
incontinence to 5HT2 receptor blockade.

Lauterbach EC(1), Baralatei FT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry & Behavioral Sciences, Mercer University School of 
Medicine, Macon, GA, USA. eclbgnp@earthlink.net

OBJECTIVES: Urinary incontinence arising in dementia lowers patient quality of 
life, predicts caregiver burden and nursing home placement, and predisposes to 
adding additional medicines that can further impair cognition, behavior, and 
function. An understanding of incontinence pharmacology can help the clinician 
predict and manage this adverse event in treating patients with dementia.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Case report.
PRINCIPAL OBSERVATIONS: We encountered a patient with Alzheimer's disease and 
vascular dementia who developed urinary incontinence and parkinsonism when 
ziprasidone was added to the regimen for behavioral concerns.When he was 
switched to duloxetine, the incontinence and parkinsonism resolved whereas 
improvements in perseveration, irritability, paranoia, and agitation persisted.
CONCLUSIONS: While a pharmacokinetic explanation is unlikely, the best evidence 
suggests that ziprasidone-mediated serotonin 5HT2 receptor blockade may explain 
the reversible incontinence, with an adrenergic alpha-1 receptor mechanism 
considered to be less likely. Patients on 5HT2 antagonist drugs, including 
atypical antipsychotics, should be observed for incontinence. In the event of 
incontinence developing in the context of these agents, duloxetine may represent 
a potential pharmacological alternative in some cases. Duloxetine may improve 
neuropsychiatric symptoms in dementia through its effects on serotonin, 
norepinephrine, and frontal dopamine.

PMID: 19752843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2169. Curr Top Med Chem. 2009;9(10):903-12.

Cognitive impairment and dementia in patients with Parkinson disease.

Leverenz JB(1), Quinn JF, Zabetian C, Zhang J, Montine KS, Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Centers of Veterans 
Administration, Department of Neurology, Oregon Health & Sciences University, 
Portland, OR, USA.

Parkinson disease (PD) is an already prevalent neurodegenerative disease that is 
poised to at least double over the next 25 years. Although best known for its 
characteristic movement disorder, PD is now appreciated commonly to cause 
cognitive impairment, including dementia, and behavioral changes. Dementia in 
patients with PD is consequential and has been associated with reduced quality 
of life, shortened survival, and increased caregiver distress. Here we review 
clinical presentation and progression, pathological bases, identification of 
genetic risk factors, development of small molecule biomarkers, and emerging 
treatments for cognitive impairment in patients with PD.

PMCID: PMC2804995
PMID: 19754405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2170. PLoS One. 2009 Sep 16;4(9):e7052. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007052.

Copper-triggered aggregation of ubiquitin.

Arnesano F(1), Scintilla S, Calò V, Bonfrate E, Ingrosso C, Losacco M, 
Pellegrino T, Rizzarelli E, Natile G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Farmaco-Chimico, University of Bari A. Moro, Bari, Italy.

Neurodegenerative disorders share common features comprising aggregation of 
misfolded proteins, failure of the ubiquitin-proteasome system, and increased 
levels of metal ions in the brain. Protein aggregates within affected cells 
often contain ubiquitin, however no report has focused on the aggregation 
propensity of this protein. Recently it was shown that copper, differently from 
zinc, nickel, aluminum, or cadmium, compromises ubiquitin stability and binds to 
the N-terminus with 0.1 micromolar affinity. This paper addresses the role of 
copper upon ubiquitin aggregation. In water, incubation with Cu(II) leads to 
formation of spherical particles that can progress from dimers to larger 
conglomerates. These spherical oligomers are SDS-resistant and are destroyed 
upon Cu(II) chelation or reduction to Cu(I). In water/trifluoroethanol (80:20, 
v/v), a mimic of the local decrease in dielectric constant experienced in 
proximity to a membrane surface, ubiquitin incubation with Cu(II) causes 
time-dependent changes in circular dichroism and Fourier-transform infrared 
spectra, indicative of increasing beta-sheet content. Analysis by atomic force 
and transmission electron microscopy reveals, in the given order, formation of 
spherical particles consistent with the size of early oligomers detected by gel 
electrophoresis, clustering of these particles in straight and curved chains, 
formation of ring structures, growth of trigonal branches from the rings, 
coalescence of the trigonal branched structures in a network. Notably, none of 
these ubiquitin aggregates was positive to tests for amyloid and Cu(II) 
chelation or reduction produced aggregate disassembly. The early formed 
Cu(II)-stabilized spherical oligomers, when reconstituted in 
1-palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPC) liposomes and in POPC 
planar bilayers, form annular and pore-like structures, respectively, which are 
common to several neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson's, 
Alzheimer's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and prion diseases, and have been 
proposed to be the primary toxic species. Susceptibility to aggregation of 
ubiquitin, as it emerges from the present study, may represent a potential risk 
factor for disease onset or progression while cells attempt to tag and process 
toxic substrates.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007052
PMCID: PMC2737635
PMID: 19756145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2171. Brain. 2009 Nov;132(Pt 11):2947-57. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp234. Epub 2009 Sep 16.

A clinico-pathological study of subtypes in Parkinson's disease.

Selikhova M(1), Williams DR, Kempster PA, Holton JL, Revesz T, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders and Institute of 
Neurology, University College, London, UK.

We have carried out a systematic review of the case files of 242 donors with 
pathologically verified Parkinson's disease at the Queen Square Brain Bank for 
Neurological Disorders in an attempt to corroborate the data-driven subtype 
classification proposed by Lewis and colleagues (Heterogeneity of Parkinson's 
disease in the early clinical stages using a data driven approach. J Neurol 
Neurosurg Psychiatry 2005; 76: 343-8). Cases were segregated into earlier 
disease onset (25%), tremor dominant (31%), non-tremor dominant (36%) and rapid 
disease progression without dementia (8%) subgroups. We found a strong 
association between a non-tremor dominant disease pattern and cognitive 
disability. The earlier disease onset group had the longest duration to death, 
and greatest delay to the onset of falls and cognitive decline. Patients with a 
tremor dominant disease pattern did not live significantly longer than 
non-tremor dominant patients and showed no difference in mean time to onset of 
falls and hallucinations. Rapid disease progression was associated with older 
age, early depression and early midline motor symptoms, and in 70% of the cases, 
tremulous onset. The non-tremor dominant subgroup had a significantly higher 
mean pathological grading of cortical Lewy bodies than all other groupings (P < 
0.05) and more cortical amyloid-beta plaque load and cerebral amyloid angiopathy 
than early disease onset and tremor dominant groups (P = 0.047). An analysis of 
cases with pathologically defined neocortical Lewy body disease confirmed the 
link between bradykinetic onset, cognitive decline and Lewy body deposition in 
the neocortex. Although neuropathological examination failed to distinguish the 
other subtypes, the classification scheme was supported by an analysis of 
clinical data that were independent of the basic subgroup definitions.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp234
PMID: 19759203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2172. Trends Neurosci. 2009 Oct;32(10):548-57. doi: 10.1016/j.tins.2009.06.003. Epub 
2009 Sep 16.

Metabolic brain networks in neurodegenerative disorders: a functional imaging 
approach.

Eidelberg D(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurosciences, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, North 
Shore-LIJ Health System, Manhasset, NY, USA. david1@nshs.edu

Network analysis of functional brain imaging data is an innovative approach to 
study circuit abnormalities in neurodegenerative diseases. In Parkinson's 
disease, spatial covariance analysis of resting-state metabolic images has 
identified specific regional patterns associated with motor and cognitive 
symptoms. With functional imaging, these metabolic networks have recently been 
used to measure system-related progression and to evaluate novel treatment 
strategies. Network analysis is also being used to characterize specific 
functional biomarkers for Huntington's disease and Alzheimer's disease. These 
networks have been particularly helpful in uncovering compensatory mechanisms in 
genetically at-risk individuals. Ongoing developments in network applications 
are likely to enhance the role of functional imaging in the investigation of 
neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tins.2009.06.003
PMCID: PMC2782537
PMID: 19765835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2173. Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol. 2009 Nov;44 Suppl 2:15-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.regg.2009.06.009. Epub 2009 Sep 19.

[What should be done and not done throughout the process of dementia? Dialogue 
and aid].

[Article in Spanish]

Duaso Magaña E(1), Cuadra L, Capo M, Llonch M, Loutfi S, Fragoso M, Rodríguez D, 
Rey A.

Author information:
(1)Ambitos de Geriatría y Médico, Consorcio Sanitario de Terrassa, Terrassa, 
Barcelona, Spain. EDuaso@cst.cat

Because dementia is a powerful predictor of dependence, people with this disease 
are those that live longest with disability. Dementia is the chronic disease 
provoking the greatest dependence at 12, 24, and 36 months after diagnosis, 
ahead of other diseases such as stroke, Parkinson's disease and cardiovascular 
disease. Many of us are aware of the devastating consequences of dementia, but 
few know how to recognize the symptoms in the initial phases. To rectify this 
situation, increased public information and training for health professionals is 
required. To improve the care of the distinct phases of dementia, progress must 
be made in three areas: dementia must be considered a public health priority, 
the erroneous belief that nothing can be done for patients with a diagnosis of 
dementia must be combatted and, finally, no less importantly, knowledge of how 
to recognize incipient dementia must be acquired. People with dementia less 
frequently receive palliative care than patients with cancer, despite clearly 
sharing the need for care in the advances stages of the disease and frequent 
requests by relatives and carers. In summary, action can be taken to improve the 
early diagnosis of dementia and the care of the distinct phases of the disease, 
thus delaying and/or minimizing dependency. Finally, comfort measures at the end 
stage can be improved.

Copyright © 2009 SEGG. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regg.2009.06.009
PMID: 19766357 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2174. Psychiatry Res. 2009 Oct 30;174(1):76-80. doi: 
10.1016/j.pscychresns.2009.02.006. Epub 2009 Sep 19.

Decreased cardiac MIBG uptake, its correlation with clinical symptoms in 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Kobayashi S(1), Tateno M, Morii H, Utsumi K, Saito T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo, Hokkaido, 
Japan.

Recent studies have demonstrated the usefulness of 123I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine 
(MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy for the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB). In this study, we investigated the relationship between decreased cardiac 
MIBG uptake and clinical symptoms in DLB. Thirty-six patients with probable DLB 
and six normal controls underwent MIBG scintigraphy. We measured the early and 
delayed heart-to-mediastinum (H/M) ratios, and the results between subgroups 
based on the presence and absence of clinical symptoms were compared. The mean 
early and delayed H/M ratios were 1.55+/-0.29 and 1.42+/-0.30, and 30 (83.3%) 
and 33 (91.7%) subjects showed lower values compared to the cutoff, 
respectively. A statistically significant difference was found only between 
groups with and without orthostatic hypotension (OH). Among 10 DLB subjects 
without Parkinsonism, nine patients had a decreased H/M ratio in the delayed 
image. To our knowledge, this is the first study to correlate decreased MIBG 
uptake with the clinical symptoms of DLB, and to show a significantly lower H/M 
ratio in subjects with OH. Furthermore, we found that MIBG scintigraphy could 
detect cardiac sympathetic denervation regardless of clinically evident 
Parkinsonism. These results suggest that MIBG myocardial scintigraphy could be a 
valuable diagnostic test in the clinical diagnosis of DLB.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pscychresns.2009.02.006
PMID: 19766460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2175. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2009 Aug;7(4):210-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.07.001.

Determinants of antidepressant medication prescribing in elderly residents of 
aged care homes in Australia: a retrospective study.

Nishtala PS(1), McLachlan AJ, Bell JS, Chen TF.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Pharmacy, The University of Sydney, Sydney, Australia. 
prasadn@pharm.usyd.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Depression is underrecognized and poorly treated among older people 
living in aged care homes worldwide. Depression has been associated with higher 
rates of recurrence, disability, and death in older people.
OBJECTIVES: The primary objective of this study was to assess the determinants 
of antidepressant medication prescribing among older people living in aged care 
homes in Australia. A further objective was to investigate the anti-depressant 
medications in common use, doses of antidepressants, and concurrent 
pharmacotherapy among people receiving antidepressants.
METHODS: A random sample of 500 deidentified medication review reports was 
extracted from a database containing >165,000 Residential Medication Management 
Review reports. Residents' demographic and clinical characteristics, medical 
diagnoses, and prescribed medications were systematically extracted from these 
reports. Logistic regression models were used to determine factors associated 
with the prescribing of any antidepressant, including tricyclic antidepressants 
(TCAs), selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), and "other" 
antidepressants (eg, mianserin, mirtazapine, venlafaxine).
RESULTS: The mean (SD) age of the residents was 84.0 (9.0) years. Seventy-five 
percent were female. The prevalence of antidepressant prescribing among these 
aged care home residents was 33.0%. SSRIs were more commonly prescribed than 
TCAs, monoamine oxidase inhibitors, and other antidepressants. Antidepressants 
were more likely to be prescribed in people treated for dementia with mood 
disorder (odds ratio [OR] = 9.70; 95% CI, 5.26-17.88), depression (OR = 13.28; 
95% CI, 6.44-27.36), and Parkinson's disease (OR = 3.56; 95% CI, 1.37-9.23). 
SSRI prescribing was associated with dementia with mood disorder (OR = 5.85; 95% 
CI, 3.19-10.72) and depression (OR = 6.44; 95% CI, 3.38-12.26). TCA prescribing 
was associated with depression (OR = 2.95; 95% CI, 1.18-7.35) and concurrent 
benzodiazepine use (OR = 2.43; 95% CI, 1.03-5.72). Other antidepressant 
prescribing was associated with dementia with mood disorder (OR = 6.53; 95% CI, 
3.15-13.50) and depression (OR = 5.00; 95% CI, 2.23-11.19).
CONCLUSIONS: There was preferential prescribing of SSRI antidepressants among 
these older aged care home residents with depression. Cognitive impairment alone 
was not significantly associated with antidepressant prescribing; however, these 
aged care home residents with dementia and mood disorders had an increased 
likelihood of being treated with antidepressants. The prescribing of TCAs was 
significantly associated with concurrent benzodiazepine use.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2009.07.001
PMID: 19766953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2176. Mov Disord. 2009 Nov 15;24(15):2225-32. doi: 10.1002/mds.22757.

Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder in the transition to degenerative 
disease.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Vendette M, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) predicts Parkinson's disease (PD) 
and dementia. However, the nature of the disease that emerges from RBD has not 
been fully characterized. Since 2004, we have been conducting a prospective 
study of idiopathic RBD patients, providing an opportunity to directly observe 
patients as they transitioned to a defined neurodegenerative syndrome. Patients 
with idiopathic RBD underwent an extensive annual evaluation of motor function, 
olfaction, color vision, autonomic function, cognition and psychiatric symptoms. 
Neurodegenerative disease was defined according to standard criteria. We 
compared these measures in patients who had developed PD to those with dementia, 
all within the first year of developing disease. Of 67 patients, 6 developed PD 
and eleven developed dementia. Except for cognitive functioning, all tests of 
olfaction, color vision, autonomic function, depression, and quantitative 
measures of motor speed were similar in patients with PD and dementia. Of 
dementia patients, seven met criteria for probable Lewy body dementia (LBD) and 
four for Alzheimer's disease (or, possible LBD). In all probable LBD cases, the 
diagnosis was made because of parkinsonism, with no patient experiencing 
hallucinations or fluctuations. Patients with "Alzheimer's disease" seemed to 
have LBD, as they demonstrated typical LBD cognitive profiles on 
neuropsychological testing and were indistinguishable from LBD patients in 
ancillary measures. Therefore, among RBD patients with new-onset LBD, 
hallucinations or fluctuations are absent, suggesting that RBD is a reliable 
early sign of LBD. The indistinguishability of dementia and PD in all ancillary 
measures suggests a single unitary "RBD-then-neurodegeneration" process, the 
clinical presentation of which depends upon selective neuronal vulnerability.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22757
PMID: 19768814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2177. Rev Med Suisse. 2009 Aug 26;5(214):1650-5.

[Management of Parkinson's disease in 2009].

[Article in French]

Maertens de Noordhout A(1).

Author information:
(1)Service universitaire de neurologie, Hôpital de la Citadelle, Bd du 12e de 
ligne, 4000 Liège, Belgique. al.maertens@chu.ulg.ac.be

The cause of Parkinson's disease remains unknown and no cure or prevention 
exists so far. Levodopa remains by far the most potent symptomatic therapy, but 
induces side-effects such as motor fluctuations and abnormal movements, which 
can somewhat be counterbalanced by optimizing levodopa plasma levels or acting 
at receptors level with long half-life dopamine agonists. In severe cases, 
functional surgery with deep brain stimulation can be offered. Some 
non-dopaminergic symptoms like dementia, freezing, postural instability or 
dysautonomia do not respond to dopaminergic drugs and need special care.

PMID: 19772196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2178. Rev Neurol. 2009 Oct 1-15;49(7):363-9.

[Sense of smell, physiological ageing and neurodegenerative diseases: II. Ageing 
and neurodegenerative diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

Fusari A(1), Molina JA.

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Psicología, Universidad Nacional de Educación a Distancia, 
Madrid, España. ninafusari@googlemail.com

INTRODUCTION: The sense of smell, which was once studied because of its 
biological and evolutionary significance, is today one of the centres of 
interest in research on normal and pathological ageing. The latest scientific 
developments point to an inversely proportional relationship between age and 
olfactory sensitivity. In certain neurodegenerative diseases this sensory 
decline is one of the first symptoms of the disorder and is correlated with the 
progression of the disease.
DEVELOPMENT: In this work we are going to review the scientific knowledge on 
loss of sense of smell in ageing and in neurodegenerative diseases, with special 
attention given to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: A survey of studies that have examined the olfactory deficits in 
ageing and in some neurodegenerative diseases offers conclusive results about 
the presence of these impairments in the early stages of these disorders and 
even among healthy elderly persons. Although a number of causes contribute to 
these sensory losses in physiological ageing, a common neurological foundation 
has been proposed for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. Nevertheless, 
despite certain initial similarities, the olfactory deficits shown in these 
disorders seem to be qualitatively different.

PMID: 19774531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2179. BMC Bioinformatics. 2009 Aug 27;10 Suppl 8(Suppl 8):S7. doi: 
10.1186/1471-2105-10-S8-S7.

MtSNPscore: a combined evidence approach for assessing cumulative impact of 
mitochondrial variations in disease.

Bhardwaj A(1), Mukerji M, Sharma S, Paul J, Gokhale CS, Srivastava AK, Tiwari S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India. 
anshu@igib.res.in

BACKGROUND: Human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) variations have been implicated in a 
broad spectrum of diseases. With over 3000 mtDNA variations reported across 
databases, establishing pathogenicity of variations in mtDNA is a major 
challenge. We have designed and developed a comprehensive weighted scoring 
system (MtSNPscore) for identification of mtDNA variations that can impact 
pathogenicity and would likely be associated with disease. The criteria for 
pathogenicity include information available in the literature, predictions made 
by various in silico tools and frequency of variation in normal and patient 
datasets. The scoring scheme also assigns scores to patients and normal 
individuals to estimate the cumulative impact of variations. The method has been 
implemented in an automated pipeline and has been tested on Indian ataxia 
dataset (92 individuals), sequenced in this study, and other publicly available 
mtSNP dataset comprising of 576 mitochondrial genomes of Japanese individuals 
from six different groups, namely, patients with Parkinson's disease, patients 
with Alzheimer's disease, young obese males, young non-obese males, and type-2 
diabetes patients with or without severe vascular involvement. MtSNPscore, for 
analysis can extract information from variation data or from mitochondrial DNA 
sequences. It has a web-interface 
http://bioinformatics.ccmb.res.in/cgi-bin/snpscore/Mtsnpscore.pl that provides 
flexibility to update/modify the parameters for estimating pathogenicity.
RESULTS: Analysis of ataxia and mtSNP data suggests that rare variants comprise 
the largest part of disease associated variations. MtSNPscore predicted possible 
role of eight and 79 novel variations in ataxia and mtSNP datasets, 
respectively, in disease etiology. Analysis of cumulative scores of patient and 
normal data resulted in Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC) of ~0.5 and 
accuracy of ~0.7 suggesting that the method may also predict involvement of 
mtDNA variation in diseases.
CONCLUSION: We have developed a novel and comprehensive method for evaluation of 
mitochondrial variation and their involvement in disease. Our method has the 
most comprehensive set of parameters to assess mtDNA variations and overcomes 
the undesired bias generated as a result of better-studied diseases and genes. 
These variations can be prioritized for functional assays to confirm their 
pathogenic status.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2105-10-S8-S7
PMCID: PMC2745589
PMID: 19758471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2180. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Feb 15;289(1-2):49-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.042. Epub 
2009 Sep 23.

Olfactory system pathology as a model of Lewy neurodegenerative disease.

Duda JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education and Clinical Center/MS #127, 
Philadelphia VA Medical Center, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. john.duda@va.gov

Olfactory dysfunction has gained recognition as an early and nearly universal 
feature of Lewy body Parkinson's disease (PD). Recently, research efforts have 
focused on the use of early non-motor symptoms of PD as early biomarkers and 
have suggested that investigating neurodegeneration in the aspects of the 
nervous system subserving these symptoms may offer important insights into the 
pathophysiology of Lewy body PD. Therefore, there has been interest in 
characterizing the pathology observed in the olfactory bulb and system of 
patients with PD, dementia with Lewy bodies and perhaps more importantly, in 
subjects with incidental Lewy pathology, defined as people with Lewy pathology 
without evidence of Parkinsonism or dementia during life. The olfactory bulb may 
be ideally suited to investigations into the pathophysiology of the Lewy body 
disorders as it is one of the few areas of the brain wherein the entirety of 
neurons susceptible to Lewy neurodegeneration, including the dendritic 
arborization, cell soma, axon and synaptic terminals, can be examined in the 
same preparation. Interestingly, there is a lack of Lewy neurodegeneration in 
the dopaminergic neurons of the olfactory bulb and paradoxically, an apparent 
increase in dopaminergic neurons in some PD patients compared to controls. In 
this report, the known neuropathology of the olfactory system in PD will be 
reviewed and the advantages of investigating degeneration of the olfactory bulb 
as a model of Lewy neurodegeneration will be discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.08.042
PMID: 19783257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2181. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009 Nov;57(11):1975-81. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02493.x. Epub 2009 Sep 28.

Blood pressure and brain injury in older adults: findings from a community-based 
autopsy study.

Wang LY(1), Larson EB, Sonnen JA, Shofer JB, McCormick W, Bowen JD, Montine TJ, 
Li G.

Author information:
(1)Mental Illness Research and Education Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Healthcare System, Seattle, Washington 98108, USA. 
wanglucy@u.washington.edu

Comment in
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 2009 Nov;57(11):2146-7.

OBJECTIVES: To examine correlations between blood pressure (BP) and 
dementia-related pathological brain changes in a community-based autopsy sample.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
SETTING: A large health maintenance organization in Seattle, Washington.
PARTICIPANTS: A cohort of 250 participants aged 65 and older and cognitively 
normal at time of enrollment in the Adult Changes in Thought (ACT) Study and who 
underwent autopsy.
MEASUREMENTS: BP and history of antihypertensive treatment were taken at 
enrollment. A linear regression model was used to examine the relationship 
between BP (systolic (SBP) and diastolic (DBP)) at enrollment and pathological 
changes in the cerebrum (cystic macroscopic infarcts, microinfarcts, neuritic 
plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, and cortical Lewy bodies).
RESULTS: The presence of more than 2 microinfarcts, but not any other 
pathological change, was independently associated with SBP in younger 
participants (65-80, n=137) but not in older participants (>80, n=91). The 
relative risk (RR) for more than two microinfarcts with each 10-mmHg increase in 
SBP was 1.15 (95% confidence interval (CI)=1.00-1.33) in the younger 
participants, adjusted for age at entry, sex, and time to death. This RR was 
particularly strong in younger participants not taking antihypertensive 
medications (RR=1.48, 95% CI=1.21, 1.81); significant associations were not 
observed in participants treated for hypertension. Findings for DBP were 
negative.
CONCLUSION: The association between high SBP and cerebrovascular damage in 
untreated older adults (65-80) suggests that adequate hypertension treatment may 
reduce dementia risk by minimizing microvascular injury to cerebrum.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2009.02493.x
PMCID: PMC2818442
PMID: 19793158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The editor in chief has 
reviewed the conflict of interest checklist provided by the authors and has 
determined that the authors have no financial or any other kind of personal 
conflicts with this paper.


2182. J Neurol. 2010 Mar;257(3):359-66. doi: 10.1007/s00415-009-5324-y. Epub 2009 Oct 
1.

Low sensitivity in clinical diagnoses of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Nelson PT(1), Jicha GA, Kryscio RJ, Abner EL, Schmitt FA, Cooper G, Xu LO, Smith 
CD, Markesbery WR.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuropathology, Department of Pathology, University of Kentucky 
Medical Center, University of Kentucky, Rm 311, Sanders-Brown Building, 800 S. 
Limestone, Lexington, KY 40536-0230, USA. pnels2@email.uky.edu

The success of future neurodegenerative disease (ND) therapies depends partly on 
accurate antemortem diagnoses. Relatively few prior studies have been performed 
on large, multicenter-derived datasets to test the accuracy of final clinical ND 
diagnoses in relation to definitive neuropathological findings. Data were 
analyzed from the University of Kentucky Alzheimer's Disease Center autopsy 
series and from the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) registry. 
NACC data are derived from 31 different academic medical centers, each with 
strong clinical expertise and infrastructure pertaining to NDs. The final 
clinical diagnoses were compared systematically with subsequent neuropathology 
diagnoses. Among subjects meeting final inclusion criteria (N = 2,861 for NACC 
Registry data), the strength of the associations between clinical diagnoses and 
subsequent ND diagnoses was only moderate. This was particularly true in the 
case of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB): the sensitivity of clinical diagnoses 
was quite low (32.1% for pure DLB and 12.1% for Alzheimer's disease (AD + DLB) 
although specificity was over 95%. AD clinical diagnoses were more accurate 
(85.0% sensitivity and 51.1% specificity). The accuracy of clinical DLB 
diagnoses became somewhat lower over the past decade, due apparently to 
increased "over-calling" the diagnosis in patients with severe cognitive 
impairment. Furthermore, using visual hallucinations, extrapyramidal signs, 
and/or fluctuating cognition as part of the clinical criteria for DLB diagnosis 
was of minimal utility in a group (N = 237) with high prevalence of severe 
dementia. Our data suggest that further work is needed to refine our ability to 
identify specific aging-related brain disease mechanisms, especially in DLB.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-009-5324-y
PMCID: PMC2839040
PMID: 19795154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2183. J Bioenerg Biomembr. 2009 Oct;41(5):407-10. doi: 10.1007/s10863-009-9240-8.

Mitochondrial haplogroups associated with Japanese Alzheimer's patients.

Takasaki S(1).

Author information:
(1)Toyo University, Izumino 1-1-1, Ora-gun Itakuracho, Gunma, Japan. 
s_takasaki@toyonet.toyo.ac.jp

The relationships between Japanese Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and their 
mitochondrial single nucleotide polymorphism (mtSNP) frequencies at individual 
mtDNA positions of the entire mitochondrial genome are described using the 
radial basis function (RBF) network and the modified method. Japanese AD 
patients are associated with the haplogroups G2a, B4c1, and N9b1. In addition, 
to compare mitochondrial haplogroups of the AD patients with those of other 
classes of Japanese people, the relationships between four classes of Japanese 
people (i.e., Japanese centenarians, Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, type 2 
diabetic (T2D) patients, and non-obese young males) and their mtSNPs are also 
described. The four classes of people are associated with following haplogroups: 
Japanese centenarians-M7b2, D4b2a, and B5b; Japanese PD patients-M7b2, B4e, and 
B5b; Japanese T2D patients-B5b, M8a1, G, D4, and F1; and Japanese healthy 
non-obese young males-D4g and D4b1b. The haplogroups of the AD patients are 
therefore different from those of the other four classes of Japanese people. As 
the analysis method described in this article can predict a person's mtSNP 
constitution and the probabilities of becoming an AD patient, centenarian, PD 
patient, or T2D patient, it may be useful in initial diagnosis of various 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s10863-009-9240-8
PMID: 19795196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2184. Mov Disord. 2009 Nov 15;24(15):2203-10. doi: 10.1002/mds.22594.

Cerebrospinal tau, phospho-tau, and beta-amyloid and neuropsychological 
functions in Parkinson's disease.

Compta Y(1), Martí MJ, Ibarretxe-Bilbao N, Junqué C, Valldeoriola F, Muñoz E, 
Ezquerra M, Ríos J, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Institut Clínic de Neurociències, 
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Centro de 
Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, Hospital Clínic, 
Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Alzheimer's disease (AD)-pathology may play a role in Parkinson's disease 
(PD)-related dementia (PDD). The aim of this study was to assess cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) levels of tau, phospho-tau, and beta-amyloid, proposed AD 
biomarkers, and their relationship with cognitive function in PD. Forty PD 
patients [20 nondemented (PDND); 20 PDD] and 30 controls underwent CSF tau, 
phospho-tau, and beta-amyloid analysis using specific ELISA techniques. All PD 
patients and 15 controls underwent neuropsychological testing of 
fronto-subcortical (attention, fluency) and neocortical (memory, naming, 
visuoperceptive) functions. CSF markers levels were compared between groups, and 
compared and correlated with neuropsychological measures in PDND and PDD 
separately and as a continuum (PD). CSF tau and phospho-tau were higher in PDD 
than in PDND and controls (P < 0.05). CSF beta-amyloid ranged from high 
(controls) to intermediate (PDND) and low (PDD) levels (P < 0.001). In all PD 
and PDD patients, high CSF tau and phospho-tau were associated with impaired 
memory and naming. In PDND, CSF beta-amyloid was related with phonetic fluency. 
These findings suggest underlying AD-pathology in PDD in association with 
cortical cognitive dysfunction, and that low CSF beta-amyloid in PDND patients 
with impaired phonetic fluency can constitute an early marker of cognitive 
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22594
PMID: 19795497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2185. Neurologia. 2009 Jul-Aug;24(6):399-418.

[The complexes of degenerative dementias: an evolution from disease to 
spectrum].

[Article in Spanish]

Robles A(1).

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neurología Cognitiva, Hospital La Rosaleda, Santiago de Compostela 
(A Coruña). aroblesb@meditex.es

INTRODUCTION: Everyone has a particular combination of risk polymorphisms and 
occasionally determinant mutations, related to molecular items which are 
pathogenetic in degenerative dementias. If we add other epigenetic factors to 
this, we can generate a very heterogeneous base, which explains why these 
diseases manifest through varied clinical and neuropathological phenotypes, 
distributed in <<complexes>> (groups of entities with symptomatic, 
neurochemical, histopathologic and proteinopathic affinities).
METHOD: A review of the current knowledge about phenotype variants of 
degenerative dementias has been carried out, detecting overlapping and divergent 
aspects between them and generating groups (complexes) which are more operative 
to work with, instead of using the current independent entities (diseases).
RESULTS: Besides the known Pick complex, there are sufficient data to propose 
the recognition of the Lewy complex, Alzheimer complex, multisystemic atrophy 
complex, and polyglutamine complex. Each one of them contains phenotypic 
variants that overlap with other complex variants, creating links between all 
the complexes and forming a spectrum in which almost all degenerative dementias 
can be included.
CONCLUSIONS: The progression of medical knowledge has made it more appropriate 
to locate each patient at a specific point in a complex, in the degenerative 
dementia spectrum, instead of diagnosing a generic disease. This change makes it 
recommendable to adjust the diagnostic criteria, and the therapeutic decisions 
should be designed individually according to their specific location in a 
complex. Researchers should also take into account this diversity when 
establishing both the criteria for selecting participants and the objectives of 
their therapeutic trials.

PMID: 19798607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2186. Brain. 2009 Nov;132(Pt 11):2958-69. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp245. Epub 2009 Oct 7.

The distinct cognitive syndromes of Parkinson's disease: 5 year follow-up of the 
CamPaIGN cohort.

Williams-Gray CH(1), Evans JR, Goris A, Foltynie T, Ban M, Robbins TW, Brayne C, 
Kolachana BS, Weinberger DR, Sawcer SJ, Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0PY, UK. 
chm27@cam.ac.uk

Cognitive abnormalities are common in Parkinson's disease, with important social 
and economic implications. Factors influencing their evolution remain unclear 
but are crucial to the development of targeted therapeutic strategies. We have 
investigated the development of cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson's 
disease using a longitudinal approach in a population-representative incident 
cohort (CamPaIGN study, n = 126) and here present the 5-year follow-up data from 
this study. Our previous work has implicated two genetic factors in the 
development of cognitive dysfunction in Parkinson's disease, namely the genes 
for catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT Val(158)Met) and microtubule-associated 
protein tau (MAPT) H1/H2. Here, we have explored the influence of these genes in 
our incident cohort and an additional cross-sectional prevalent cohort (n = 
386), and investigated the effect of MAPT H1/H2 haplotypes on tau transcription 
in post-mortem brain samples from patients with Lewy body disease and controls. 
Seventeen percent of incident patients developed dementia over 5 years 
[incidence 38.7 (23.9-59.3) per 1000 person-years]. We have demonstrated that 
three baseline measures, namely, age >or=72 years, semantic fluency less than 20 
words in 90 s and inability to copy an intersecting pentagons figure, are 
significant predictors of dementia risk, thus validating our previous findings. 
In combination, these factors had an odds ratio of 88 for dementia within the 
first 5 years from diagnosis and may reflect the syndrome of mild cognitive 
impairment of Parkinson's disease. Phonemic fluency and other frontally based 
tasks were not associated with dementia risk. MAPT H1/H1 genotype was an 
independent predictor of dementia risk (odds ratio = 12.1) and the H1 versus H2 
haplotype was associated with a 20% increase in transcription of 4-repeat tau in 
Lewy body disease brains. In contrast, COMT genotype had no effect on dementia, 
but a significant impact on Tower of London performance, a frontostriatally 
based executive task, which was dynamic, such that the ability to solve this 
task changed with disease progression. Hence, we have identified three highly 
informative predictors of dementia in Parkinson's disease, which can be easily 
translated into the clinic, and established that MAPT H1/H1 genotype is an 
important risk factor with functional effects on tau transcription. Our work 
suggests that the dementing process in Parkinson's disease is predictable and 
related to tau while frontal-executive dysfunction evolves independently with a 
more dopaminergic basis and better prognosis.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp245
PMID: 19812213 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2187. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2009 Jul-Sep;23(3):224-8. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e318199dd7d.

Association between BDNF Val66Met polymorphism and Alzheimer disease, dementia 
with Lewy bodies, and Pick disease.

Fehér A(1), Juhász A, Rimanóczy A, Kálmán J, Janka Z.

Author information:
(1)University of Szeged, Department of Psychiatry, 6 Semmelweis Street, Szeged, 
Hungary. fehera@nepsy.szote.u-szeged.hu

A functional polymorphism of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF 
Val66Met) has been reported to affect memory-related hippocampal activity. 
Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene polymorphism is known to be associated with 
Alzheimer disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and Pick disease (PiD). 
We tested the hypothesis that BDNF Val and ApoE epsilon4 alleles confer 
susceptibility to AD, DLB, and PiD. The study included 160 AD, 34 DLB patients, 
38 autopsy-confirmed PiD, and 164 age-matched healthy control (HC) probands. The 
frequency of the BDNF Val allele was significantly higher in AD, but there were 
no statistical differences in the allele distribution in PiD or in DLB as 
compared with HC. The Val/Met genotype occurred with statistically significantly 
higher frequency in PiD than in HC. The ApoE epsilon4 allele was significantly 
overrepresented in all dementias as compared with HC. Genotypes containing both 
ApoE epsilon4 and BDNF Val alleles occurred more frequently in all investigated 
dementias than in HC. We suggest that the presence of the BDNF Val allele in 
itself and in combination with the ApoE epsilon4 allele can be risk factors for 
AD, and the results indicate a synergistic effect of the 2 polymorphisms on DLB 
and PiD risk.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e318199dd7d
PMID: 19812463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2188. J Clin Neurol. 2009 Sep;5(3):133-8. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2009.5.3.133. Epub 2009 Sep 
30.

Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease without dementia: subtypes and 
influences of age.

Kim JW(1), Cheon SM, Park MJ, Kim SY, Jo HY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Dong-A University, Busan, 
Korea.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Cognitive impairments are common in Parkinson's disease 
(PD), although the severity of these impairments does not significantly impair 
the patient's daily activities. The aim of this study was to determine the 
frequency of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) of Parkinson's disease (PDMCI) and 
its subtypes in nondemented PD patients. We also evaluated the influence of age 
on the pattern of subtypes of PDMCI.
METHODS: A total of 141 consecutive, nondemented PD patients underwent a 
comprehensive neuropsychological assessment covering the five cognitive domains: 
attention, language, visuospatial, memory, and executive functions. PDMCI was 
defined as impaired performance in at least one of these five cognitive domains. 
The influence of age on the distribution of subtypes of PDMCI was assessed by 
comparing patients in two groups dichotomized according to their age at 
assessment (younger vs. older).
RESULTS: Fifty-seven (40.4%) of the nondemented PD patients had an impairment in 
at least one domain, and were therefore considered as having PDMCI. The age at 
assessment and age at disease onset were significantly higher in the PDMCI 
patients. The amnestic type of PDMCI was the most frequent, followed by the 
visuospatial, linguistic, executive, and attention types in that order. The 
frequency of PDMCI was higher for all subtypes in the older group; the domain 
that was influenced the most by age was executive function.
CONCLUSIONS: MCI was common in PD and the subtypes were diverse. Age was found 
to be an important risk factor for the development of PDMCI, particularly for 
the executive subtype. These results indicate that the concept of MCI should be 
introduced in PD.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2009.5.3.133
PMCID: PMC2760718
PMID: 19826564


2189. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2010 Mar;16(3):228-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.09.008. Epub 2009 Oct 14.

alpha-Synuclein multiplication analysis in Italian familial Parkinson disease.

Sironi F(1), Trotta L, Antonini A, Zini M, Ciccone R, Della Mina E, Meucci N, 
Sacilotto G, Primignani P, Brambilla T, Coviello DA, Pezzoli G, Goldwurm S.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, via Bignami 1, 
20126 Milan, Italy.

The alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA) multiplication causes autosomal dominant 
Parkinson Disease (PD): triplication is associated with early-onset rapidly 
progressing parkinsonism with a strong likelihood of developing dementia, while 
duplication is associated with a less severe phenotype similar to idiopathic PD. 
We tested for SNCA multiplication 144 unrelated PD patients with a dominant 
family history. We identified one patient with SNCA duplication (0.7%). The 
SNCA-duplicated patient was a woman of 45 years of age with PD onset at 41 years 
of age. She experienced a rapidly progressive disease with early motor 
complications (on/off fluctuations and dyskinesias). Medical records confirmed 
that the proband's mother developed PD at 47 years of age and died at 63 with 
dementia. She experienced rapid progression in both motor and cognitive 
symptoms: development of dementia at 54 years of age, 7 years after onset. 
Although SNCA duplication is an unusual cause of familial PD testing for it is 
worthwhile. The clinical presentation of duplicated cases may be more aggressive 
than usual.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2009.09.008
PMID: 19833540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2190. ASN Neuro. 2009 Nov 9;1(4):e00019. doi: 10.1042/AN20090042.

Animal models for Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia: a 
perspective.

Götz J(1), Götz NN.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia.

In dementia research, animal models have become indispensable tools. They not 
only model aspects of the human condition, but also simulate processes that 
occur in humans and hence provide insight into how disease is initiated and 
propagated. The present review discusses two prominent human neurodegenerative 
disorders, Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia. It discusses what we 
would like to model in animals and highlights some of the more recent 
achievements using species as diverse as mice, fish, flies and worms. Advances 
in imaging and therapy are explored. We also discuss some anticipated new models 
and developments. These will reveal how key players in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease and frontotemporal dementia, such as the peptide Aβ (amyloid 
β) and the protein tau, cause neuronal dysfunction and eventually, neuronal 
demise. Understanding these processes fully will lead to early diagnosis and 
therapy.

DOI: 10.1042/AN20090042
PMCID: PMC2785514
PMID: 19839939


2191. Br J Gen Pract. 2009 Oct;59(567):e329-38. doi: 10.3399/bjgp09X472629.

Identification of new risk factors for pneumonia: population-based case-control 
study.

Vinogradova Y(1), Hippisley-Cox J, Coupland C.

Author information:
(1)Division of Primary Care, University of Nottingham, Nottingham. 
yana.vinogradova@nottingham.ac.uk

Comment in
    Br J Gen Pract. 2009 Oct;59(567):716-7.

BACKGROUND: Certain conditions are established as risk factors for 
community-acquired pneumonia. There are a number of other conditions that may 
also be risk factors, but information on these is limited.
AIM: To determine new independent risk factors for community-acquired pneumonia 
using a very large primary care database.
DESIGN OF STUDY: Nested case-control study.
SETTING: Four hundred and forty-three general practices in the UK contributing 
to the QRESEARCH database.
METHOD: A total of 17 172 incident cases of all ages diagnosed with pneumonia 
between 1996 and 2005 were matched with up to five controls by age, sex, general 
practice, and calendar year. Associations between pneumonia and each established 
condition and potential risk factors were determined with odds ratios (ORs), 
using multiple conditional logistic regression analysis adjusted for smoking, 
socioeconomic status, and use of influenza and pneumococcal vaccines.
RESULTS: The analysis confirmed the higher risk of pneumonia among patients with 
at least one of the established risk factors; the adjusted OR was 2.29 (95% 
confidence interval [CI]=2.20 to 2.39). In addition, patients with the following 
conditions had a higher risk of pneumonia despite adjustment for known risk 
factors and confounders: stroke or transient ischaemic attack, rheumatoid 
arthritis, Parkinson's disease, cancers, multiple sclerosis, dementia, and 
osteoporosis. The adjusted OR for pneumonia among patients without an 
established risk factor but with at least one of the new conditions was 2.44 
(95% CI=2.24 to 2.65).
CONCLUSION: As well as confirming some established risk factors, this study has 
determined seven new independent risk factors for community-acquired pneumonia.

DOI: 10.3399/bjgp09X472629
PMCID: PMC2751937
PMID: 19843413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2192. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2009;28(4):314-9. doi: 10.1159/000249145. Epub 2009 
Oct 21.

Cerebrospinal fluid total tau is associated with shorter survival in dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Boström F(1), Hansson O, Blennow K, Gerhardsson L, Lundh T, Minthon L, 
Zetterberg H, Londos E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, University Hospital MAS, Malmö, Sweden. 
fredrik.bostrom@skane.se

A pathology typical of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) has been demonstrated to 
increase mortality to a greater extent than the pathology of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). However, mortality in DLB has also been shown to increase with concomitant 
AD pathology. Furthermore, in a recent publication, we showed that there is a 
robust and specific increase in CSF calcium and magnesium in DLB patients 
compared to both AD patients and controls. Thus, in order to explore the 
influence of CSF AD markers and trace element concentrations on mortality in 
DLB, we undertook a longitudinal prospective study of 47 clinically diagnosed 
DLB patients and 157 AD patients as well as 49 healthy volunteers. Both AD and 
DLB patients showed an increased mortality compared to the healthy controls 
(relative risk: 10 and 8, respectively; p < 0.001). Increased levels of CSF 
total tau were associated with increased mortality among the DLB patients (p < 
0.05), but not among the AD patients or controls. Gender, age, MMSE score, 
Abeta42 concentration and phosphorylated tau, and CSF trace element 
concentrations did not influence survival in the obtained models.

2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000249145
PMID: 19844105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2193. Mov Disord. 2009 Nov 15;24(15):2277-81. doi: 10.1002/mds.22477.

Gene expression changes in blood as a putative biomarker for Huntington's 
disease.

Lovrecic L(1), Kastrin A, Kobal J, Pirtosek Z, Krainc D, Peterlin B.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Genetics, University Medical Centre, Ljubljana, 
Slovenia.

Several studies demonstrated alterations of gene expression in blood in various 
neurological disorders including Huntington's disease (HD). Using microarray 
technology, a recent study identified a large number of significantly altered 
mRNAs in HD blood, from which a 12-gene set was selected as classifier for 
discriminating controls and HD patients. The aim of our study was to validate 
expression changes of these 12 genes in an independent cohort of HD patients and 
evaluate their sensitivity and specificity. Four different subject groups were 
included--patients with HD, Parkinson's disease (PD), acute ischemic stroke (AS) 
and healthy controls. Although the previous results were successfully validated, 
gene expression changes in HD blood partly overlapped with those observed in 
blood from PD and AS patients. Predictive value of the selected biomarker set 
for HD group was 78%, with 82% sensitivity and 53% specificity. Further gene 
expression analyses in longitudinal studies are needed to validate and refine 
possible transcriptomic blood biomarkers in HD.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22477
PMID: 19844910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2194. Eur J Neurol. 2010 Jan;17(1):3-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02799.x. Epub 
2009 Oct 21.

Another connection between essential tremor and Parkinson's disease?

Louis ED.

Comment in
    Eur J Neurol. 2010 Sep;17(9):e89.

Comment on
    Eur J Neurol. 2010 Jan;17(1):152-9.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2009.02799.x
PMID: 19845748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2195. Exp Gerontol. 2010 Jan;45(1):30-40. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2009.10.010. Epub 2009 
Oct 22.

Total and phosphorylated tau protein as biological markers of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Hampel H(1), Blennow K, Shaw LM, Hoessler YC, Zetterberg H, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Discipline of Psychiatry, School of Medicine & Trinity College Institute of 
Neuroscience, Laboratory of Neuroimaging & Biomarker Research, Trinity College, 
University of Dublin, The Adelaide and Meath Hospital Incorporating The National 
Children's Hospital, Tallaght, Dublin, Ireland. 
harald.hampel@med.uni-muenchen.de

Advances in our understanding of tau-mediated neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) are moving this disease pathway to center stage for the development 
of biomarkers and disease modifying drug discovery efforts. Immunoassays were 
developed detecting total (t-tau) and tau phosphorylated at specific epitopes 
(p-tauX) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), methods to analyse tau in blood are at 
the experimental beginning. Clinical research consistently demonstrated CSF t- 
and p-tau increased in AD compared to controls. Measuring these tau species 
proved informative for classifying AD from relevant differential diagnoses. Tau 
phosphorylated at threonine 231 (p-tau231) differentiated between AD and 
frontotemporal dementia, tau phosphorylated at serine 181 (p-tau181) enhanced 
classification between AD and dementia with Lewy bodies. T- and p-tau are 
considered "core" AD biomarkers that have been successfully validated by 
controlled large-scale multi-center studies. Tau biomarkers are implemented in 
clinical trials to reflect biological activity, mechanisms of action of 
compounds, support enrichment of target populations, provide endpoints for 
proof-of-concept and confirmatory trials on disease modification. World-wide 
quality control initiatives are underway to set required methodological and 
protocol standards. Discussions with regulatory authorities gain momentum 
defining the role of tau biomarkers for trial designs and how they may be 
further qualified for surrogate marker status.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2009.10.010
PMCID: PMC2815003
PMID: 19853650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2196. J Neurol Sci. 2010 Jan 15;288(1-2):88-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.09.033. Epub 
2009 Oct 24.

Hypoperfusion of the motor cortex associated with parkinsonism in dementia with 
Lewy bodies.

Takahashi R(1), Ishii K, Shimada K, Ohkawa S, Nishimura Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nishi-Kobe Medical Center, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. 
ryuichi59@yahoo.co.jp

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to investigate the impact of parkinsonism on 
regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHOD: Forty-four probable DLB patients, comprising 13 patients without 
parkinsonism and 31 patients with parkinsonism, and 16 normal controls were 
selected for this study. We evaluated the rCBF in each group by means of 
N-isopropyl-p-[(123)I] iodoamphetamine (IMP) and single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT). The rCBF in the different groups was compared using 
voxel-by-voxel Statistical Parametrical Mapping (SPM).
RESULT: Patients with DLB showed low rCBF in the frontal, temporal, and 
occipital cortex with relative sparing of the paracentral region. DLB patients 
with parkinsonism (DLB-P) had lower rCBF in the primary motor cortex (M1) and 
left supplementary motor area (SMA) than DLB patients without parkinsonism 
(DLB-nonP). DLB-nonP patients showed decreased rCBF in the left 
temporo-occipital region.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that two distinct clinical entities are involved 
in DLB. In addition, CBF changes in the M1 and SMA are seen in the early stages 
of Parkinson's disease. This result would help in diagnosing DLB in the context 
of Lewy body (LB) disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2009.09.033
PMID: 19854452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2197. Brain. 2009 Dec;132(Pt 12):3308-17. doi: 10.1093/brain/awp263.

Cerebrospinal hypocretin, daytime sleepiness and sleep architecture in 
Parkinson's disease dementia.

Compta Y(1), Santamaria J, Ratti L, Tolosa E, Iranzo A, Muñoz E, Valldeoriola F, 
Casamitjana R, Ríos J, Marti MJ.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, ICN, IDIBAPS, CIBERNED, Hospital Clínic, 
c./Villarroel 170, 08036, Barcelona, Spain.

Excessive daytime sleepiness is common in Parkinson's disease and has been 
associated with Parkinson's disease-related dementia. Narcoleptic features have 
been observed in Parkinson's disease patients with excessive daytime sleepiness 
and hypocretin cell loss has been found in the hypothalamus of Parkinson's 
disease patients, in association with advanced disease. However, studies on 
cerebrospinal fluid levels of hypocretin-1 (orexin A) in Parkinson's disease 
have been inconclusive. Reports of sleep studies in Parkinson's disease patients 
with and without excessive daytime sleepiness have also been disparate, pointing 
towards a variety of causes underlying excessive daytime sleepiness. In this 
study, we aimed to measure cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin-1 levels in 
Parkinson's disease patients with and without dementia and to study their 
relationship to dementia and clinical excessive daytime sleepiness, as well as 
to describe potentially related sleep architecture changes. Twenty-one 
Parkinson's disease patients without dementia and 20 Parkinson's disease 
patients with dementia, along with 22 control subjects without sleep complaints, 
were included. Both Epworth sleepiness scale, obtained with the help of the 
caregivers, and mini-mental state examination were recorded. Lumbar 
cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin-1 levels were measured in all individuals using a 
radio-immunoassay technique. Additionally, eight Parkinson's disease patients 
without dementia and seven Parkinson's disease patients with dementia underwent 
video-polysomnogram and multiple sleep latencies test. Epworth sleepiness scale 
scores were higher in Parkinson's disease patients without dementia and 
Parkinson's disease patients with dementia than controls (P < 0.01) and scores 
>10 were more frequent in Parkinson's disease patients with dementia than in 
Parkinson's disease patients without dementia (P = 0.04). Cerebrospinal fluid 
hypocretin-1 levels were similar among groups (controls = 321.15 +/- 47.15 
pg/ml; without dementia = 300.99 +/- 58.68 pg/ml; with dementia = 309.94 +/- 
65.95 pg/ml; P = 0.67), and unrelated to either epworth sleepiness scale or 
mini-mental state examination. Dominant occipital frequency awake was slower in 
Parkinson's disease patients with dementia than Parkinson's disease patients 
without dementia (P = 0.05). Presence of slow dominant occipital frequency 
and/or loss of normal non-rapid eye movement sleep architecture was more 
frequent among Parkinson's disease patients with dementia (P = 0.029). Thus, 
excessive daytime sleepiness is more frequent in Parkinson's disease patients 
with dementia than Parkinson's disease patients without dementia, but lumbar 
cerebrospinal fluid hypocretin-1 levels are normal and unrelated to severity of 
sleepiness or the cognitive status. Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid does not 
accurately reflect the hypocretin cell loss known to occur in the hypothalamus 
of advanced Parkinson's disease. Alternatively, mechanisms other than hypocretin 
cells dysfunction may be responsible for excessive daytime sleepiness and the 
sleep architecture alterations seen in these patients.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awp263
PMID: 19858078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2198. Neurology. 2009 Oct 27;73(17):1381-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181bd80c1.

Anemia or low hemoglobin levels preceding Parkinson disease: a case-control 
study.

Savica R(1), Grossardt BR, Carlin JM, Icen M, Bower JH, Ahlskog JE, Maraganore 
DM, Steensma DP, Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA. rocca@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2010 May 18;74(20):1655; author reply 1655-6.

OBJECTIVE: It has been suggested that anemia may be a risk factor for dementia, 
for restless legs syndrome, and for Parkinson disease (PD). Thus, we 
investigated the association of anemia with the subsequent risk of PD using a 
case-control study design.
METHODS: We used the medical records-linkage system of the Rochester 
Epidemiology Project to identify 196 subjects who developed PD in Olmsted 
County, Minnesota, from 1976 through 1995. Each incident case was matched by age 
(+/-1 year) and sex to a general population control. We reviewed the complete 
medical records of cases and controls in the system to detect anemia defined 
using the World Health Organization criteria.
RESULTS: Anemia was more common in the history of cases than of controls (odds 
ratio 2.00, 95% confidence interval 1.31-3.06, p = 0.001). The association 
remained significant after adjustment for cigarette smoking, exposure to 
pesticides, or hysterectomy (in women). The association was not significantly 
different between men and women, or between PD patients with or without rest 
tremor. Analyses stratified by time of onset of anemia showed a greater 
association for anemia that started 20 to 29 years before the onset of PD. 
Hemoglobin levels were slightly but consistently lower in cases than in controls 
across all ages.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support an association between anemia experienced early 
in life and the later development of Parkinson disease. The interpretation of 
this association remains uncertain.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3181bd80c1
PMCID: PMC2769554
PMID: 19858460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2199. Nervenarzt. 2009 Nov;80(11):1275-82. doi: 10.1007/s00115-009-2806-1.

[Personality in old age].

[Article in German]

Förstl H(1), Perneczky R, Karenberg A, Diehl-Schmid J, Lautenschlager NT.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Technische 
Universität München, 81675 München. hans.foerstl@lrz.tu-muenchen.de

Modern developmental psychology tends to draw a positive, resource-based picture 
of human aging. We will however focus on more difficult aspects of personality 
in old age which are of psychiatric relevance: the persistence of cluster A and 
C personality disorders, antisocial personality in the elderly; the interaction 
of personality and a detection of mild cognitive impairment (MCI); personality 
features as risk or protective factors or early signs of Alzheimer's dementia; 
changes of personality in Parkinson's disease and frontotemporal dementia. We 
will briefly mention recent neuroimaging studies which appear to suggest a 
functional neuroanatomy of personality. A quote from Cicero's cato major, de 
senectute indicates that some of his perceptions regarding classic personality 
characteristics of the elderly can be recognized in our patients and can be 
prevented or treated with modern interventions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-009-2806-1
PMID: 19859685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2200. Curr Mol Med. 2009 Sep;9(7):801-13. doi: 10.2174/156652409789105534.

Mining the genome for susceptibility to complex neurological disorders.

Gubitz AK(1), Gwinn K.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, NIH, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.

Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have become increasingly widely used to 
determine regions of the genome which may contain loci influencing the risk of 
neurological disorders. While linkage studies have identified genes that cause a 
number of Mendelian disorders, linkage analysis is less well suited for the more 
common complex disorders. This has led to the widespread use of GWAS for that 
purpose. Here we present and discuss several of the major extant GWAS in 
neurological disorders, their limitations, and implications of findings to date.

DOI: 10.2174/156652409789105534
PMID: 19860660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]