301. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Jul 18;92(15):6892-5. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.92.15.6892.

A mitochondrial DNA clone is associated with increased risk for Alzheimer 
disease.

Hutchin T(1), Cortopassi G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

Severe mitochondrial genetic mutations lead to early degeneration of specific 
human tissues; milder mitochondrial mutations may cause degeneration at a later 
point in life. A mutation at position 4336 was reported to occur at increased 
frequency in individuals with Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease 
[Shoffner, J. M., Brown, M. D., Torroni, A., Lott, M. T., Cabell, M. F., Mirra, 
S. S., Beal, M. F., Yang, C.-C., Gearing, M., Salvo, R., Watts, R. L., Juncos, 
J. L., Hansen, L. A., Crain, B. J., Fayad, M., Reckord, C. L. & Wallace, D. C. 
(1993) Genomics 17, 171-184]. We have investigated the notion that this mutation 
leads to excess risk of AD by using a case-control study design of 72 AD 
autopsies and 296 race- and age-matched controls. The 4336G mutation occurred at 
higher frequency in AD autopsies than age-matched controls, a statistically 
significant difference. Evolutionary analysis of mtDNAs bearing the 4336G 
mutation indicated they were more closely related to each other than to other 
mtDNAs, consistent with the model of a single origin for this mutation. The 
tight evolutionary relatedness and homoplasmy of mtDNAs that confer elevated 
risk for a late-onset disease contrast strikingly with the distant relatedness 
and heteroplasmy of mitochondrial genomes that cause early-onset disease. The 
dichotomy can be explained by a lack of selection against mutations that confer 
a phenotype at advanced age during most of the evolution of humans. We estimate 
that approximately 1.5 million Caucasians in the United States bear the 4336G 
mutation and are at significantly increased risk of developing mitochondrial AD 
in their lifetime. A mechanism for 4336G-mediated cell death is proposed.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.92.15.6892
PMCID: PMC41436
PMID: 7624338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biochem Pharmacol. 1995 Jul 31;50(3):355-65. doi: 10.1016/0006-2952(95)00150-x.

Cycad toxin-induced damage of rodent and human pancreatic beta-cells.

Eizirik DL(1), Kisby GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Environmental toxins may be risk factors for some forms of diabetes mellitus and 
neurodegenerative diseases. The medicinal and food use of seed from the cycad 
plant (Cycas spp.), which contains the genotoxin cycasin, is a proposed 
etiological factor for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Parkinsonism-dementia 
complex (ALS/PDC), a prototypical neurodegenerative disease found in the western 
Pacific. Patients with ALS/PDC have a very high prevalence of glucose 
intolerance and diabetes mellitus (in the range of 50-80%). We investigated 
whether the cycad plant toxin cycasin (methylazoxymethanol (MAM) 
beta-D-glucoside) or the aglycone MAM are toxic in vitro to mouse or human 
pancreatic islets of Langerhans. Mouse pancreatic islets treated for 6 days with 
cycasin impaired the beta-cell insulin response to glucose, but this effect was 
reversible after a further 4 days in culture without the toxin. When mouse 
islets were exposed for 24 hr to MAM/MAM acetate (MAMOAc; 0.1-1.0 mM), there was 
a dose-dependent impairment in insulin release and glucose metabolism, and a 
significant decrease in islet insulin and DNA content. At higher MAM/MAMOAc 
concentrations (1.0 mM), widespread islet cell destruction was observed. 
Glucose-induced insulin release remained impaired even after removal of MAM and 
a further culturing for 4 days without the toxin. MAM damages islets by two 
possible mechanisms: (a) nitric oxide generation, as judged by increased medium 
nitrite accumulation; and (b) DNA alkylation, as judged by increased levels of 
O6-methyldeoxyguanosine in cellular DNA. Incubation of mouse islets with hemin 
(10 or 100 microM), a nitric oxide scavenger, or nicotinamide (5-20 mM) 
protected beta-cells from a decrease in glucose oxidation by MAM. In separate 
studies, a 24 hr treatment of human beta-islet cells with MAMOAc (1.0 mM) 
produced a significant decrease in both insulin content and release in response 
to glucose. In conclusion, the present data indicate that cycasin and its 
aglycone MAM impair both rodent and human beta-cell function which may lead to 
the death of pancreatic islet cells. These data suggest that a "slow toxin" may 
be a common aetiological factor for both diabetes mellitus and neurodegenerative 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(95)00150-x
PMID: 7646537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Brain Cogn. 1995 Aug;28(3):259-65. doi: 10.1006/brcg.1995.1256.

Genetic evidence that the Lewy body variant is indeed a phenotypic variant of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Katzman R(1), Galasko D, Saitoh T, Thal LJ, Hansen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, USA.

Lewy Body Variant (LBV) patients present as Alzheimer's disease (AD) clinically; 
about two-thirds also have mild extrapyramidal features. At autopsy, neocortical 
and brain stem Lewy bodies are present in addition to changes diagnostic of AD. 
We have found that the Apolipoprotein E4 allele is a major genetic risk factor 
for LBV as it is for "pure AD," in contrast to subjects with diffuse Lewy body 
disease or Parkinson's disease. This genetic evidence supports the concept that 
LBV--the second most common neurodegenerative form of dementia--is a phenotypic 
variant of AD.

DOI: 10.1006/brcg.1995.1256
PMID: 8546853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1995 Aug;35(8):878-83.

[An unusual case of peroneal muscular atrophy with rigidity, polyneuropathy, 
mental retardation, and diabetes mellitus developed in familial Parkinson's 
disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Saito T(1), Hosoda M, Aoto K, Hasegawa H, Kowa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kitasato University East Hospital.

Familial polyneuropathy mimicking Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease associated with 
parkinsonism and dementia has been reported in literature. We present with 
similar peroneal muscular atrophy, rigidity of upper extremities, severe 
peripheral neuropathy, mental retardation and diabetes mellitus. The patient, a 
42-year-old man, developed progressive muscle weakness, mental retardation and 
difficulty in walking in childhood. Because of his pes cavus, he had three 
surgical operations. At the age of 20 years, he developed distal muscular 
atrophy of lower limbs. On neurological examination, all limb muscles were 
atrophic, especially in lower one third of the thigh. Rigidity was noted in the 
upper extremities. Deep tendon reflexes were hyperactive in the upper and 
diminished in the lower extremities. Muscle CT revealed low density areas in all 
the muscles examined, specially in the gastrocnemius and anterior tibial 
muscles. Needle EMG showed neurogenic change in the forearm, but not in the 
lower limbs, because of no voluntary contractions obtained due to severe muscle 
atrophy. Marked slowing of motor conduction velocity with muscle action 
potentials of very low amplitude was found in the ulnar nerve. Muscle action 
potentials were not elicited in the median and peroneal nerves. Sensory action 
potentials were not elicited from the median, ulnar and sural nerves. These 
findings were consistent with axonal polyneuropathy. In the sural nerve biopsy, 
the densities of myelinated fibers were markedly decreased. However, 
unmyelinated fiber densities were relatively preserved. Onion bulb formation was 
not found. This patient may be classified into hereditary motor-sensory 
neuropathy (HMSN) type II based on the clinical findings delayed nerve 
conduction velocities and axonal degeneration in the sural nerve. He has also 
diabetes mellitus. CT of the brain revealed nothing particular. He is one of 
members with familial Parkinson's disease (PD) developed in Sagamihara. Peroneal 
muscular atrophies are not necessarily associated with PD, though it has been 
occasionally complicated in various neuro-degenerative diseases including 
parkinsonism. We are now following the patient to detect the symptom of 
Parkinson's disease for early treatment.

PMID: 8665730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Neurology. 1995 Sep;45(9):1691-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.45.9.1691.

Neuropsychological characteristics of preclinical dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Jacobs DM(1), Marder K, Côté LJ, Sano M, Stern Y, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 1997 Feb;48(2):546-7.

The goal of this study was to characterize the changes in cognition associated 
with the earliest, or preclinical, stages of dementia in Parkinson's disease 
(PD). We administered a comprehensive neuropsychological test battery to a group 
of initially nondemented PD patients participating in a longitudinal 
community-based epidemiologic study. We used Cox proportional hazards models to 
assess the relative risk of incident dementia associated with baseline scores on 
the neuropsychological tests. Baseline performance on two verbal fluency tasks 
(letter fluency and category fluency) was significantly and independently 
associated with incident dementia. Tests of memory, orientation, abstract 
reasoning, naming, and constructional skill were less sensitive predictors of 
subsequent dementia. The neuropsychological pattern characterizing the 
preclinical stages of dementia in PD differed from that described previously in 
preclinical Alzheimer's disease. Results suggest that poor performance on tests 
of verbal fluency may represent a distinct characteristic of the preclinical 
phase of dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.45.9.1691
PMID: 7675228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Age Ageing. 1995 Sep;24(5):375-81. doi: 10.1093/ageing/24.5.375.

Primitive reflexes and dementia: results from the Canadian Study of Health and 
Aging.

Hogan DB(1), Ebly EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

We report on the prevalence of primitive reflexes (PR) and their association 
with cognitive, behavioural, functional and clinical characteristics in 2914 
Canadians 65 years and older. Data were collected as part of the Canadian Study 
of Health and Aging (1990-92) and included individuals living in the community 
and in institutions. PR were more commonly found in demented subjects. Demented 
subjects with prehensile PR (i.e. grasp, traction, suck) had significantly more 
functional and behavioural problems and were more severely demented. The 
presence of any PR increased the likelihood of other neurological findings (e.g. 
bradykinesia). Vascular dementia (VD) cases were more likely to have unilateral 
primitive PR than probable Alzheimer's disease (Pro AD) and Parkinson's dementia 
(PD) cases. PD cases were more likely to have glabellar and traction responses. 
While more common among the demented, PR lacked sufficient sensitivity to be an 
early diagnostic tool for dementia. Prehensile PR may help to define particular 
types or severity of dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/24.5.375
PMID: 8669338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1995 Sep 30;139(39):1975-8.

[Prevalence of chronic diseases in the elderly; the ERGO study (Erasmus 
Rotterdam Health and the Elderly)].

[Article in Dutch]

Hofman A(1), Boerlage PA, Bots ML, den Breeijen JH, de Bruijn AM, Grobbee DE, 
Hoes AW, de Jong PT, Koenders MJ, Odding E, et al.

Author information:
(1)Erasmus Universiteit, Instituut Epidemiologie en Biostatistiek, Rotterdam.

In the Rotterdam Study, prevalence and determinants of chronic diseases in the 
elderly (age > or = 55 years), were investigated in inhabitants of Ommoord, a 
suburb of Rotterdam. The study focused on cardiac diseases (myocardial 
infarction, angina pectoris, cardiovascular risk factors), glaucoma, macular 
degeneration, osteoporosis, osteoarthrosis and invalidity, dementia (Alzheimer's 
disease, vascular dementia, Parkinson's disease), epilepsy, cerebrovascular 
accident. The number of participants was 7983 (3105 men, 4878 women), a response 
of 78%. The participants were interviewed and were twice examined in an 
out-patient clinic. The results will be described in subsequent issues of this 
journal.

PMID: 7477540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Am J Pathol. 1995 Oct;147(4):934-46.

Aberrant GAP-43 gene expression in Alzheimer's disease.

de la Monte SM(1), Ng SC, Hsu DW.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Neuropathology Laboratory, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA.

GAP-43 is a growth-associated phosphoprotein expressed at high levels in neurons 
during development, axonal regeneration, and neuritic sprouting. GAP-43 gene 
expression in mature neurons is probably functionally important for the 
structural remodeling of synapses as required for learning and establishing new 
memory. The widespread aberrant neuritic growth accompanied by impaired synaptic 
plasticity in Alzheimer's disease (AD) suggests that abnormal GAP-43 gene 
expression may contribute to the cascade of neurodegeneration. In the present 
study, end-stage AD brains exhibited reduced neuronal expression but increased 
glial cell levels of GAP-43 mRNA and protein. Glial cell localization of GAP-43 
gene expression was confirmed by in situ hybridization of cerebral tissue, 
Northern blot analysis of microdissected cerebral white matter, and independent 
analysis of astrocytoma cell lines and primary malignant astrocytomas. In 
addition, in AD, GAP-43 immunoreactivity was translocated from the cytosol to 
membranes of swollen neuritic (dendritic) and glial cell processes throughout 
cerebral cortex and white matter. Downregulated and aberrant neuronal GAP-43 
gene expression appears to reflect an important molecular lesion that precedes 
and progresses with the widespread synaptic disconnection and dementia in AD. At 
the same time, the presence of similar neuronal abnormalities in Pick's disease, 
diffuse Lewy body disease, Parkinson's disease, and Down syndrome suggests 
common mechanisms in the respective cascades of neurodegeneration. Finally, the 
finding of aberrantly increased glial cell GAP-43 gene expression in AD exposes 
a previously unrecognized neurodegenerative change that may account for the 
axonal loss and white matter atrophy detected early in the course of disease.

PMCID: PMC1871017
PMID: 7573369 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Am J Psychiatry. 1995 Oct;152(10):1476-84. doi: 10.1176/ajp.152.10.1476.

Multicenter clinicopathological correlation in dementia.

Victoroff J(1), Mack WJ, Lyness SA, Chui HC.

Author information:
(1)University of Southern California School of Medicine, Rancho Los Amigos 
Medical Center, Downey 90242, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to determine the accuracy of 
clinical diagnoses of dementia in a large group of patients evaluated in a 
multicenter, university-based, Alzheimer's disease diagnostic and treatment 
program.
METHOD: Clinical diagnoses and neuropathological results from seven 
collaborating Alzheimer's disease research centers were compared for 196 cases 
of dementia.
RESULTS: When diagnoses of probable Alzheimer's disease, possible Alzheimer's 
disease, and Alzheimer's disease plus another condition were combined, 163 (83%) 
of the patients were clinically regarded as likely to have had Alzheimer's 
disease. Of those patients, 134 (82%) were found to have neuropathological 
changes diagnostic of Alzheimer's disease or Alzheimer's disease plus another 
condition. A total of 116 patients were diagnosed as having probable Alzheimer's 
disease; 100 (86%) of those were found to have pathological diagnoses of 
Alzheimer's disease or Alzheimer's disease plus another condition. Cerebral 
infarcts were found in 17% of the patients clinically diagnosed with probable 
Alzheimer's disease. Lewy bodies with variable Alzheimer's disease-type 
pathological changes were found in 7% of the patients with clinical diagnoses of 
probable Alzheimer's disease. Conversely, significant Alzheimer's disease-type 
pathological changes were found in 55% of the patients clinically diagnosed as 
having vascular dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians accurately predict Alzheimer's disease-type 
neuropathological findings in a high proportion of cases of dementia but may not 
predict cerebrovascular pathology and Lewy bodies in some patients with apparent 
clinical Alzheimer's disease and may often fail to predict Alzheimer's 
disease-type pathological findings in patients with apparent vascular dementia. 
With the emergence of effective treatments for Alzheimer's disease, there is an 
increasing need to optimize methods for ante-mortem diagnosis of dementia.

DOI: 10.1176/ajp.152.10.1476
PMID: 7573587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Brain Pathol. 1995 Oct;5(4):459-66. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1995.tb00625.x.

Neuropathological diagnostic criteria for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and 
other human spongiform encephalopathies (prion diseases).

Budka H(1), Aguzzi A, Brown P, Brucher JM, Bugiani O, Gullotta F, Haltia M, Hauw 
JJ, Ironside JW, Jellinger K, et al.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, University of Vienna, Wien, Austria.

Neuropathological diagnostic criteria for Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) and 
other human transmissible spongiform encephalopathies (prion diseases) are 
proposed for the following disease entities: CJD--sporadic, iatrogenic 
(recognised risk) or familial (same disease in 1st degree relative): spongiform 
encephalopathy in cerebral and/or cerebellar cortex and/or subcortical grey 
matter; or encephalopathy with prion protein (PrP) immunoreactivity (plaque 
and/or diffuse synaptic and/or patchy/perivacuolar types). 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS) (in family with dominantly 
inherited progressive ataxia and/or dementia): encephalo(myelo)pathy with 
multicentric PrP plaques. Familial fatal insomnia (FFI) (in member of a family 
with PRNP178 mutation): thalamic degeneration, variable spongiform change in 
cerebrum. Kuru (in the Fore population). Without PrP data, the crucial feature 
is the spongiform change accompanied by neuronal loss and gliosis. This 
spongiform change is characterised by diffuse or focally clustered small round 
or oval vacuoles in the neuropil of the deep cortical layers, cerebellar cortex 
or subcortical grey matter, which might become confluent. Spongiform change 
should not be confused with non-specific spongiosis. This includes status 
spongiosus ("spongiform state"), comprising irregular cavities in gliotic 
neuropil following extensive neuronal loss (including also lesions of 
"burnt-out" CJD), "spongy" changes in brain oedema and metabolic 
encephalopathies, and artefacts such as superficial cortical, perineuronal, or 
perivascular vacuolation; focal changes indistinguishable from spongiform change 
may occur in some cases of Alzheimer's and diffuse Lewy body diseases. Very rare 
cases might not be diagnosed by these criteria. Then confirmation must be sought 
by additional techniques such as PrP immunoblotting, preparations for electron 
microscopic examination of scrapie associated fibrils (SAF), molecular biologic 
studies, or experimental transmission.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1995.tb00625.x
PMID: 8974629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1995 Autumn;3(4):280-289. doi: 
10.1097/00019442-199503040-00002. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

Methodology of Treatment Studies in Geriatric Depression.

Alexopoulos GS(1).

Author information:
(1)Cornell University Medical College, White Plains, NY 10605.

Treatment studies of geriatric depression should focus not only on recovery and 
remission but also on relapse, recurrence, disability, quality of life, 
cognitive impairment, and exacerbation of medical morbidity. Each of these 
outcomes appears to have different predictors. Medical burden may influence 
geriatric depression, response to antidepressants, and overall disability, as 
well as specific conditions underlying geriatric depression (e.g., Alzheimer's 
disease, stroke, or parkinsonism). Measures of medical morbidity, cognitive 
impairment, and perhaps structural brain abnormalities should be considered as 
possible influences on treatment response. Studies of geriatric depression 
associated with specific disease entities are necessary, using instruments that 
avoid rating symptoms and signs that are part of a concurrent dementia syndrome 
or result from a medical illness. However, there should also be ratings with an 
"all-inclusive" approach that disregards the origin of depressive 
symptoms-whether from depression, dementia, or the medical illness. This 
strategy will reduce the risk of underdiagnosing depression.

Copyright © 1995 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1097/00019442-199503040-00002
PMID: 28531061


312. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1995 Nov;43(11):1243-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.1995.tb07400.x.

SPECT in dementia: clinical and pathological correlation.

Read SL(1), Miller BL, Mena I, Kim R, Itabashi H, Darby A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, VA Medical Center, West Los Angeles UCLA School of 
Medicine 90073, USA.

BACKGROUND: The clinical diagnosis of dementia continues to be flawed. Although 
the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is better than 90% at research centers 
in highly selected patients, the diagnosis of patients with non-AD dementias and 
atypical AD patients is poor. Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) 
is a functional imaging technique touted as a diagnostic technique for the 
degenerative disorders. However there have been few clinicopathological studies 
using SPECT.
METHODS: Twenty-seven consecutive dementia patients were evaluated clinically at 
a University-based specialty dementia clinic, and a diagnosis of a specific 
dementia was made. SPECT imaging was used in helping to select a clinical 
diagnosis. The correlations between clinical, SPECT and autopsy diagnoses were 
analyzed.
RESULTS: Single photon emission computed tomography predicted pathologic 
diagnosis in 25 of 27 patients with dementia (92.6%), compared with clinical 
diagnosis, which was confirmed in 20/27 (74.1%). Distinct patterns were 
associated with dementia caused by AD, Fronto-Temporal Dementia (FTD), and 
Jakob-Creutzfeldt Disease (JCD). Vascular insults not seen with computerized 
tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) were found with SPECT. Three 
different pathologies were found in patients with Parkinsonian-Dementias (PD): 
Lewy-Body Variant of AD, Diffuse Lewy-bodies without plaques, and substantia 
nigra neuronal loss without plaques or Lewy-bodies. All showed a 
temporal-parietal pattern with SPECT that was similar to AD.
CONCLUSION: SPECT provides useful positive information in dementia, particularly 
the differentiation of AD, FTD, and JCD. However, it does not distinguish PD 
from AD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1995.tb07400.x
PMID: 7594158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Brain. 1995 Dec;118 ( Pt 6):1573-81. doi: 10.1093/brain/118.6.1573.

Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type I in Martinique (French West Indies). 
Clinical and neuropathological analysis of 53 patients from three unrelated SCA2 
families.

Dürr A(1), Smadja D, Cancel G, Lezin A, Stevanin G, Mikol J, Bellance R, Buisson 
GG, Chneiweiss H, Dellanave J, et al.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U289, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, France.

Autosomal dominant cerebellar ataxia type I was diagnosed in three unrelated 
families from Martinique (French West Indies), and linkage to the locus for 
spinocerebellar ataxia 2 (SCA2) was established. Neuropathological findings in 
two patients were those of olivopontocerebellar atrophy without oligodendroglial 
cytoplasmic inclusions. Cerebellar ataxia was associated with hyporeflexia in 
68% of 31 examined patients, with slowed and/or limited eye movements in 65% and 
with dementia in 29%. No patients had optic atrophy, pigmentary retinal 
degeneration, spasticity or parkinsonism. Mean age at onset was 33 +/- 16 years, 
and onset before the age of 20 years was correlated with a more rapid and severe 
course of the disease. Movement disorders, oculomotor disturbances, sphincter 
disturbances and cognitive impairment were significantly more frequent in early 
than in late onset patients. This explains why the phenotype was strikingly 
different in one family, in which mean age at onset was much earlier. Comparison 
with previously described SCA2 families indicated similarities, such as reduced 
saccade velocity, supranuclear ophthalmoplegia and decreased reflexes, although 
phenotypic heterogeneity remains the outstanding feature of this disorder.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/118.6.1573
PMID: 8595486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Neurol Sci. 1995 Dec;134(1-2):146-9. doi: 10.1016/0022-510x(95)00238-3.

Apolipoprotein E genotype in Spanish patients of Alzheimer's or Parkinson's 
disease.

Ibarreta D(1), Gómez-Isla T, Portera-Sánchez A, Parrilla R, Ayuso MS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Physiology and Molecular Genetics, Centro de 
Investigaciones Biológicas (CSIC), Madrid, Spain.

Blood donors of the Madrid area show a 6% frequency of apolipoprotein E genotype 
carrying allele epsilon 4. This frequency is smaller than other populations of 
Caucasian origin. This proportion decreases to 4% in a selected sample of 
healthy individuals of ages > 60 years. The frequency (34%) of the allele 
epsilon 4 was significantly increased in patients of late onset Alzheimer's 
disease, similarly to other populations. An earlier age of onset of the dementia 
is observed in the patients of late-onset Alzheimer's disease carrying the 
allele epsilon 4. No increased frequency in allele epsilon 4 frequency was found 
in patients of early-onset Alzheimer's disease. Patients of Parkinson's disease 
do not show any differences in the frequency of the alleles of apolipoprotein E 
when compared with healthy individuals.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-510x(95)00238-3
PMID: 8747858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Acta Neurol Scand. 1995 Dec;92(6):455-63. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00480.x.

Age at onset: the major determinant of outcome in Parkinson's disease.

Hely MA(1), Morris JG, Reid WG, O'Sullivan DJ, Williamson PM, Broe GA, Adena MA.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Factors at presentation which influenced the course of the disease and response 
to treatment were assessed in 125 de novo patients with Parkinson's disease. 
Ninety-eight patients were available for re-assessment at 5 years. Older 
patients presented earlier after the onset of symptoms, deteriorated more 
rapidly, and were significantly more likely to develop dementia and impairment 
of balance. Increasing age and symmetrical disease predicted the new appearance 
of imbalance. Age of onset did not predict dyskinesia or end of dose failure. A 
low tremor score at baseline and female gender were predictive of the early 
appearance of dyskinesia. Patients who experienced end of dose failure were 
taking a significantly higher dose of levodopa. Once dose and duration of 
treatment were corrected for, no baseline features were predictive of end of 
dose failure. The dose of levodopa at 5 years was positively correlated to 
baseline disease severity as measured by the Columbia score. We conclude that 
the age of onset of symptoms of Parkinson's disease is a major determinant of 
the course of the disease and response to treatment.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1995.tb00480.x
PMID: 8750110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1995 Dec;35(12):1549-53.

[Disappearance of ALS from Guam: implications for exogenous causes].

[Article in Japanese]

Chen KM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Guam Memorial Hospital.

The author reports the disappearance of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) from 
Guam over past 30 years, which coincided with rapid changes in the ecology, 
socioeconomy, and westernization of the life style. This slow but steady decline 
is believed to be the consequences of radical changes from food collection to 
wage-based life style and dietary improvement in recent years and elimination of 
exogenous factors. Those risk factor(s) are believed to be the environmental 
trace metals which must have triggered the accelerated oxidative stresses in the 
motor neurons of genetically susceptible population. Changing Epidermiology: 1. 
The annual incidence of 70/100,000 in 1960s down to 7/100,000 in 1990s, and 
remained unchanged for past 15 years. 2. Upward shift of age at onset by 10 
years and at death by 8 years and even out of sex ratio. 3. Birth cohort 
analysis showed less risks for those born after 1920. No ALS cases born after 
1945. 4. No increase in the incidence of ALS among non-Chamorros transients of 
Guam and Marianas during W.W.II. 5. Long-term resident non-Charmorro and 
half-Chamorros on Guam are also affected. 6. Charmorro migrants to U.S. Mainland 
are affected after long absence from Guam. 7. Incubation period for both ways is 
estimated to be 18 approximately 20 years. 8. Other forms of dementias like 
Alzheimer disease (AD) and vascular dementias are on the rise and the leading 
cause of death is cerebro- and cardiovascular diseases. 9. ALS is also declining 
in past 10 approximately 15 years in Kii peninsula, and West New Guinea. 
Changing Ecology of Guam: 1. One third of Island land was used for construction 
of huge military bases after W.W.II. 2. Urbanization of villages including 
concrete houses, deep well water supply, sewage, and electrification. 3. Tourism 
boom: high-rise hotels, development of 7 golf courses and other recreational 
facilities resulted in loss of flora and erosions of soil. Socioeconomic 
Changes: 1. Shift in population demography; Efflux of Chamorros and influx of 
aliens; Chamorros less than 50% by 1990. 2. Tourists passed 1 million in 1994. 
3. Automobiles 1 car/1.5 person. 4. Westernization: After W.W.II, almost free 
access to Military Commissary for imported food and appliances. 5. Life style: 
from food collection to wage-based society. Genetic Studies: 1. Familial 
aggregations, but no clear-cut Mendelian inheritance. 2. Segregation analysis: 
no absolute genetic or environmental cause but additive gene component may play 
a role in genetic susceptibility and basis for geographical clustering. 3. 
Absence of Apo-E or Mu/Zn SOD genes. 4. Recent discovery of mtDNA Complex I 
deficiency in Parkinsonism-dementia cases suggests mitochondrial DNA 
abnormality. Comparative Environmental Studies: 1. Environmental studies in 
three hyperendemic areas in the Western Pacific--Kii, Marianas, and west New 
Guinea, where strikingly high incidences of ALS is known to occur, found the 
identical geochemical environment--low Ca, Mg, and Zn and high A1, Mn, Fe, Si, 
in the garden soil and drinking water. 2. Exogenous etiologic factors that are 
absent from primitive culture of Auyu and Jackai tribes in West New Guinea were 
eliminated. 3. Cycad neurotoxicity has been excluded. 4. Suspected exogenous 
agents that are common in these 3 hyperendemic areas are (a) locally grown 
vegetables, starchy roots, and reef fish; (b) surface water containing soluble 
organic minerals from red laterites; (c) rain water that is chemically pure and 
lack of essential minerals. Pathogenic Speculation: Chronic dietary deficiency 
since birth in Ca, Mg and Zn induced excessive absorption of divalent cations 
which accelerates oxidant-mediated neuronal degenerations in a genetically 
susceptible population. The process is probably carried through interactions 
between cytoskeletal abnormality of the neuron, aging process, abnormal 
proteins, and mitochondrial dysfunction.

PMID: 8752460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Neurologia. 1995 Dec;10 Suppl 1:50-5.

[Genetic neuroepidemiology].

[Article in Spanish]

Coria F(1), Cuadrado N.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neurología, Hospital Del Río Hortega, Valladolid.

Many human diseases result from the combined effect of several genetic and non 
genetic factors. Thanks to the development of powerful tools for molecular 
analysis, researchers in recent years have begun to uncover the genes behind 
such multifactorial neurologic and systemic disorders as Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's diseases and diabetes. Likewise investigators have been able to 
confirm that the course of these diseases and their clinical manifestations 
depend on the concurrence in the same individual of specific genetic variations. 
Because each gene confers a certain degree of predisposition to a specific 
disease, they are therefore called susceptibility genes. The search for and 
analysis of susceptibility genes in defined populations is termed genetic 
epidemiology. This multidisciplinary science is providing valuable data that 
further our understanding and ability to diagnose of disorders of the nervous 
system. It also enables us to predict the clinical course of disease in a given 
patient with a high degree of reliability, even when no clinical signs are yet 
evident.

PMID: 8838559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Neurodegeneration. 1995 Dec;4(4):443-8. doi: 10.1006/neur.1995.0053.

Effects of apolipoprotein E genotype on cortical neuropathology in senile 
dementia of the Lewy body and Alzheimer's disease.

Benjamin R(1), Leake A, Ince PG, Perry RH, McKeith IG, Edwardson JA, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne.

Apolipoprotein E (APO E) genotypes were determined in a UK population of 
neuropathologically confirmed control cases, and in cases of Lewy body dementia 
(SDLT) and late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). APO E epsilon 4 allele frequency 
was significantly elevated in both SDLT and AD groups with a concomitant 
reduction in the APO E epsilon 3 allele frequency. The epsilon 2 allele 
frequency in the AD group was only 25% of the control population, though because 
of the relatively small sample size this reduction was not significant; the 
epsilon 2 allele frequency in the SDLT group was normal. No significant 
association was found between senile plaque density and neurofibrillary tangle 
density in the neocortex and APO E allele dose in either SDLT or AD. Although 
the possession of APO E epsilon 4 is associated with an increased risk of 
developing SDLT and AD, actual APO E genotype does not appear to affect the 
burden of pathology.

DOI: 10.1006/neur.1995.0053
PMID: 8846238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Epidemiol. 1995 Dec 15;142(12):1300-5. doi: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117597.

Risk of dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, and severe head 
trauma: a register-based follow-up study.

Breteler MM(1), de Groot RR, van Romunde LK, Hofman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The authors investigated the risk of developing dementia for persons aged 50-75 
years who suffered from Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, or severe head trauma. 
They compared the risk in this patient group with the risk in a reference group 
in a follow-up study based on the linked databases of three Dutch nationwide 
morbidity registers over the years 1980-1989. The overall relative risk of 
developing dementia within 8 years in patients with Parkinson's disease who were 
initially free of dementia was 3.0 (95% confidence interval (CI) 2.9-3.1). Risk 
was especially increased in younger Parkinson's disease patients (relative risk 
(RR) = 13.2, 95% CI 6.2-28.6). For patients with epilepsy, the overall relative 
risk was 1.5 (95% CI 1.4-1.7). Severe head trauma was not associated with an 
increased risk of dementia (RR = 1.0, 95% CI 0.9-1.1). These findings suggest 
that Parkinson's disease is an important risk factor for dementia, with a 
particularly high risk in young patients with Parkinson's disease. Patients with 
epilepsy may bear a moderately increased risk of developing dementia. This study 
does not support earlier findings in retrospective case-control studies of an 
increased risk of dementia in head trauma patients.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a117597
PMID: 7503050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1996 Jan;55(1):97-105. doi: 
10.1097/00005072-199601000-00010.

Validity and reliability of the preliminary NINDS neuropathologic criteria for 
progressive supranuclear palsy and related disorders.

Litvan I(1), Hauw JJ, Bartko JJ, Lantos PL, Daniel SE, Horoupian DS, McKee A, 
Dickson D, Bancher C, Tabaton M, Jellinger K, Anderson DW.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1996 Dec;55(12):1278-9.

We investigated the validity and reliability of diagnoses made by eight 
neuropathologists who used the preliminary NINDS neuropathologic diagnostic 
criteria for progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and related disorders. The 
specific disorders were typical, atypical, and combined PSP, postencephalitic 
parkinsonism, corticobasal ganglionic degeneration, and Pick's disease. These 
disorders were chosen because of the difficulties in their neuropathologic 
differentiation. We assessed validity by measuring sensitivity and positive 
predictive value. Reliability was evaluated by measuring pairwise and group 
agreement. From a total of 62 histologic cases, each neuropathologist 
independently classified 16 to 19 cases for the pairwise analysis and 5 to 6 
cases for the group analysis. The neuropathologists were unaware of the study 
design, unfamiliar with the assigned cases, and initially had no clinical 
information about the cases. Our results showed that with routine sampling and 
staining methods, neuropathologic examination alone was not fully adequate for 
differentiating the disorders. The main difficulties were discriminating the 
subtypes of PSP and separating postencephalitic parkinsonism from PSP. 
Corticobasal ganglionic degeneration and Pick's disease were less difficult to 
distinguish from PSP. The addition of minimal clinical information contributed 
to the accuracy of the diagnosis. On the basis of results obtained, we propose 
clinicopathologic diagnostic criteria to improve on the NINDS criteria.

DOI: 10.1097/00005072-199601000-00010
PMID: 8558176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Neuroepidemiology. 1996 Jan-Feb;15(1):20-5. doi: 10.1159/000109885.

Risk factors for dementia in Parkinson's disease: effect of education.

Glatt SL(1), Hubble JP, Lyons K, Paolo A, Tröster AI, Hassanein RE, Koller WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 
66160-7314, USA.

Cognitive deficits are common in Parkinson's disease (PD), but the 
pathophysiology and relationship to Alzheimer's disease (AD) are not understood. 
We used a case-control format to investigate putative risk factors for the 
development of dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease. We compared 52 
cognitively intact patients with PD to 43 PD patients with dementia with regard 
to factors previously suggested as relevant to either AD or PD. Multiple 
logistic regression yielded the following significant predictors of dementia in 
PD: lack of education (less than a high school graduate) (OR 21); severity of 
motor deficit (UPDRS total motor score greater than 20; OR 6.34), and PD onset 
at greater than 60 years of age (OR 4.12). The predictive probability of 
dementia in our subjects when all three variables were positive was 97.9%. We 
conclude that education may modify the risk of cognitive decline in PD. 
Protective effects of educational attainment, independent of dementia etiology, 
may be due to greater functional brain reserve.

DOI: 10.1159/000109885
PMID: 8719045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Br Med Bull. 1996 Jan;52(1):58-73. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a011533.

Beneficial effects of nicotine and cigarette smoking: the real, the possible and 
the spurious.

Baron JA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hampshire, 
USA.

Cigarette smoking is an established risk factor for cancer and cardiovascular 
disease, and is the leading cause of avoidable disease in most industrialized 
countries. Less well-known are possible beneficial effects, which are briefly 
considered in this survey. Preliminary data suggest that there may be inverse 
associations of smoking with uterine fibroids and endometriosis, and protective 
effects on hypertensive disorders and vomiting of pregnancy are likely. Smoking 
has consistently been found to be inversely related to the risk of endometrial 
cancer, but cancers of the breast and colon seem unrelated to smoking. Inverse 
associations with venous thrombosis and fatality after myocardial infarction are 
probably not causal, but indications of benefits with regard to recurrent 
aphthous ulcers, ulcerative colitis, and control of body weight may well reflect 
a genuine benefit. Evidence is growing that cigarette smoking and nicotine may 
prevent or ameliorate Parkinson's disease, and could do so in Alzheimer's 
dementia. A variety of mechanisms for potentially beneficial effects of smoking 
have been proposed, but three predominate: the 'anti-estrogenic effect' of 
smoking; alterations in prostaglandin production; and stimulation of nicotinic 
cholinergic receptors in the central nervous system. Even established inverse 
associations cannot be used as a rationale for cigarette smoking. These data can 
be used, however, to clarify mechanisms of disease, and point to productive 
treatment or preventive options with more narrowly-acting interventions.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a011533
PMID: 8746297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Dementia. 1996 Jan-Feb;7(1):23-6. doi: 10.1159/000106848.

Aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia in the diagnosis of dementia.

Kramer JH(1), Duffy JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

The association of aphasia, apraxia and agnosia with cortical but not 
subcortical dementias, is a widely held belief. The purpose of the present study 
was to determine the frequency of aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia in groups of 
cortical and subcortical dementia patients, and to assess the diagnostic utility 
of these symptoms. Subjects were 64 patients with subcortical dementias 
(Parkinson's disease and normal pressure hydrocephalus) and 192 patients with 
cortical dementia (probable Alzheimer's disease) matched for sex, age, and 
Mini-Mental State Examination score. Each patient was evaluated for the presence 
of aphasia, apraxia, and agnosia. Results indicated that only aphasia was 
reported significantly more often in cortical dementia patients than in 
subcortical dementia patients. The presence of either of these three symptoms 
has very low diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, and total predictive value. 
The severity of the patient's dementia was predicted whether the patient had 
aphasia or apraxia; type of dementia had no predictive value. These data led to 
the conclusion that cortical and subcortical dementias cannot be reliably 
dissociated on the basis of aphasia, apraxia, or agnosia.

DOI: 10.1159/000106848
PMID: 8788078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Acta Neuropathol. 1996;91(3):247-53. doi: 10.1007/s004010050422.

Apolipoprotein E in Guamanian amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex: genotype analysis and relationships to 
neuropathological changes.

Buée L(1), Pérez-Tur J, Leveugle B, Buée-Scherrer V, Mufson EJ, Loerzel AJ, 
Chartier-Harlin MC, Perl DP, Delacourte A, Hof PR.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U422, Lille, France.

Apolipoprotein E (Apo E) has been recently identified within amyloid deposits 
and neurofibrillary tangles in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. 
A strong association of the Apo E epsilon 4 allele with higher risk of 
developing AD has also been reported. In the present study, the distribution of 
Apo E and the possible relationship between Apo E alleles and neuropathological 
alterations were analyzed in a series of Guamanian amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex (ALS/PDC) cases, a neurodegenerative 
condition characterized neuropathologically by widespread, severe 
neurofibrillary tangle formation but rare amyloid deposits. ApoE 
immunoreactivity was consistently observed in both type of lesions in these 
cases. Compared to tau protein immunoreactivity, there were generally fewer Apo 
E-immunoreactive neurofibrillary tangles, particularly in the deep layers of the 
neocortex and in the hippocampus. Genotype analysis revealed that the epsilon 4 
allele frequency was 5.9%, the epsilon 3 allele frequency 88.2%, and the epsilon 
2 allele frequency 5.9% in this series. Recent data suggest that the Apo E4 
variant may induce amyloidogenesis, while E2 could have a neuroprotective role. 
However, the rare Guamanian patients with amyloid deposits in cortical areas 
were not related to the epsilon 4 allele, since all cases with senile plaques 
were epsilon 3/epsilon 3. In addition, compared to unaffected Guamanian cases 
and other Asian-Pacific populations previously reported, the observed low 
frequency of the epsilon 2 allele in the present cases, which may be consistent 
with the notion that this allele, may represent a neuroprotective factor in 
several neurodegenerative disorders. The present data indicate that there is a 
strong interaction between Apo E deposition and neurofibrillary changes in 
Guamanian ALS-PDC.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010050422
PMID: 8834536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1996;47:205-18. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6892-9_14.

Molecular biology of APO E alleles in Alzheimer's and non-Alzheimer's dementias.

Morris CM(1), Massey HM, Benjamin R, Leake A, Broadbent C, Griffiths M, Lamb H, 
Brown A, Ince PG, Tyrer S, Thompson P, McKeith IG, Edwardson JA, Perry RH, Perry 
EK.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, Tyne and Wear, United Kingdom.

Current research into the aetiology of the dementias is focused upon genetic 
factors which give rise to the disease process. Recently the Apolipoprotein E 
gene (APO E) and in particular the epsilon 4 allele has been shown to be a risk 
factor for late onset Alzheimer's disease (AD) where there is an increased 
frequency of the epsilon 4 allele. The epsilon 4 allele has also been shown to 
reduce the age at onset of dementia in AD in a dose dependent manner, with the 
epsilon 2 allele having an opposing effect. We have genotyped a large series of 
clinically and neuropathologically confirmed cases of AD and found the expected 
increase in the Apolipoprotein epsilon 4 allele frequency when compared to a 
control population. Similarly, in Lewy Body Dementia (LBD) an increased epsilon 
4 frequency is also found though a normal epsilon 2 frequency exists, unlike in 
AD where the epsilon 2 frequency is reduced. No changes in APO E allele 
frequencies were found in presenile AD, Parkinson's disease with or without 
dementia, or in Down's syndrome. No association was found between any of the APO 
E alleles and the histopathological indices of AD, cortical senile plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles, in any disease category. Neurochemical indicators of 
AD, loss of choline acetyltransferase activity was also unaffected by APO E 
genotype. Whilst their appears to be a strong association between the APO E 
allele and AD and also in LBD, other related neurodegenerative disorders 
associated with dementia do not show such a linkage. Changes in the epsilon 2 
allele frequency may indicate a genetic difference between AD and LBD. The 
epsilon 4 allele does not appear to influence the burden of AD type pathology 
and this is particularly relevant given the relative lack of NFT in LBD 
indicating that factors other than SP or NFT may govern the onset of dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6892-9_14
PMID: 8841967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Int Psychogeriatr. 1996;8 Suppl 3:429-34; discussion 447-8. doi: 
10.1017/s1041610297003785.

Differentiating behavioral disturbances of dementia from drug side effects.

Eastham JH(1), Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, USA.

DOI: 10.1017/s1041610297003785
PMID: 9154602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 1996;103(4):455-90. doi: 10.1007/BF01276421.

Pattern of brain destruction in Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.

Braak H(1), Braak E, Yilmazer D, de Vos RA, Jansen EN, Bohl J.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum der Morphologie, J.W. Goethe Universität, Frankfurt/Main, Federal 
Republic of Germany.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are the most common 
age-related degenerative disorders of the human brain. Both diseases involve 
multiple neuronal systems and are the consequences of cytoskeletal abnormalities 
which gradually develop in only a small number of neuronal types. In AD, 
susceptible neurons produce neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and neuropil threads 
(NTs), while in PD, they develop Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites (LNs). The 
specific lesional pattern of both illnesses accrues slowly over time and remains 
remarkably consistent across cases. In AD, six developmental stages can be 
distinguished on account of the predictable manner in which the neurofibrillary 
changes spread across the cerebral cortex. The pathologic process commences in 
the transentorhinal region (clinically silent stages I and II), then proceeds 
into adjoining cortical and subcortical components of the limbic system (stages 
III and IV - incipient AD), and eventually extends into association areas of the 
neocortex (stages V and VI - fully developed AD). During the course of PD, 
important components of the limbic system undergo specific lesions as well. The 
predilection sites include the entorhinal region, the CA2-sector of the 
hippocampal formation, the limbic nuclei of the thalamus, anterior cingulate 
areas, agranular insular cortex (layer VI), and - within the amygdala - the 
accessory cortical nucleus, the ventromedial divisions both of the basal and 
accessory basal nuclei, and the central nucleus. The amygdala not only generates 
important projections to the prefrontal association areas but also exerts 
influence upon all non-thalamic nuclei which in a non-specific manner project 
upon the cerebral cortex and upon the nuclei regulating endocrine and autonomic 
functions. All these amygdala-dependent structures themselves exhibit severe 
PD-specific lesions. In general, the extranigral destructions are in themselves 
not sufficient to produce overt intellectual deterioration. Similarly, 
AD-related pathology up to stage III may be asymptomatic as well. Fully 
developed PD with concurring incipient AD, however, is likely to cause impaired 
cognition. Presently available data support the view that the occurrence of 
additional lesions in the form of AD stage III (or more) destruction is the most 
common cause of intellectual decline in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01276421
PMID: 9617789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Clin Neurosci. 1996 Jan;3(1):52-60. doi: 10.1016/s0967-5868(96)90083-1.

Midbrain neuropathology in idiopathic Parkinson's disease and diffuse Lewy body 
disease.

Halliday GM(1), McRitchie DA, Cartwright H, Pamphlett R, Hely MA, Morris JG.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Randwick, Australia; 
Neuropathology Division, Department of Pathology, University of Sydney, 
Australia.

We have quantified midbrain cell loss in idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) 
compared with controls; six patients had PD with onset before 70 years, five 
patients had late onset PD (>70 years) and nine patients had diffuse Lewy body 
disease. The pattern of cell loss in these last two groups has not been 
previously described. No age associated neuronal loss was seen in controls. 
There was cell loss and reduced area of the pars compacta in all cases but no 
difference in the pattern of cell loss, which was predominantly ventral. The 
amount of cell loss in the dorsolateral cluster correlated with the duration of 
Parkinsonian symptoms, while greater cell loss in the dorsomedial cluster 
correlated with the presence of tremor and the absence of early dementia. These 
results suggest that the topography of midbrain pathology does not assist in 
differentiating these overlapping syndromes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0967-5868(96)90083-1
PMID: 18644264


329. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1996 Jan 17;777:266-70. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1996.tb34430.x.

Apolipoprotein E alleles and brain vascular pathology in Alzheimer's disease.

Kalaria RN(1), Cohen DL, Premkumar DR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.

The presence of apolipoprotein E (ApoE)-E4 allele has been implicated as a risk 
factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We examined the occurrence of ApoE 4 
alleles in AD associated with cerebral amyloid angiopathy and other vascular 
lesions. We found significantly high frequency of the ApoE 4 allele in AD with 
moderate to severe CAA. The frequency of the allele was also high in AD cases 
with other vascular lesions such as multiple infarcts and lacunes. As previously 
reported, we confirm a greater frequency of the ApoE 4 allele in the diffuse 
Lewy body variant of AD. Our results suggest ApoE 4 allele to be a significant 
factor in the development of CAA in AD. While this may be related to increased 
brain amyloid load as a consequence of ApoE genotype, the possibility exists 
that ApoE may be a specific factor in vascular abnormalities associated with AD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1996.tb34430.x
PMID: 8624096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Anasthesiol Intensivmed Notfallmed Schmerzther. 1996 Feb;31(1):49-52. doi: 
10.1055/s-2007-995869.

[Perioperative management of the patient with atypical Parkinson disease].

[Article in German]

Rundshagen I(1).

Author information:
(1)Abteilung für Anästhesiologie, Universitäts-Krankenhaus Eppendorf, Hamburg.

Recent neuropathological findings define that 10-20% of the Parkinson patients 
belong to the atypical Parkinson's syndrome due to multi-system disease marked 
by typical Parkinsonian symptoms such as rigor, tremor and akinesia and early 
onset of severe autonomic, cerebellar or pyramidal disorders. Symptoms like 
postural hypotension, dysphagia, hypersalivation, urinary bladder dysfunction, 
thermodysregulation, abnormalities in eye movement, early falls or dementia etc. 
are frequently seen in these patients. In these patients dopamin depletion in 
the nigrostriatal pathway is combined with degeneration of other cerebral 
structures like olivopontocerebellar and intermediolateral columns. Patients 
need high dosages of L-dopa and other antiparkinsonian drugs with poor prognosis 
in general. First, we report on an atypical Parkinson patient who developed 
acute dyspnoea and muscle rigidity after general anaesthesia; second, on another 
patient who took a long time to recover from general anaesthesia. Both responded 
to antiparkinsonian drugs, the first to orally applied L-dopa, the second to 
intravenous amantadine. Most probably the interruption of the treatment with 
high dosages of L-dopa (in these patients given in 2-4 hours intervals) had 
caused these complications. The special nature of the anaesthesiological 
management of atypical Parkinson patients is reviewed.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-995869
PMID: 8868535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1996 Feb;50(1):35-40. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1819.1996.tb01660.x.

Olfactory evoked potentials in Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's disease and 
anosmic patients.

Sakuma K(1), Nakashima K, Takahashi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, 
Japan.

Erratum in
    Psychiatry Clin Neurosci 1996 Aug;50(4):234.

Olfactory evoked potential (OEP) recordings were undertaken using amyl acetate 
stimulation in 20 patients with Parkinson's disease, nine patients with 
Alzheimer's disease, seven patients with olfactory dysfunction with no other 
neurological disorder, and 17 control subjects. In order to eliminate the 
somatosensory factor from the combined somatosensory and olfactory components 
produced by amyl acetate stimulation, we substracted the potentials using 
odorless air from those using amyl acetate. In normal subjects, three components 
were observed, the mean latencies of which were 309 +/- 46, 484 +/- 61 and 710 
+/- 55 ms. In all subjects with anosmia (n = 7), no responses were observed. In 
the patients with Alzheimer's disease, the components were fewer despite having 
no olfactory dysfunction. In the 20 patients with Parkinson's disease, eight 
[corrected] patients showed no components, seven patients showed one component 
and four [corrected] patients showed two components. The components rarely were 
detected in spite of whether the patients had olfactory dysfunction or not. 
Olfactory evoked potentials are useful in detecting olfactory dysfunction and 
the early stages of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1819.1996.tb01660.x
PMID: 9201769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1996 Mar;44(3):296-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1996.tb00918.x.

Psychotic symptoms in Parkinson's disease patients with dementia.

Naimark D(1), Jackson E, Rockwell E, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Psychiatry Clinical Research Center, University of California, San 
Diego, USA.

Comment in
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 1997 Feb;45(2):252-3.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the prevalence of psychotic symptoms in a group of patients 
with Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia and examine the association of 
psychotic symptoms with neuropsychiatric problems, the level of distress 
reported by caregivers, and cognitive and functional impairment.
DESIGN: The psychotic and nonpsychotic patients with PD dementia were compared 
on a series of demographic, neuropsychiatric, behavioral, caregiver complaint, 
and cognitive measures.
SETTING: The database from nine university-based State of California Alzheimer's 
Disease Diagnostic and Treatment Centers (ADDTCs).
PARTICIPANTS: 101 patients diagnosed with PD.
RESULTS: A total of 36 of the 101 patients (35.6%) had either hallucinations, 
delusions, or both. The psychotic patients had significantly more insomnia, 
confusion, agitation, personality changes, and self-care problems and were noted 
by their caregivers to be significantly more unmanageable at home than their 
nonpsychotic counterparts. On cognitive scales, psychotic patients were 
significantly more impaired.
CONCLUSION: Many patients with PD and dementia experience psychosis. Psychotic 
symptoms in PD dementia patients are associated with major behavioral, 
cognitive, and functional problems.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1996.tb00918.x
PMID: 8600200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Neurology. 1996 Mar;46(3):678-81. doi: 10.1212/wnl.46.3.678.

Hippocampal volumes in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease with and without 
dementia, and in vascular dementia: An MRI study.

Laakso MP(1), Partanen K, Riekkinen P, Lehtovirta M, Helkala EL, Hallikainen M, 
Hanninen T, Vainio P, Soininen H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kuopio, Finland.

Hippocampal atrophy detected by volumetric MRI is a sensitive feature of early 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), but there are no studies evaluating hippocampal 
atrophy by MR volumetry in other dementing diseases. We therefore compared 
hippocampal volumes in a total of 113 subjects: 50 patients with mild to 
moderate AD, 9 patients with vascular dementia (VaD), 12 patients with 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) without dementia, 8 patients with PD and 
dementia (PDD), and 34 elderly control subjects. Thin, coronal, contiguous 
images were obtained by a 1.5-T MR imager. All patient groups had significantly 
smaller volumes of the hippocampus compared with the control group. In the PDD 
group, the absolute volumes were even smaller than in the AD group. In the PD 
group, the volumes were diminished to a lesser but significant extent. The 
volumes in the VaD group varied: of nine patients, two had no atrophy, three had 
unilateral, and four had bilateral atrophy. We postulate that hippocampal 
atrophy does not seem to be a specific phenomenon of dementia in AD but also 
occurs in VaD and PDD, and even in PD when no dementia is present. However, 
coexistence of AD pathology in our PD and VaD patients cannot be ruled out. 
Further studies with access to neuropathologic data are needed.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.46.3.678
PMID: 8618666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Kaku Igaku. 1996 Mar;33(3):303-18.

[A phase 3 clinical trial of 123I-iomazenil, a new central-type benzodiazepine 
receptor imaging agent (Part 2)--Report on clinical usefulness in diagnosis of 
degenerative neurological diseases and mental disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Torizuka K(1), Uemura K, Toru M, Shinohara Y, Nishimura T, Yonekura Y, 
Nakagawara J, Matsuda H, Sakai F, Matsuda K, Fukuyama H, Morimoto K.

Author information:
(1)Fukui Medical School, Japan.

Iomazenil (IMZ) is a partial inverse agonist of central-type benzodiazepine 
receptors (BZR) which binds specifically to BZR with high affinity. A 
multi-center Phase 3 clinical study was performed to evaluate the clinical 
usefulness of 123I-IMZ-SPECT in the diagnosis of brain disorders in 169 patients 
with degenerative neurological diseases and 37 patients with mental disorders 
such as neurotic, stress-related and somatoform disorders. In dementia, the 
decrease in activity in late images, obtained three hours after administration 
of 123I-IMZ, correlated negatively with the dementia score. In Parkinson's 
disease and spinocerebellar degeneration. 123I-IMZ showed a more profound 
decrease in uptake in late images than seen in the cerebral blood flow (CBF) 
images, and this decrease was in proportion to the duration and severity of the 
illness. In mental disorders, the ratio of the late to early image counts showed 
a negative correlation with Hamilton's anxiety scale in all regions in the brain 
cortices. In panic disorders, the ratio of the cerebral count to the cerebellar 
count in the late images correlated negatively with the severity of the attack 
in the frontal, temporal and parietal cortices. These results suggest that 
123I-IMZ-SPECT enables us to evaluate the neuronal damage in degenerative 
diseases and the decrease in the BZR binding potential in mental disorders.

PMID: 8622264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Med Hypotheses. 1996 Mar;46(3):222-4. doi: 10.1016/s0306-9877(96)90244-3.

Lewy body diseases: possible new directions in prophylaxis and therapy.

Oken RJ.

No therapy exists for the Lewy body diseases, which are an important cause of 
dementia. We regard Lewy body diseases and Parkinson disease as components of a 
spectrum of disorders having a degree of Alzheimer disease neuropathology. 
Immunologic features of Alzheimer disease and Parkinson disease suggest the 
involvement of similar phenomena in Lewy body diseases pathogenesis. Based on 
the efficacy of anti-inflammatory medication in arresting the progression of 
Alzheimer disease and the presence of common immunologic features in Alzheimer 
disease and Parkinson disease, a case is made for therapeutic intervention at 
the immune system level. Anti-inflammatory medications appear to be an 
appropriate therapeutic approach to Lewy body diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0306-9877(96)90244-3
PMID: 8676755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Neurol Sci. 1996 Mar;136(1-2):162-8. doi: 10.1016/0022-510x(95)00318-v.

Plasma catechols and monoamine oxidase metabolites in untreated Parkinson's and 
Alzheimer's diseases.

Ahlskog JE(1), Uitti RJ, Tyce GM, O'Brien JF, Petersen RC, Kokmen E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, MI 55905, USA.

Prior studies have documented functional and pathological compromise of the 
peripheral sympathetic nervous system in patients with Parkinson's disease, 
suggesting the possibility of reduced catecholamine release into the 
circulation. We measured free plasma catechols in early and untreated patients 
with Parkinson's disease, but found no evidence of reduced concentrations, 
compared to control subjects or a group of patients with probable Alzheimer's 
disease. Rather, there was a significant elevation of plasma norepinephrine 
within the Parkinson's disease group. Furthermore, 6 of 15 untreated Parkinson's 
disease patients (40%) displayed markedly elevated plasma concentrations of the 
catecholamine MAO metabolites, DOPAC or DOPEG. Despite this finding, platelet 
MAO-B activity measured in these and all other Parkinson's disease patients fell 
well within the range of the control subjects, and was also statistically 
similar to the group with Alzheimer's type dementia. Plasma dopa levels were 
similar in all groups, whereas the majority of patients in the three groups had 
plasma free dopamine and epinephrine concentrations below the limits of 
detection. These trends toward increased, rather than decreased, circulating 
catechol concentrations suggest that peripheral sympathetic nervous system 
catecholamine production and release is not severely compromised in patients 
with early Parkinson's disease. In addition, we were unable to confirm certain 
previous reports of elevated MAO-B activity in patients with Parkinson's or 
Alzheimer's diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-510x(95)00318-v
PMID: 8815165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


337. No To Shinkei. 1996 Mar;48(3):253-7.

[Corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy--differentiation 
by somatosensory-evoked potentials].

[Article in Japanese]

Miwa H(1), Mori H, Abe K, Hoshino I, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

It is by no means easy to make an early differential diagnosis between 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
because both disorders occasionally show similar clinical features such as 
parkinsonism, supranuclear gaze palsy, or dementia. In the present study, we 
studied somatosensory-evoked potentials (SEPs) in 4 CBD and 8 PSP patients. SEPs 
after median nerve stimulation (0.2 ms square wave delivered with a frequency of 
1 Hz) were recorded from bilateral parietal and midfrontal electrodes. Latencies 
of identifiable peaks and the inter-peak amplitudes were measured, and a 
comparison was made between the two disorders. Both latencies and amplitudes of 
all the identified peaks showed no statistical difference between the two 
disorders. To reveal an inter-hemispheric difference of the amplitude, we 
calculated the asymmetry index: the amplitude of the more affected side/the sum 
of the amplitudes of both sides. In CBD patients, an asymmetry index of P1N2 
amplitude was found to be decreased significantly. The asymmetric appearance of 
this part of SEPs may be helpful for early differential diagnosis between CBD 
and PSP.

PMID: 8868336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


338. BMJ. 1996 Mar 23;312(7033):724. doi: 10.1136/bmj.312.7033.724.

Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and motor neurone disease.

Ben-Shlomo Y, Whitehead AS, Smith GD.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1996 Jul 6;313(7048):45.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.312.7033.724
PMCID: PMC2350458
PMID: 8605448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Neuropsychologia. 1996 Apr;34(4):315-20. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(95)00109-3.

Are perception and memory for faces influenced by a specific age at onset factor 
in Parkinson's disease?

Haeske-Dewick HC(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurologisches Therapiecentrum gemGmbH, Institut an der 
Heinrich-Heine-Universität Düsseldorf, Germany.

This study investigated the possibility that a specific age at onset factor in 
Parkinson's disease results in qualitative differences in cognitive functioning 
between early- and late-onset patients without dementia. Both early- and 
late-onset patients performed more poorly than matched controls on 
face-matching, recognition memory for unfamiliar faces and famous face 
identification. When the performance of the early- and late-onset patients was 
contrasted, alongside that of controls, both Parkinson's disease and age were 
found to be factors that influenced cognitive ability. No interaction between 
these factors emerged. These results suggest that performance of early- and 
late-onset Parkinson's disease patients without dementia may be quantitatively 
different and lend no further support to the proposal that two separate 
disorders exist.

DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(95)00109-3
PMID: 8657362 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Med Hypotheses. 1996 Apr;46(4):367-77. doi: 10.1016/s0306-9877(96)90189-9.

Alzheimer's disease risk factors as related to cerebral blood flow.

Crawford JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Terre Haute Center for Medical 
Science, IN 47809, USA.

Inconsistencies within results of case-control studies on Alzheimer's disease 
risk factors led to a search of the literature for a potential cofactor. Reduced 
cerebral blood flow was selected and literature was surveyed for evidence of a 
cerebral blood flow linkage with the more than 40 putative risks. Alcohol abuse, 
depression, head trauma, underactivity, old age, sleep disturbance, glucose 
utilization, Down's syndrome, and Parkinson's disease are risk factors where an 
association with reduced cerebral blood flow is documented. Studies were cited 
showing that improved cerebral blood flow is associated with factors thought to 
be helpful in Alzheimer's disease, such as education or occupational attainment, 
exercise, headache, smoking, and arthritis/anti-inflammatory drugs to the extent 
that aspirin is used. Sugar consumption is identified as a potential risk factor 
with glucose management in Alzheimer's disease also shown to involve reduced 
cerebral blood flow. An hypothesis is developed showing how compromised regional 
cerebral blood flow could fit as a cofactor for genetic, autoimmune, and 
neurotoxic aspects of Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0306-9877(96)90189-9
PMID: 8733167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Neurology. 1996 Apr;46(4):922-30. doi: 10.1212/wnl.46.4.922.

Accuracy of clinical criteria for the diagnosis of progressive supranuclear 
palsy (Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome).

Litvan I(1), Agid Y, Jankovic J, Goetz C, Brandel JP, Lai EC, Wenning G, 
D'Olhaberriague L, Verny M, Chaudhuri KR, McKee A, Jellinger K, Bartko JJ, 
Mangone CA, Pearce RK.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814-3559, USA.

We assessed the validity and interrater reliability of neurologists who, using 
four different sets of previously published criteria for the clinical diagnosis 
of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), also called Steele-Richardson-Olszewski 
syndrome, rated 105 autopsy-proven cases of PSP (n = 24), Lewy body disease (n = 
29), corticobasal ganglionic degeneration (n = 10), postencephalitic 
parkinsonism (n = 7), multiple system atrophy (n = 16), Pick's disease (n = 7), 
and other parkinsonian or dementia disorders (n = 12). Cases were presented in 
random order to six neurologists. Information from each patient's first and last 
visits to the medical center supplying the case was presented sequentially to 
the rater, and the rater's diagnosis was compared with the neuropathologic 
diagnosis of each case. Interrater agreement for the diagnosis of PSP varied 
from substantial to near perfect, but none of the criteria had both high 
sensitivity and high predictive value. Because of these limitations, we used a 
logistic regression analysis to identify the variables from the data set that 
would best predict the diagnosis. This analysis identified vertical supranuclear 
palsy with downward gaze abnormalities and postural instability with unexplained 
falls as the best features for predicting the diagnosis. From the results of the 
regression analysis and the addition of exclusionary features, we propose 
optimal criteria for the clinical diagnosis of PSP.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.46.4.922
PMID: 8780065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1996 May;44(5):578-82. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.1996.tb01446.x.

Factors associated with institutionalization of older people in Canada: testing 
a multifactorial definition of frailty.

Rockwood K(1), Stolee P, McDowell I.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.

OBJECTIVES: To test a model of frailty by examining factors associated with 
institutionalization of older people in Canada; to assess whether diagnostic 
data provided information about risk beyond that provided by data on functional 
capacity and demographic variables.
METHODS: Cross-sectional study of 1258 institutional subjects and 9113 
community-dwelling older adults from the Canadian Study of Health and Aging.
RESULTS: Multiple logistic regression analysis showed that female gender, being 
unmarried, absence of a caregiver, presence of cognitive impairment (including 
all types of dementia), functional impairment, diabetes mellitus, stroke, and 
Parkinson's disease were independently associated with being in a long-term care 
facility.
CONCLUSION: Frailty appears to be a multidimensional construct, and not simply a 
synonym for dependence in Activities of Daily Living. Studies of health outcomes 
in older people should include diagnostic data as well as demographic 
information and data on functional capacity.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1996.tb01446.x
PMID: 8617909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


343. No To Shinkei. 1996 May;48(5):487-95.

[A 78-year-old man with young onset parkinsonism and sudden death].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyasaka H(1), Mori H, Saikawa T, Shirai T, Kondo T, Imai H, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Komagome Hospital, Japan.

We report a right-handed 78-year-old man with early onset parkinsonism. The 
patient had an onset of micrographia at 23 years of the age in 1939. Seven years 
later he started to drag his right foot, and at 38 years of age, he walked with 
small steps with festination. Tremor was also present in his right hand. His 
daily life was independent as a otorhinolaryngologist. He visited our clinic on 
March 24, 1977 when he was mentally sound and showed mild parkinsonism 
consisting of masked face, stooped posture, small step gait, bradykinesia, and 
right side dominant rigidity and tremor. He showed good response to 
trihexyphenidyl and amantadine HCl. Two month later, he developed dyskinesia and 
some worsening of parkinsonism, and was admitted to our hospital for the first 
time. He was treated with 400 to 600 mg/day of levodopa/ carbidopa. He showed 
marked improvement, however, dyskinesia remained in his mouth. He was doing well 
until 77 years of age (June of 1993) when he developed hallucination and motor 
fluctuations. He was admitted again to our hospital on June 22, 1993. On 
admission, he was alert and appeared mentally sound. However, Hasegawa dementia 
scale was 18/30. Upward gaze was slightly restricted (3/5). Voice was somewhat 
small but no masking was noted. His posture was stooped and the gait was of 
small step. Dyskinesia was noted during walk. No rigidity nor tremor was noted. 
Deep tendon reflexes were lost but no sensory loss or motor weakness was noted. 
Routine laboratory studies were unremarkable. A cranial CT scan revealed only 
mild to moderate cortical atrophy. Motor and sensory conduction velocities were 
within normal limits, however, motor action potentials could not be obtained 
with stimulation to the right common peroneal nerve. He was treated with 600 
mg/day of levodopa with carbidopa, 100 mg of amantadine HCl, 300 mg of Dops, and 
25 mg of tiapride. He continued to show motor fluctuations, and was discharged 
on July 23, 1993. Since then his motor functions had become progressively worse 
with frequent falls, but he was still able to walk without support. On October 3 
of 1994, he went to bed as usual. On the next morning, he was found dead in his 
bed at 9: 30. The patient was discussed in neurological CPC, and the chief 
discussant arrived at the conclusion that the patient had young-onset 
Parkinson's disease with Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra. Opinions were 
divided between Parkinson's disease and Lewy body negative young onset 
parkinsonism. Postmortem examination revealed obstruction of the trachea by 
aspirated foods, and the cause of death appeared to have been suffocation by the 
foods. Macroscopically, the external appearance of the brain was unremarkable 
except for slight frontal atrophy. The substantia nigra showed depigmentation in 
the lateral part, but the pigmentation of the medial part was well preserved. 
Upon histologic examination, the number of pigmented neurons in the dorsomedial 
part was well preserved. In the lateral part, pigmented neurons were well 
preserved in the dorsal area, however, in the ventral area, only non-pigmented 
neurons were seen; they appeared to be neurons in the pars reticulata. No 
gliosis was seen in any of the nigral areas. No Lewy bodies were seen in the 
remaining neurons. So-called immature neurons with rounded shape without 
neuromelanin could not be detected. The locus coeruleus neurons were well 
preserved. The putamen and the other basal ganglia structures were also intact. 
Slight myelin pallor was noted in the subcortical white matter, however, 
otherwise cerebral cortices were normal. The histology of this patient is unique 
in that only the ventrolateral part of the substantia nigra showed abnormal 
finding consisting of lack of pigmented neurons without gliosis. It is not clear 
whether the nigral change represents degeneration or a congenital "hypoplasia'. 
To our knowledge, such a unique pathology of the substantia nigra has not been 
reported in the literature. Our patient ma

PMID: 8672309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mov Disord. 1996 May;11(3):236-42. doi: 10.1002/mds.870110304.

Clinical course of patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Roos RA(1), Jongen JC, van der Velde EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Leiden University, The Netherlands.

We determined the variables associated with the progression and duration of 
illness of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and investigated the cause of 
death. In 474 patients with parkinsonism, who visited the Academic Hospital 
between January 1, 1960 and August 31, 1993, we did a survival analysis with the 
following covariates: age at onset, initial symptom (tremor or 
rigidity/hypokinesia), age at reaching Hoehn and Yahr stage III, dementia-free 
period, and levodopa treatment. A total of 345 patients with parkinsonism 
fulfilled the criteria of idiopathic PD; 258 of them were still alive on the 
closing date of this study. There were significantly more men than women 
(1.43:1). Medical advice was sought in an earlier stage by men and by patients 
with tremor as presenting symptom. For patients with rigidity/hypokinesia as 
first symptom, the duration of illness until reaching Hoehn and Yahr stage III 
was shorter than for patients starting with tremor alone. If the initial symptom 
is tremor, patients develop dementia less frequently and later after onset than 
when tremor is not involved. Reaching Hoehn and Yahr stage III and developing 
dementia both, limit the patient's survival time. The mortality risk for a 
patient was found to be increased from the moment levodopa treatment was started 
as compared to those patients who had not yet started with the treatment. The 
effect of levodopa on survival could not be disentangled from effects of other 
factors related to the start of levodopa treatment.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870110304
PMID: 8723138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Neuropsychologia. 1996 May;34(5):449-57. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(95)00124-7.

Perceptual priming in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Koivisto M(1), Portin R, Rinne JO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Turku, Finland.

The present study focused on perceptual identification priming (implicit memory) 
in early stages of dementia by studying demographically and cognitively matched 
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). The AD and 
PD groups performed normally on perceptual identification priming, whereas their 
explicit recognition memory was equally impaired compared to normal controls. 
These results imply that priming in perceptual identification relies on the 
perceptual memory system which can resist not only impairments of explicit 
memory but also widespread cognitive deterioration induced by the 
neurodegenerative processes in AD or PD.

DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(95)00124-7
PMID: 9148201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


346. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1996 Jun;60(6):615-20. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.60.6.615.

Natural history of progressive supranuclear palsy (Steele-Richardson-Olszewski 
syndrome) and clinical predictors of survival: a clinicopathological study.

Litvan I(1), Mangone CA, McKee A, Verny M, Parsa A, Jellinger K, D'Olhaberriague 
L, Chaudhuri KR, Pearce RK.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

OBJECTIVE--To analyse the natural history of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP 
or Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome) and clinical predictors of survival in 
24 patients with PSP confirmed by necropsy, who fulfilled the NINDS criteria for 
a neuropathological diagnosis of typical PSP. METHODS--Patients were selected 
from the research and clinical files of seven medical centres involving tertiary 
centres of Austria, England, France, and the United States. Clinical features 
were analysed in detail. The patients' mean age at onset of PSP was 63 (range 
45-73) years. RESULTS--The most frequent clinical features (occurring in at 
least 75% of the patients) were early postural instability and falls, vertical 
supranuclear palsy, akinetic-rigid predominant parkinsonian disorder 
characterised by symmetric bradykinesia and axial rigidity unrelieved by 
levodopa, pseudobulbar palsy, and frontal release signs. Occasionally, segmental 
dystonia or myoclonus were described, but neither aphasia nor alien limb 
syndrome was reported. Fractures occurred in 25% of the patients but were 
unrelated to the severity of the gait or to the presence of falls. Median 
survival time was 5.6 (range 2-16.6) years. Onset of falls during the first 
year, early dysphagia, and incontinence predicted a shorter survival time. Age 
at onset, sex, early onset of dementia, vertical supranuclear palsy, or axial 
rigidity had no effect on prognosis of survival. Pneumonia was the most common 
immediate cause of death. PSP was most often clinically misdiagnosed as 
Parkinson's disease. Errors in diagnosis suggest that PSP is underdiagnosed. 
CONCLUSION--Progressive onset of early postural instability with falls or 
supranuclear vertical palsy in the fifth decade, should suggest the diagnosis of 
PSP. Onset of falls during the first year are emphasised, as they could lead to 
an early diagnosis and influence the prognosis of patients with PSP. Whether 
appropriate treatment of the dysphagia could prolong the survival of PSP 
patients needs to be explored.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.60.6.615
PMCID: PMC1073943
PMID: 8648326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Neurology. 1996 Jun;46(6):1551-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.46.6.1551.

Amantadine treatment is an independent predictor of improved survival in 
Parkinson's disease.

Uitti RJ(1), Rajput AH, Ahlskog JE, Offord KP, Schroeder DR, Ho MM, Prasad M, 
Rajput A, Basran P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

Amantadine has been used for more than 20 years in the symptomatic treatment of 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Several recent discoveries suggest that amantadine 
could also have a neuroprotective effect in PD. We studied survival in all 
parkinsonism (including PD and other parkinsonian syndromes) patients attending 
a single clinic, employing standard survival curves and a Cox regression model, 
to identify independent predictive variables for survival (while taking into 
account factors potentially associated with both outcome and treatment 
selection). Amantadine-treated patients (n = 250) were similar to the patients 
not treated with amantadine (n = 586) in terms of age, gender, type of 
parkinsonism, Hoehn and Yahr stage and dementia status at initial neurological 
visit. Amantadine use was an independent predictor of improved survival (p < 
0.01). Improved survival was also associated with a higher 10-year expected 
survival (based on age, gender, and birth year), absence of dementia, type of 
parkinsonism = PD, and low Hoehn and Yahr stage (I or II) at initial neurologic 
visit (all p < 0.01); these additional factors occurred in statistically similar 
proportions in the groups that were and were not treated with amantadine. The 
association of improved survival with amantadine use may stem from symptomatic 
benefit or may reflect a "neuroprotective" effect, mediated through 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonism, dopamine uptake blockade 
activity, or other mechanisms. Our preliminary findings suggest that a 
prospective, controlled, randomized trial of amantadine's effects on PD 
progression is warranted.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.46.6.1551
PMID: 8649547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Arch Neurol. 1996 Jun;53(6):538-42. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550060082020.

Frequency of dementia in Parkinson disease.

Aarsland D(1), Tandberg E, Larsen JP, Cummings JL.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Psychiatric Hospital in Rogaland, Stavanger, 
Norway.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequency of dementia in patients with Parkinson 
disease (PD).
DESIGN: Community-based prevalence study.
SETTING: The study population comprised 220,858 inhabitants from the Rogaland 
County, Norway.
PARTICIPANTS: Almost 400 participants were examined by a neurologist, and 245 
were given the diagnosis of PD and included in the study.
MEASUREMENTS: Mental functioning was rated with the Mini-Mental State 
Examination; Gottfries, Bråne, and Steen scale; and the intellectual subscale of 
the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Criteria from the Diagnostic and 
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised, were applied 
during a semistructured interview to determine the diagnosis of dementia.
RESULTS: Dementia was found in 67 patients (27.7%). Patients with dementia were 
older at the time of the study and at onset of PD and had had PD longer than the 
patients without dementia. Major depression was more common among patients with 
dementia (23%) than among patients without dementia (2.3%) (chi 2 , P < .001), 
and patients with dementia were more often institutionalized than those without 
dementia (62% vs 6%, respectively, chi 2 , P < .001). Atypical neurologic 
features for idiopathic PD (ie, early occurrence of autonomic failure, 
symmetrical disease presentation, and only moderate response to a dopamine 
agonist) were associated with more severe dementia of a higher frequency rate 
and with lower scores on cognitive rating scales.
CONCLUSION: Approximately one quarter of the patients with PD had dementia with 
the motor manifestations of PD. Dementia was associated with depression, 
institutionalization, older age at onset of PD, and atypical neurologic 
features.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550060082020
PMID: 8660156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Am J Pathol. 1996 Jun;148(6):2083-95.

Apolipoprotein E-epsilon4 alleles in cerebral amyloid angiopathy and 
cerebrovascular pathology associated with Alzheimer's disease.

Premkumar DR(1), Cohen DL, Hedera P, Friedland RP, Kalaria RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106-4938, USA.

The presence of apolipoprotein E-epsilon4 (APOE-epsilon4) allele has been 
implicated as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD). We examined the 
frequencies of APOE-epsilon4 alleles in age-matched controls and subgroups of 
190 AD subjects exhibited cerebral amyloid angiopathy (CAA) and other frequently 
associated lesions. CAA was evident in 96% of the AD subjects, which were 
divided into two groups, one bearing mild or no apparent CAA and the other with 
moderate to severe CAA. APOE-epsilon4 allele frequency (48%) in the latter 
advanced CAA group was six times higher than in those who exhibited mild CAA. In 
the advanced CAA subjects, the occurrence of an epsilon4 allele was increased by 
a factor of 17 (95% confidence interval, 7.56 to 38.9). This was despite the 
fact that neocortical amyloid-beta plaque densities in the two groups were 
similar and that all of the AD subjects had met the accepted neuropathological 
criteria. We also observed that the degree of CAA severity was greatest in the 
group of subjects with the epsilon4/epsilon4 genotype. The association between 
CAA and APOE-epsilon4 was further implicated in two non-AD subjects among 
neurological controls with severe CAA. These two subjects, both homozygous for 
the APOE-epsilon4 allele, were primarily diagnosed as having Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease and Pick's disease in the absence of significant neocortical amyloid 
deposition. Allele frequency comparisons between neurological control subjects 
with CAA and those without likewise accorded a strong relationship between the 
APOE-epsilon4 allele and the presence of CAA. More remarkably, the epsilon4 
allele frequency was highly associated with AD subjects exhibiting lobar or 
intracerebral hemorrhage, all of whom had advanced CAA. We observed that 36% of 
the AD subjects had concomitant cerebrovascular pathology resulting from single 
infarcts, multiple microinfarcts, ischemic white matter lesions, or petechial 
hemorrhages. Although the difference in APOE genotype distribution between 
subjects with and without cerebrovascular lesions did not reach statistical 
significance, we did note that the frequency of the epsilon4 allele was 
significantly higher in subjects with such pathology as compared with those 
without. However, we found no evidence to suggest that the acquisition of an 
APOE-epsilon4 allele or one of the alleles, epsilon2 or epsilon3, was a factor 
in the occurrence of atherosclerosis localized in the basal surface arteries. 
Analyses of our sample also confirm that there was a lower frequency of the 
APOE-epsilon2 allele in AD subjects and that the frequency of the epsilon4 
allele in AD subjects with concomitant diffuse Lewy body disease was 
intermediate between controls and AD subjects. Our results suggest that the 
APOE-epsilon4 allele is a significant factor in the development of CAA in AD and 
reveal the possibility that APOE is an independent factor in CAA and other 
vascular abnormalities associated with AD.

PMCID: PMC1861657
PMID: 8669492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


350. No To Shinkei. 1996 Jun;48(6):587-97.

[A 62-year-old man with familial parkinsonism with the onset at 24 years of the 
age].

[Article in Japanese]

Takubo H(1), Kondo T, Mori H, Miyake T, Suda K, Yokochi M, Imai H, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

We report a right-handed 62-year-old man with early onset familial parkinsonism. 
The patient was well until 24 years of the age when he noted an onset of resting 
tremor in his right hand. During the next four years, he noted rigidity, 
bradykinesia, and difficulty in walking. He was seen in another hospital at 28 
years of the age, where he received left pallidotomy. Rigidity on the left side 
showed marked improvement. He received right pallidotomy at age 30 years. He 
developed right hemiplegia after this surgery. He was admitted to our hospital 
in March, 1983 when he was 51 years of the age. He was treated with levodopa but 
improvement was rather of minor degree. He was transferred to another hospital, 
but his motor disturbance progressed slowly, and was admitted again to our 
hospital in November 1990. He had 6 siblings 4 of whom including himself 
suffered from parkinsonism. No consanguinity was noted in parents. On admission, 
he appeared chronically ill but the general physical examination was 
unremarkable. Neurologic examination revealed an alert and mentally sound man. 
Hasegawa dementia scale was 28.5/32.5. Upward gaze was slightly restricted 
(3/5). Cranial nerve examination revealed oculogyric crisis, apraxia of eyelid 
opening, masked face, and small voice. He was able to stand with support; his 
posture showed left-ward leaning. He had right hemiparesis with moderate 
weakness. He showed marked bradykinesia and moderate rigidity in his left upper 
extremity. Fine postural tremor was noted in the left hand. Deep tendon reflexes 
were diminished in the upper extremities. No Babinski sign was noted. Pain 
sensation was somewhat diminished on the right side. Results of routine 
laboratory examination were unremarkable. Cranial CT scan revealed atrophy in 
the frontal lobe, particularly in the prefrontal area. In addition, MRI revealed 
T1-and-T2-low signal intensity lesions in the right ventral pallidal region and 
in the left ventrolateral thalamic-hypothalamic areas. He was treated with 600 
mg of levodopa with benserazide and 22.5 mg of bromocriptine with mild to 
moderate improvement in his bradykinesia and rigidity. He was discharged in 
January 1991. His clinical course was complicated by intestinal obstruction in 
October, 1994. He was admitted to another hospital where he was operated on the 
obstruction on November 5, 1994. The sigmoid colon was markedly dilated but no 
mass was found. Postoperative course was uneventful until November 18, 1994 when 
he was found dead in his hospital room shortly after 4 am. The patient was 
discussed in neurological CPC, and the chief discussant arrived at the 
conclusion that the patient had young-onset familial Lewy body-negative 
parkinsonism. Opinions were divided between Lewy body-positive familial 
Parkinson's disease and Lewy body negative young onset parkinsonism. Postmortem 
examination revealed aspiration pneumonia, which appeared to be the cause of his 
death, in the right lung. Neuropathologic examination revealed loss of malanized 
neurons in the substantia nigra and the locus coeruleus. In the substantia 
nigra, neuronal loss was particularly severe in the ventrolateral area. No Lewy 
bodies were seen. The dorsal motor nucleus of the vagal nerve was well 
preserved. Stereotaxic lesions involved bilateral thalamic areas. This patient 
appears to represent a case of autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism 
(AR-JP). Early onset, superb response to levodopa, sleep effect, and easy 
development of dyskinesias and motor fluctuations characterize AR-JP. The reason 
why this patient did not show these clinical features is probably bilateral 
sterotaxic surgeries. Particularly, the second surgery was complicated by right 
hemiparesis. His siblings who developed parkinsonism showed typical clinical 
features of AR-JP.

PMID: 8703564 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Biochem Pharmacol. 1996 Jun 28;51(12):1585-91. doi: 
10.1016/0006-2952(95)02433-6.

Potential role of environmental genotoxic agents in diabetes mellitus and 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Eizirik DL(1), Spencer P, Kisby GE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Cell Biology, Uppsala University, Sweden.

Epidemiological data suggest that environmental genotoxins are risk factors for 
some forms of diabetes mellitus and neurodegenerative diseases. The present 
commentary focuses on mechanisms involved in genotoxin-induced pancreatic 
beta-cell and neuronal damage. These two cell types seem to share a similar 
vulnerability to different forms of DNA damage, and the long-term consequences 
of repeated genotoxic insults to post-mitotic neurons or slowly proliferating 
beta-cells remain to be clarified. One intriguing possibility is that genotoxins 
could act as "slow" toxins in these cells, triggering a cascade of cellular 
events, which culminates in progressive cell dysfunction and loss. Indeed, 
exposure to mutagenic nitroso agents such as streptozotocin and cycasin induces 
long-lasting damage to both beta -cells and neurons. These data on cycasin, a 
toxin obtained from the cycad plant (Cycas spp.), are of special interest, since 
this agent may be implicated in both amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Parkinson 
dementia complex and diabetes mellitus in the western Pacific area. Future 
studies are required to sort out the interactions between different genotoxic 
agents, viral infections, and cellular repair mechanisms on cellular survival 
and function. Moreover, further epidemiological studies are needed to clarify 
the role of N-nitrosoureas in diabetes mellitus and neurodegenerative diseases 
in populations with different genetic backgrounds. Answers to these questions 
may provide useful information on the pathogenesis of these devastating 
diseases, and open the possibility for their primary prevention.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(95)02433-6
PMID: 8687473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Neurology. 1996 Jul;47(1):148-54. doi: 10.1212/wnl.47.1.148.

Follow-up study of risk factors in progressive supranuclear palsy.

Golbe LI(1), Rubin RS, Cody RP, Belsh JM, Duvoisin RC, Grosmann C, Lepore FE, 
Mark MH, Sachdeo RC, Sage JI, Zimmerman TR Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick 08903-0019, USA.

The cause of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is not known and has been 
little studied. The one previous controlled epidemiologic survey, performed at 
our center in 1986, found small-town experience and greater educational 
attainment as PSP risks, but, in retrospect, these results may have been 
produced by ascertainment bias. Since that time, several anecdotal reports have 
implicated heredity and various environmental exposures in the cause of some 
cases of PSP. To clarify the results of the previous study and to evaluate the 
more recently implicated candidate factors in a controlled fashion, we mailed a 
validated 69-item questionnaire to 91 personally examined patients with PSP and 
104 unmatched controls with other neurologic conditions for which they had been 
referred to our tertiary neurologic center. We were able to match 75 subjects 
from each group by year of birth, sex, and race and subjected them to a separate 
matched-pair analysis. We allowed surrogates to supply any or all of the 
responses. Questions concerned hydrocarbon, pesticide, and herbicide exposure; 
urban/rural living; auto repair and other occupations; head trauma; educational 
attainment; maternal age; and family history of PSP, parkinsonism, dementia, and 
other neurologic conditions. A statistically significant finding was that 
patients with PSP were less likely to have completed at least 12 years of school 
(matched odds ratio = 0.35, 95% CI = 0.12-0.95, p = 0.022; unmatched odds ratio 
= 0.44, 95% CI = 0.21-0.89, p = 0.020). We hypothesize that this result may be a 
proxy for poor early-life nutrition or for occupational or residential exposure 
to an as-yet unsuspected toxin. Future studies should examine these potential 
risk factors in PSP.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.47.1.148
PMID: 8710069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Mov Disord. 1996 Jul;11(4):384-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.870110406.

Hypokinesia in Huntington's disease.

van Vugt JP(1), van Hilten BJ, Roos RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Hospital, The Netherlands.

Motor activity was quantitatively assessed over a period of 5 days using a 
wrist-worn activity monitor in 14 patients with Huntington's disease (of whom 4 
used neuroleptic drugs) and 14 age- and sex-matched healthy controls. 
Additionally, patients were rated for dementia, depression, clinical impairment 
of motor tasks, chorea, and disability. A significant decrease in daytime motor 
activity was observed in patients compared with controls, suggesting hypokinesia 
rather than hyperkinesia. Hypokinesia tended to be more severe in patients using 
neuroleptic drugs. Lower activity levels were significantly related to lower 
scores of functional disability, but not to other clinical measures. We conclude 
that hypokinesia is a prominent manifestation in Huntington's disease that is 
worsened by the use of neuroleptics.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870110406
PMID: 8813217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Br Med Bull. 1996 Jul;52(3):539-55. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a011566.

Advances in psychopharmacology: mood disorders and dementia.

Cowen PJ(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Psychiatry, Littlemore Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Recent years have seen the introduction of several new antidepressants, many of 
which have selective effects on serotonin (5-HT) pathways. In most patients 
these drugs are as effective as traditional tricyclic antidepressants and are 
somewhat better tolerated. In the most severe depressive disorders, however, 
drugs such as clomipramine, that produce potent inhibition of both 5-HT and 
noradrenaline reuptake may be more effective. Lithium is increasingly used in 
the treatment of resistant depression but its role in the short-term management 
of mania is less certain because of the increased risk of relapse on sudden 
discontinuation. In the treatment of mania and prophylaxis of bipolar disorder, 
carbamazepine and valproate are alternatives to lithium. In dementia, the 
cholinesterase inhibitor, tacrine, produces worthwhile improvement in about 40% 
of patients able to tolerate adequate doses. There is concern about adverse 
effects of antipsychotic drugs in patients with dementia, particularly those 
with Lewy body disease.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.bmb.a011566
PMID: 8949256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 Jul 16;224(2):484-6. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1996.1053.

The apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele in Parkinson's disease with Alzheimer 
lesions.

Egensperger R(1), Bancher C, Kösel S, Jellinger K, Mehraein P, Graeber MB.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Laboratory, Institute of Neuropathology, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany.

The association between the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) epsilon 4 allele and 
Parkinson's disease (PD) with coexistent dementia has remained controversial. We 
determined ApoE allele frequencies in 35 subjects with neuropathologically 
confirmed Lewy body Parkinsonism with and without concomitant Alzheimer lesions, 
27 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), and 54 controls without 
neurodegenerative disease. We hypothesized that if AD lesions in PD evolve by 
the same pathomechanism as in "pure AD," the ApoE epsilon 4 allele frequency in 
PD with AD lesions (PD+AD) and pure AD should be similar. The frequency of the 
ApoE epsilon 4 allele differed significantly between PD+AD (13.3%) and AD cases 
(35.2%), but not between PD+AD and PD without AD pathology (12.5%) or controls 
(11.1%). We conclude that the ApoE epsilon 4 allele does not function as a risk 
factor which influences the development of AD lesions in PD. Our data suggest 
that Parkinson's disease with Alzheimer lesions and Alzheimer's disease with 
coexistent Parkinsonian features represent two distinct entities at both the 
clinicopathological and molecular genetic levels.

DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1996.1053
PMID: 8702415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Curr Opin Neurol. 1996 Aug;9(4):281-5. doi: 10.1097/00019052-199608000-00007.

Spectrum of memory dysfunction in degenerative disease.

Perry RJ(1), Hodges JR.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge Neurology unit, Cambridge, UK.

We have summarized relevant literature on the patterns of memory deficit found 
in Alzheimer's disease, the focal lobar atrophies (semantic dementia and 
dementia of frontal type) and three forms of subcortical dementia (progressive 
supranuclear palsy, Huntington's and Parkinson's disease). We have stressed an 
approach based on the joint principals of cognitive neuropsychology and applied 
neuroanatomy. Alzheimer's disease results in a severe deficit in the 
establishment of new episodic memories which reflects the perihippocampal locus 
of the early pathology. In semantic dementia, there is profound progressive and 
relatively pure loss of semantic memory associated with focal left temporal 
neocortical atrophy. By contrast, in the subcortical dementias the major 
impairments are in working (immediate) memory and retrieval of information from 
longer term memory stores, deficits which reflect dysfunction of frontostriatal 
systems.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-199608000-00007
PMID: 8858186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1996 Aug;36(8):944-50.

[Autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation 
(AR-EPDF)--clinical characteristics].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamura Y(1), Kohriyama T, Kawakami H, Kaseda Y, Kuzuhara S, Nakamura S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Hiroshima.

Among heterogeneous diseases manifested by parkinsonism beginning early in life, 
there is a disease presenting with marked diurnal fluctuation of symptoms, 
called autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation 
(AR-EPDF). To identify the characteristics of this condition as a disease 
entity, we examined the clinical manifestations of AR-EPDF patients (Group I, n 
= 42) in comparison with those of early-onset parkinsonism patients without 
diurnal fluctuation (Group II, n = 34). Family history suggesting autosomal 
recessive inheritance was noted in 85.7% of Group I patients and 17.6% of Group 
II. The male-to-female ratio was 1: 1.8 in Group I, and 1:0.89 in Group II. Age 
at onset showed a standard distribution with an average of 25.6 years (SD: +/- 
7.7) in Group I and an average of 32.7 with an increasing pattern toward 40 
years in Group II. The initial symptom was dystonic gait disturbance in 42.9% of 
Group I and 5.9% of Group II, parkinsonian gait in 19.9% of Group I and 2.9% of 
Group II, and tremor in 28.6% of Group I and 41.2% of Group II. The main 
clinical feature was parkinsonism in both groups. Diurnal fluctuation of 
parkinsonism was remarkable in all but one (97.6%) of Group I, while it was not 
observed in Group II. Dystonic postures were noted in 79.4% of Group I and in 
37.1% of Group II; hyperactive tendon reflexes in 74.3% of Group I patients and 
in 20% of Group II. Autonomic symptoms were mild in both groups. None of the 
Group I patients had dementia while two of Group II did. Levodopa was markedly 
effective in both groups. Dopa-induced dyskinesia was observed in 96.8% of Group 
I and in 61.8% of Group II. As for progression of the disease, the Hoehn-Yahr 
stage of patients on medication was evaluated as 2.2 +/- 0.7 (mean +/- SD) in 
Group I and 3.1 +/- 1.1 in Group II for a period of 10 to 20 years of onset, 2.5 
+/- 0.8 in Group I and 3.3 +/- 0.5 in Group II for 20 to 30 years, and 3.2 +/- 
0.9 in Group I and 4.3 +/- 0.6 in Group II after 30 years. There were 
significant differences between the two groups in the frequency of positive 
family history, in the mean and distribution of age at onset, in the incidence 
of dystonic gait as the initial symptom, and in the incidences and medians of 
the variables including dystonia, hyperreflexia and dopa-induced dyskinesia, as 
well as in the progression of the disease. Thus, we have successfully 
characterized the clinical features of AR-EPDF and demonstrated that diurnal 
fluctuation is a cardinal symptom of this disease. Reported pathologic studies 
on AR-EPDF showed the nigral lesion characterized by non-Lewy body type 
degeneration and the occurrence of melanin-poor neurons. These pathologic 
findings as well as the clinical manifestations differentiate AR-EPDF from 
Parkinson's disease and from autosomal-dominant familial parkinsonism. Low 
melanin-content of the nigral neurons is also a striking feature of hereditary 
progressive dystonia with diurnal fluctuation, in which unlike AR-EPDF there is 
no neuronal loss in the substantia nigra.

PMID: 8958746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Lancet. 1996 Aug 17;348(9025):429-32. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(96)03356-9.

Effect of oestrogen during menopause on risk and age at onset of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Tang MX(1), Jacobs D, Stern Y, Marder K, Schofield P, Gurland B, Andrews H, 
Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H Serglevsky Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1996 Aug 17;348(9025):420-1.
    Lancet. 1996 Oct 12;348(9033):1027-8; author reply 1029-30.
    Lancet. 1996 Oct 12;348(9033):1028; author reply 1029.
    Lancet. 1996 Oct 12;348(9033):1028; author reply 1029-30.
    Lancet. 1996 Oct 12;348(9033):1028-9; author reply 1029-30.
    Lancet. 1996 Oct 12;348(9033):1029; author reply 1029-30.

BACKGROUND: Oestrogen use by postmenopausal women has many health benefits, but 
findings on the effect of oestrogen in Alzheimer's disease are conflicting. 
Oestrogen promotes the growth and survival of cholinergic neurons and could 
decrease cerebral amyloid deposition, both of which may delay the onset or 
prevent Alzheimer's disease. To investigate whether use of oestrogen during the 
postmenopausal period affects the risk of Alzheimer's disease, we studied 1124 
elderly women who were initially free of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's 
disease, and stroke, and who were taking part in a longitudinal study of ageing 
and health in a New York City community.
METHODS: Relative risks and age-at-onset distributions were calculated from 
simple and adjusted Cox proportional hazards models. Standard annual clinical 
assessments and criterion-based diagnoses were used in follow-up (range 1-5 
years).
FINDINGS: Overall, 156 (12.5%) women reported taking oestrogen after onset of 
menopause. The age at onset of Alzheimer's disease was significantly later in 
women who had taken oestrogen than in those who did not and the relative risk of 
the disease was significantly reduced (9/156 [5.8%] oestrogen users vs 158/968 
[16.3%] nonusers; 0.40 [95% Cl 0.22-0.85], p < 0.01), even after adjustment for 
differences in education, ethnic origin, and apolipoprotein-E genotype. Women 
who had used oestrogen for longer than 1 year had a greater reduction in risk; 
none of 23 women who were taking oestrogen at study enrolment has developed 
Alzheimer's disease.
INTERPRETATION: Oestrogen use in postmenopausal women may delay the onset and 
decrease the risk of Alzheimer's disease. Prospective studies are needed to 
establish the dose and duration of oestrogen required to provide this benefit 
and to assess its safety in elderly postmenopausal women.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(96)03356-9
PMID: 8709781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Neurology. 1996 Sep;47(3):779-84. doi: 10.1212/wnl.47.3.779.

ApoE and CYP2D6 polymorphism with and without parkinsonism-dementia complex in 
the people of Chamorro, guam.

Chen X(1), Xia Y, Gresham LS, Molgaard CA, Thomas RG, Galasko D, Wiederholt WC, 
Saitoh T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0624, USA.

Parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC), a neurodegenerative disorder in the 
Chamorro, Guam population, has been epidemiologically ascribed to the ingestion 
of the neurotoxin cycasin. This disease is characterized neuropathologically by 
the presence of abundant neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). We analyzed a genetic 
risk factor of Alzheimer's disease (AD), apolipoprotein E, hypothesized to be 
linked to NFT formation, and a genetic risk factor of Parkinson's disease (PD), 
CYP2D6 mutation, linked to slower metabolism of exogenous toxins, in Chamorro, 
Guam individuals with and without PDC. The representation of the G-to-C mutation 
in exon 9 of the CYP2D6 gene was higher in Chamorro and Filipino than in 
Caucasian individuals, but this mutant allele had similar high frequencies in 
both PDC patients and healthy Chamorro individuals. We found no alleles of these 
genes associated with AD or PD to be overrepresented among those with PDC.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.47.3.779
PMID: 8797479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Ann Neurol. 1996 Sep;40(3):399-410. doi: 10.1002/ana.410400309.

In vivo mapping of cholinergic terminals in normal aging, Alzheimer's disease, 
and Parkinson's disease.

Kuhl DE(1), Minoshima S, Fessler JA, Frey KA, Foster NL, Ficaro EP, Wieland DM, 
Koeppe RA.

Author information:
(1)University of Michigan Hospitals, Division of Nuclear Medicine, Ann Arbor 
48109-0028, USA.

To map presynaptic cholinergic terminal densities in normal aging (n = 36), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) (n = 22), and Parkinson's disease (PD) (n = 15), we 
performed single-photon emission computed tomography using 
[123I]iodobenzovesamicol (IBVM), an in vivo marker of the vesicular 
acetylcholine transporter. We used coregistered positron emission tomography 
with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose for metabolic assessment and coregistered magnetic 
resonance imaging for atrophy assessment. In controls (age, 22-91 years), 
cortical IBVM binding declined only 3.7% per decade. In AD, cortical binding 
correlated inversely with dementia severity. In mild dementia, binding differed 
according to age of onset, but metabolism did not. With an onset age of less 
than 65 years, binding was reduced severely throughout the entire cerebral 
cortex and hippocampus (about 30%), but with an onset age of 65 years or more, 
binding reductions were restricted to temporal cortex and hippocampus. In PD 
without dementia, binding was reduced only in parietal and occipital cortex, but 
demented PD subjects had extensive cortical binding decreases similar to 
early-onset AD. We conclude that cholinergic neuron integrity can be monitored 
in living AD and PD patients, and that it is not so devastated in vivo as 
suggested by postmortem choline acetyltransferase activity (50-80%).

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410400309
PMID: 8797529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Am J Public Health. 1996 Sep;86(9):1281-8. doi: 10.2105/ajph.86.9.1281.

Neurodegenerative diseases: occupational occurrence and potential risk factors, 
1982 through 1991.

Schulte PA(1), Burnett CA, Boeniger MF, Johnson J.

Author information:
(1)Education and Information Division, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Cincinnati, Ohio 
45226, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To identify potential occupational risk factors, this study examined 
the occupational occurrence of various neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODS: Death certificates from 27 states in the National Occupational 
Mortality Surveillance System were evaluated for 1982 to 1991. Proportionate 
mortality ratios were calculated by occupation for presenile dementia, 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and motor neuron disease.
RESULTS: Excess mortality was observed for all four categories in the following 
occupational categories: teachers; medical personnel; machinists and machine 
operators; scientists; writers/designers/entertainers; and support and clerical 
workers. Clusters of three neurodegenerative diseases were also found in 
occupations involving pesticides, solvents, and electromagnetic fields and in 
legal, library, social, and religious work. Early death from motor neuron 
disease was found for firefighters, janitors, military personnel, teachers, 
excavation machine operators, and veterinarians, among others.
CONCLUSIONS: Neurodegenerative disease occurs more frequently in some 
occupations than in others, and this distribution, which may indicate 
occupational risk factors, should be further investigated.

DOI: 10.2105/ajph.86.9.1281
PMCID: PMC1380592
PMID: 8806381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Arch Neurol. 1996 Sep;53(9):837. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550090019004.

Clinicopathological studies of Alzheimer disease.

Claus JJ.

Comment on
    Arch Neurol. 1996 Jan;53(1):35-42.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550090019004
PMID: 8815846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Neurodegeneration. 1996 Sep;5(3):259-64. doi: 10.1006/neur.1996.0034.

Comparative investigation of neurofibrillary damage in the temporal lobe in 
Alzheimer's disease, Down's syndrome and dementia pugilistica.

McKenzie JE(1), Roberts GW, Royston MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Charing Cross and Westminster Medical School, 
London.

Neurofibrillary lesions such as neurofibrillary tangles, neurites and neuropil 
threads are used as neuropathological markers of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
However these lesions are also seen in non-demented elderly cases as well as in 
several other disorders such as Down's syndrome (DS), dementia pugilistica (DP) 
and Parkinson's disease. Quantitative studies may therefore help in 
understanding the pathophysiological role of these lesions. Using a novel image 
analysis technique we have quantified the extent of neurofibrillary damage in 
AD, DS and DP. We have found that the extent of neurofibrillary change did not 
significantly differ between AD and DS, though there were also strong parallels 
between AD and DP. We conclude that both genetic (as in DS) and environmental 
(as in DP) risk factors for AD-type pathology provide a similar pattern of 
neurofibrillary degeneration to that in AD itself suggesting that similar 
degenerative mechanisms might be triggered in all three conditions.

DOI: 10.1006/neur.1996.0034
PMID: 8910904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1996 Oct;61(4):347-51. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.61.4.347.

Frequency of the apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele in a case-control study of 
early onset Parkinson's disease.

Whitehead AS(1), Bertrandy S, Finnan F, Butler A, Smith GD, Ben-Shlomo Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genetics, Trinity College, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVES: It has been suggested that Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's 
disease may share a common or at least overlapping aetiology. The prevalence of 
dementia among cases of Parkinson's disease is known to be greater than expected 
in the general population. The frequency of the apolipoprotein epsilon 4 allele 
in a large case-control study of early onset Parkinson's disease has been 
examined.
METHODS: 215 patients and 212 population based controls were recruited from the 
Republic of Ireland between 1992 and 1994. Cases had to have disease onset at 55 
years or younger and be born after 1925.
RESULTS: The frequency of the epsilon 4 allele was almost identical between 
cases of Parkinson's disease (14.6%) and healthy controls (13.3%). There was no 
relation between epsilon 4 status and disease onset, disease duration, Hoehn and 
Yahr score, and disease progression. The frequency of the epsilon 4 allele was 
not increased among 10 patients with Parkinson's disease with dementia (10.0%) 
compared with the other patients without dementia (14.8%). There was no 
association between epsilon 4 allele status and either a history of smoking, 
family history of dementia, or Parkinson's disease, or being born in a rural 
area. The odds ratio for the ApoE epsilon 4 allele associated with Parkinson's 
disease was 1.10 (95% confidence interval (95% CI) 0.68-1.79), adjusting for age 
group, sex, and residential status. The pooled odds ratio from a meta-analysis 
of six studies of ApoE epsilon 4 status and Parkinson's disease was 0.94 (95% CI 
0.69-1.27).
CONCLUSIONS: The results from our study as well as the pooled meta-analysis 
exclude any important role for ApoE epsilon 4 status in the development of 
Parkinson's disease. Our results similarly do not support its role either in 
dementia associated with Parkinson's disease or disease prognosis.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.61.4.347
PMCID: PMC486573
PMID: 8890771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Mt Sinai J Med. 1996 Oct-Nov;63(5-6):314-9.

Ethnicity and movement disorders.

Eastham JH(1), Lacro JP, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, USA.

This article is a review of studies involving ethnicity and spontaneous as well 
as iatrogenic movement disorder. We have focused on Parkinson's disease and 
tardive dyskinesia. Some early studies reported that African Americans had lower 
rates of Parkinson's disease than Caucasians, whereas more recent surveys have 
not found such a difference. Several studies suggested that African Americans 
have a higher risk of developing tardive dyskinesia than Caucasians, even when 
differences in neuroleptic drug use are accounted for. Asians seem to have a 
lower or equal risk of developing tardive dyskinesis as compared with 
Caucasians. We discuss the possible contribution of ethnicity to the etiology of 
movement disorders and the implications thereof.

PMID: 8898534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1996 Oct;9(4):181-4. doi: 
10.1177/089198879600900405.

Diffuse Lewy body disease without amyloid plaques in a patient homozygous for 
apolipoprotein E allele epsilon 4: a case report.

Seltzer B(1), Fratkin J, Clejan S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, Tulane University School of Medicine, 
New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

A middle-aged woman developed extrapyramidal motor symptoms, personality and 
behavioral changes, and rapidly progressive dementia. Apolipoprotein E 
genotyping revealed that she was homozygous for the epsilon 4 allele. At 
autopsy, there were numerous cortical and subcortical Lewy bodies but no 
neuritic plaques (NPs) or neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). This case, the first 
explicitly reported patient homozygous for the epsilon 4 allele having dementia 
of the Lewy body type (DLBT) without NPs and NFTs, reinforces the distinction 
between DLBT and dementia of the Alzheimer type. It calls into question the 
pivotal role of the epsilon 4 allele in the pathogenesis of NPs and NFTs but 
raises the possibility of its being an independent risk factor for the 
development of DLBT.

DOI: 10.1177/089198879600900405
PMID: 8970011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Bull Acad Natl Med. 1996 Oct;180(7):1715-25; discussion 1725-9.

[Role of Alzheimer's type dementia among dementias of the elderly].

[Article in French]

Petit H(1), Pasquier F.

Author information:
(1)Clinique Neurologique-Hôpital Roger Salengro, CHRU, Lille.

In the authors experience of a memory clinic, about 2/3 of the patients 
fulfilled the criteria for dementia and among the demented patients 2/3 had 
probable Alzheimer's disease. Vascular dementia is the second cause of dementia 
in elderly people, but two other degenerative disorders fulfilling the 
NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for Alzheimer disease (Mc Khann et al., 1984) account for 
degenerative dementia. There is now a consensus for the clinical diagnosis and 
the neuropathological aspects of these two diseases: Dementia with Lewy Bodies 
(Mc Keith et al., 1996) and fronto-temporal dementia (the Lund and Manchester 
groups, 1994). The authors emphasize the clinical aspects of those two diseases 
at an early stage in comparison with dementia of Alzheimer type.

PMID: 9102153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Clin Neurosci. 1996 Oct;3(4):327-33. doi: 10.1016/s0967-5868(96)90028-4.

A longitudinal of Parkinson's disease: clinical and neuropsychological 
correlates of dementia.

Reid WG(1), Hely MA, Morris JG, Broe GA, Adena M, Sullivan DJ, Williamson PM.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Westmead Hospital, Australia; Department of Geriatric 
Medicine, CERA, University of Sydney, Concord Hospital, Australia.

Neuropsychological assessments were performed in ninety-one de novo patients 
participating in the Sydney Multicentre Study of Parkinson's disease. 
Assessments were made at baseline and after 3 and 5 years. Performance at 
baseline and after 5 years was compared with controls. At baseline 37% of 
patients whose symptoms of Parkinson's disease had begun after the age of 70 
years were demented. This compared with a prevalence of dementia of 8.8% in 
patients whose symptoms had begun before the age of 70 years. By 5 years the 
prevalence of dementia in the two groups had risen to 62.3% and 17.3% 
respectively. The death rate was higher over the 5 year period in the demented 
patients. Demented patients had more symmetrical signs, higher disability and 
bradykinesia scores and more impairment of gait and balance at baseline than 
non-demented patients. The presence of dementia at baseline predicted a poor 
response to treatment. The dementia at baseline had features of a subcortical 
dementia. Subsequently, aphasia, apraxia and agnosia emerged, making the 
dementia indistinguishable from that of Alzheimer's disease. Patients with well 
preserved cognitive function at baseline had a good response to levodopa and 
were more likely to develop levodopa induced dyskinesia. These results show that 
the clinical features of Parkinson's disease and response to treatment are 
influenced by the age of onset of symptoms and by the presence of dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0967-5868(96)90028-4
PMID: 18638897


369. Neurosci Lett. 1996 Oct 18;217(2-3):200-2.

Rate of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's disease is not affected by the 
alpha-1-antichymotrypsin A allele or the CYP2D6 B mutant.

Murphy GM Jr(1), Yang L, Yesavage J, Tinklenberg JR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, CA 94305-5485, USA. greer.murphy@forsythe.stanford.edu

Patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) show considerable heterogeneity in the 
rate at which they decline cognitively. The biological basis for this 
heterogeneity is unknown. We genotyped 86 subjects with diagnoses of probable AD 
to determine if they carried the alpha-1-antichymotrypsin (ACT) A allele, which 
has been associated with AD, or the CYP2D6 B mutant, found at increased 
frequency in the Lewy body variant (LBV) of AD. We then examined 
longitudinally-collected cognitive data to determine if these genetic markers 
were associated with rate of cognitive decline. Our results indicate that 
neither the ACT A allele nor the CYP2D6 B allele have a significant association 
with rate of decline on the Folstein Mini Mental State examination. Further, 
subjects with both the ACT A allele and the apolipoprotein epsilon 4 allele 
showed no evidence of accelerated decline. These findings suggest that any 
increased risk of developing AD or LBV conferred by these markers is not 
necessarily accompanied by a more rapid rate of decline.

PMID: 8916107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Neurology. 1996 Nov;47(5):1113-24. doi: 10.1212/wnl.47.5.1113.

Consensus guidelines for the clinical and pathologic diagnosis of dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB): report of the consortium on DLB international workshop.

McKeith IG(1), Galasko D, Kosaka K, Perry EK, Dickson DW, Hansen LA, Salmon DP, 
Lowe J, Mirra SS, Byrne EJ, Lennox G, Quinn NP, Edwardson JA, Ince PG, Bergeron 
C, Burns A, Miller BL, Lovestone S, Collerton D, Jansen EN, Ballard C, de Vos 
RA, Wilcock GK, Jellinger KA, Perry RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, U.K.

Recent neuropathologic autopsy studies found that 15 to 25% of elderly demented 
patients have Lewy bodies (LB) in their brainstem and cortex, and in hospital 
series this may constitute the most common pathologic subgroup after pure 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). The Consortium on Dementia with Lewy bodies met to 
establish consensus guidelines for the clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and to establish a common framework for the assessment and 
characterization of pathologic lesions at autopsy. The importance of accurate 
antemortem diagnosis of DLB includes a characteristic and often rapidly 
progressive clinical syndrome, a need for particular caution with neuroleptic 
medication, and the possibility that DLB patients may be particularly responsive 
to cholinesterase inhibitors. We identified progressive disabling mental 
impairment progressing to dementia as the central feature of DLB. Attentional 
impairments and disproportionate problem solving and visuospatial difficulties 
are often early and prominent. Fluctuation in cognitive function, persistent 
well-formed visual hallucinations, and spontaneous motor features of 
parkinsonism are core features with diagnostic significance in discriminating 
DLB from AD and other dementias. Appropriate clinical methods for eliciting 
these key symptoms are described. Brainstem or cortical LB are the only features 
considered essential for a pathologic diagnosis of DLB, although Lewy-related 
neurites, Alzheimer pathology, and spongiform change may also be seen. We 
identified optimal staining methods for each of these and devised a protocol for 
the evaluation of cortical LB frequency based on a brain sampling procedure 
consistent with CERAD. This allows cases to be classified into brainstem 
predominant, limbic (transitional), and neocortical subtypes, using a simple 
scoring system based on the relative distribution of semiquantitative LB counts. 
Alzheimer pathology is also frequently present in DLB, usually as diffuse or 
neuritic plaques, neocortical neurofibrillary tangles being much less common. 
The precise nosological relationship between DLB and AD remains uncertain, as 
does that between DLB and patients with Parkinson's disease who subsequently 
develop neuropsychiatric features. Finally, we recommend procedures for the 
selective sampling and storage of frozen tissue for a variety of neurochemical 
assays, which together with developments in molecular genetics, should assist 
future refinements of diagnosis and classification.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.47.5.1113
PMID: 8909416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mov Disord. 1996 Nov;11(6):647-53. doi: 10.1002/mds.870110609.

Amyloid beta-peptide and the dementia of Parkinson's disease.

Jendroska K(1), Lees AJ, Poewe W, Daniel SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Charité, Berlin, Germany.

It is not known whether an increased incidence of dementia in patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) is due to a higher incidence of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) or to "early" Alzheimer-type pathology. To determine whether amyloid 
beta-peptide (A beta) of AD occurs more frequently in brains of patients with 
PD, we examined 50 cases and 79 controls by using histoblots for A beta. 
Twenty-three cases with PD had dementia, including all nine with A beta 
distributed throughout the entire cerebral cortex; three of these cases had AD. 
In contrast, five of 17 controls with comparable A beta accumulation were not 
demented. Neither AD nor A beta deposition was increased in PD, furthermore, 
there was no statistical correlation between the amount of A beta and the number 
of Lewy bodies in cerebral cortex. In 14 patients with PD in whom dementia was 
unrelated to A beta, there was cerebral vascular disease (four), numerous 
cortical Lewy bodies (three), or hydrocephalus (two); in five further cases, 
dementia was not well explained by histopathologic changes. Our data found no 
increase of either AD or "early" Alzheimer-type pathology in cases of PD; 
however, a synergistic effect between the two pathologies was suggested as 
contributing to dementia.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870110609
PMID: 8914090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Age Ageing. 1996 Nov;25(6):439-42. doi: 10.1093/ageing/25.6.439.

A mental-functional risk score for prediction of hip fracture.

Ranstam J(1), Elffors L, Kanis JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Community Health Sciences, Lund University, Malmö General 
Hospital, Sweden.

We examined the apparent value of questions of functional status and mental 
score in determining the risk of hip fracture from a large retrospective 
case--control study undertaken in six countries. Of nine questions utilized in 
75% of the MEDOS study population, four questions were found to be statistically 
significant and independently related to the risk of hip fracture. From this an 
additive score was devised with three points for not being able to wash or 
dress, six points for not knowing one's age, and ten points for not knowing the 
day of the week, which gave a gradient of risk of 5.7 when categorized into 
quartiles. Similar gradients of risk were observed in all countries. A less than 
perfect score was associated with a specificity of 79% and sensitivity of 46%, 
comparable to the power of bone mineral density measurements. The risk factor 
score accounted only partially for the increase in risk associated with 
dementia, cardiovascular accidents and parkinsonism. We conclude that the steep 
gradient of risk associated with this simple score should be evaluated 
prospectively.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/25.6.439
PMID: 9003879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Neurologia. 1996 Nov;11(9):332-40.

[Depression and Parkinson's disease: neurobiologic foundations and therapeutic 
management].

[Article in Spanish]

Giménez-Roldán S(1), Dobato JL, Mateo D, González Alvarez M, Novillo Infantes 
MJ, Giménez-Zuccarelli M.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Madrid.

The prevalence of depression in Parkinson's disease (PD) is estimated to be 
around 40% and generally takes the form of dysthymia. Although psychological 
factors probably contribute to depression, data point to a relation to 
structural and biochemical changes linked to PD. Thus, the onset of motor 
impairment is often preceded by a depressive episode, although there is no 
consistency between the seriousness of motor disability and depression. 
Furthermore, depression aggravates the memory and language impairments of PD and 
is thought to be a risk factor for developing dementia. Regional cerebral blood 
flow abnormalities in the medial frontal and cingulate cortices and low 5-HIIA 
concentrations in cerebro-spinal fluid suggest that degeneration of the 
mesocorticolimbic dopaminergic system as well as dorsal raphe changes may be 
implicated. Assessment of depression in PD is difficult, as none of the 
currently available scales were specifically designed for patients with this 
disease Furthermore, there is a lack of well-controlled studies showing that 
current antidepressants are effective in PD patients or are safe for use when 
the motor, cognitive and autonomic impairments of PD are present.

PMID: 9004744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Am J Hum Genet. 1996 Dec;59(6):1306-12.

Linkage of frontotemporal dementia to chromosome 17: clinical and 
neuropathological characterization of phenotype.

Yamaoka LH(1), Welsh-Bohmer KA, Hulette CM, Gaskell PC Jr, Murray M, Rimmler JL, 
Helms BR, Guerra M, Roses AD, Schmechel DE, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA. larry@dna.doc.mc.duke.edu.

Frontotemporal dementia is a behavioral disorder of insidious onset and variable 
progression. Clinically, its early features reflect frontal lobe dysfunction 
characterized by personality change, deterioration in memory and executive 
functions, and stereotypical and perseverative behaviors. Pathologically, there 
is degeneration of the neocortex and subcortical nuclei, without distinctive 
features such as plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, or Pick or Lewy bodies. 
Within-family variation in neuropathology and clinical phenotype is observed. In 
cases where family aggregation is observed, it is inherited as an autosomal 
dominant, age-dependent disorder. Family studies recently have identified two 
dementia loci: chromosome 17 for disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophic 
complex and pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration and chromosome 3 for familial 
nonspecific dementia. We describe a family (DUK1684) with clinically and 
neuropathologically confirmed, autosomal dominant, non-Alzheimer disease 
dementia. Linkage analysis of this family showed evidence for linkage to 
chromosome 17q21, with a multipoint location score (log10) of 5.52. A comparison 
of the clinical and pathological features in DUK1684 with those of the other 
chromosome 17-linked families, together with the linkage data, suggests that 
these families are allelic. These studies emphasize that genetic linkage 
analysis remains a useful tool for differentiating disease loci in clinically 
complex traits.

PMCID: PMC1914881
PMID: 8940276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Drugs. 1996 Dec;52(6):849-60. doi: 10.2165/00003495-199652060-00006.

Pharmacological options for the management of dyskinesias.

Shale H(1), Tanner C.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, California, USA. PL0108@PSILINK.com

Dyskinesias are abnormal involuntary movements characterised by an excessive 
amount of movement. Typically, these movements are choreiform in nature. They 
may be caused by systemic, metabolic, endocrinologic, structural, vascular, 
infectious or inherited degenerative conditions, or be toxin- or drug-induced. 
With many non-drug-induced dyskinesias, treatment of the underlying condition 
may be sufficient to eliminate the movements, although temporary treatment may 
be required to control the movements if they are severe. Drug-induced 
dyskinesias often resolve when the offending drug is discontinued. A notable 
exception is tardive dyskinesia, which is caused by exposure to dopamine 
receptor blocking drugs, the majority of which are antipsychotic agents. Tardive 
dyskinesias will persist, or may even develop after the causative agent has been 
stopped and may not spontaneously remit. Another commonly encountered form of 
drug-induced dyskinesia is seen in patients with Parkinson's disease who are 
receiving levodopa. Medications which deplete dopamine are most successful in 
treating choreiform dyskinesias, although anticholinergics, GABAergics, 
serotonergics, and calcium channel blocking agents have been reportedly 
beneficial in some cases. Treatment of levodopa-induced dyskinesias requires 
manipulation of the patient's antiparkinsonian drug regimen.

DOI: 10.2165/00003495-199652060-00006
PMID: 8957155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Neurology. 1996 Dec;47(6):1403-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.47.6.1403.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: reliability and validity of clinical and pathologic 
criteria.

Mega MS(1), Masterman DL, Benson DF, Vinters HV, Tomiyasu U, Craig AH, Foti DJ, 
Kaufer D, Scharre DW, Fairbanks L, Cummings JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine 90025, USA.

Clinical criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) have been proposed, but 
their formulation, reliability, and validity require further study. Pathologic 
criteria for DLB are also undergoing evolution. Two studies were conducted with 
the goal of identifying the components of these evolving criteria that may 
benefit from further refinement; one study evaluated the components of the 
clinical criteria and another study operationalized the pathologic criteria for 
DLB. Twenty-four patients with a premorbid diagnosis of probable or possible 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) (n = 18), Parkinson's disease (PD) (n = 5), or 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) (n = 1) were studied. Inter-rater 
reliability and validity of the clinical criteria were determined by a 
retrospective chart review, done by five neurologists, and a blinded pathologic 
evaluation. The Consortium on dementia with Lewy bodies (CDLB) pathologic 
criteria were operationalized to compare past criteria and test the validity of 
the evolving clinical criteria on the dementia patients. Three or more cortical 
fields (at 250 x magnification) with many (four or more) Lewy bodies (LBs) on 
ubiquitin immunoreactive sections were required to meet the CDLB neocortical 
score of > 6. Fifteen of the AD patients had at least one LB in a cortical 
section, four had many LBs, while three had no LBs; all patients with movement 
disorder had at least one LB in a cortical section. The sensitivity/specificity 
ratio of the CDLB probable DLB clinical criteria based upon many LBs being 
present was 75%/79%. Reformulated clinical criteria that require the presence of 
extrapyramidal signs significantly predicted those patients with many LBs versus 
those with few or no LBs (chi 2 = 5.48, p = 0.02) and increased clinical 
specificity to 100%. This preliminary study identifies components of the 
evolving clinical and pathologic criteria for DLB that require further 
refinement.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.47.6.1403
PMID: 8960718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Arch Neurol. 1996 Dec;53(12):1265-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550120077019.

Visual hallucinations associated with Parkinson disease.

Sanchez-Ramos JR(1), Ortoll R, Paulson GW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami School of Medicine, Fla, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 1997 Jul;54(7):799.

OBJECTIVE: To determine factors that are predictive for the development of 
hallucinations associated with Parkinson disease (PD).
BACKGROUND: Hallucinations are a common difficulty for patients with established 
PD, and hallucinations and psychosis may be the most common causes for nursing 
home placement. The characteristics of the hallucinations associated with PD 
differ from the hallucinations associated with schizophrenia or cocaine abuse. 
Multiple factors have been suggested as causal.
DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 214 consecutive patients were interviewed during 
routine visits to the Parkinson's Disease Clinics in Columbus, Ohio, and Miami, 
Fla, using a hallucination questionnaire, Folstein Mini-Mental State 
Examination, and an attempt to correlate age, duration of disease, medication, 
and psychological or sleep disorders with the hallucinations.
RESULTS: Hallucinations were almost exclusively visual and were present in 55 of 
the 214 patients. Dementia, age, duration of disease, history of depression, or 
history of sleep disorder were strongly associated with the hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: While reduction in levodopa and anticholinergic medication doses is 
appropriate in the management of hallucinations, the factors that predispose 
patients to hallucinations include dementia and advancing age. The phenomena of 
visual hallucinations associated with PD, while not fully explained, are unique 
enough to be of interest to all neurologists and neuroscientists.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1996.00550120077019
PMID: 8970453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Ann Neurol. 1996 Dec;40(6):893-900. doi: 10.1002/ana.410400611.

Unusual clinical presentations of cortical-basal ganglionic degeneration.

Bergeron C(1), Pollanen MS, Weyer L, Black SE, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Disease and the Department of 
Pathology (Neuropathology), University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cortical-basal ganglionic degeneration classically presents predominantly as a 
motor disorder with a unique constellation of histological alterations 
characterized by the presence of neuronal loss and gliosis in a selective 
distribution, swollen achromasic neurons, and extensive deposition of abnormal 
tau in neurons and glia. We now report 3 patients with this distinctive 
pathology who presented with cognitive changes and only mild or delayed motor 
symptoms. In 2 patients with severe dementia, pathological changes were 
extensive in the anterior frontal lobe, amygdala, and hippocampus. In a third 
patient who had an isolated speech disturbance for 5 years before developing the 
more typical motor features of cortical-basal ganglionic degeneration, the most 
severe changes were observed in the left motor cortex and adjacent Broca's area. 
It is therefore apparent that the histological changes of cortical-basal 
ganglionic degeneration result in a variety of clinical presentations depending 
on the topography of the lesions. On this basis we conclude that cortical-basal 
ganglionic degeneration should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
language disturbances and dementia, particularly when the latter is accompanied 
by frontal lobe symptomatology, early speech alterations, or parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410400611
PMID: 9007094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 1996 Dec;30(6):749-59. doi: 10.3109/00048679609065041.

Tourette's syndrome in the year 2000.

Robertson MM(1), Boardman J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, University College London, 
Medical School, Middlesex Hospital, United Kingdom.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the current status of knowledge of Tourette's syndrome 
(TS) and to highlight those areas of research that are most likely to have the 
most significant advances in the next few years into the 21st century.
METHOD: Index Medicus was consulted from its beginning in 1885 until 1964 
(inclusive), looking initially under the title 'tics' and subsequently under 
'Tourette's Disorder'. From 1965 and the advent of MEDLINE, a search was 
performed looking for 'Tourette's'. A chronological examination of TS in the 
medical literature is presented. Some issues surrounding Huntington's Disease 
(HD) research are pertinent to TS and may serve as a guide in the future 
direction of TS research; these issues have been identified and illustrated in 
the context of TS. Where relevant, other medical disorders are also commented 
on.
RESULTS: There has been a steady increase in the volume of TS literature since 
1885, with a marked increase since 1980, changing in focus from a psychological 
to a neurobiological viewpoint. Current areas of interest include genetics, 
comorbid psychopathologies, neuroimaging, treatments, epidemiology and 
educational considerations. Issues raised by HD and other movement disorders 
such as Parkinson's Disease (PD) are predictive testing, gene therapy and neural 
transplants.
CONCLUSIONS: The year 2000 is likely to herald a significant increase in our 
knowledge of the genetics and neuroimaging of TS, with new developments in 
therapy. A broadening of awareness of TS among health workers and teachers in 
particular is likely to increase the number of diagnosed patients and, hence, 
new challenges will be posed to existing resources for health and educational 
provision.

DOI: 10.3109/00048679609065041
PMID: 9034463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 1996 Dec;54(4):687-90. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x1996000400023.

[Dementia in Parkinson's disease. Critical evaluation of the literature].

[Article in Portuguese]

Pamplona Lde A(1), De Mattos JP.

Author information:
(1)Serviço de Neurologia do Hospital Universitário Clementino Fraga Filho da 
Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro (UFRJ), Brasil.

In the last 30 years, Parkinson's disease has been object of great progress. The 
majority of patients reaches a longer life with quality because of the modern 
therapeutic approach. However, dementia that can occur in the evolutive process, 
has its neuropathology not completely defined until now. There are lesions in 
the basal ganglia, in the ventral area of the mesencephalic tegmentum in the 
thalamus, in the substantia nigra and in the frontal cortex. The presence of 
Lewy bodies in the cortex is associated with dementia, in the same way that the 
anatomopathological features of Alzheimer's disease, in many cases. Dementia 
should have a multifactorial basis. Different types of neurotransmitters, like 
serotonin, acetylcholine and dopamine, or even hormones, like cortisol, may be 
altered in a great number of demented parkinsonians. Depression, found in up to 
40% of patients, have been related as a risk factor for dementia, present 
approximately in 25% of cases. Studies in this area are still conflicting, with 
some confirming the relation among depression, cortical atrophy, 
hypercortisolemia and Parkinson's disease. Neuropsychologic studies show that 
the dementia in Parkinson's disease is of subcortical type. It is also known 
that parkinsonians, even those without cognitive deficiencies clinically 
significant, present deficits if submitted to more detailed neuropsychological 
tests. It is assumed, so, that cognitive impairments are intrinsic to the 
disease, varying its expression among patients. Dementia shall be diagnosed 
based on the criteria established in the diagnostic and statistical manual of 
mental disorders of the American Psychiatry Association, as well as computed 
tomography and magnetic resonance. For treatment, parkinsonian dementia does not 
recognize efficacious agents until now.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x1996000400023
PMID: 9201355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Acta Neuropathol. 1997 Jan;93(1):87-92. doi: 10.1007/s004010050586.

Amyloid P immunoreactivity precedes C4d deposition on extracellular 
neurofibrillary tangles.

Schwab C(1), Steele JC, McGeer EG, McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Extracellular neurofibrillary tangles (eNFTs) are the insoluble cytoskeletal 
debris left behind when neurons with intracellular neurofibrillary tangles 
(iNFTs) die. Reactive microglia and reactive astrocytes gather around eNFTs. 
Many inflammatory proteins are deposited in their vicinity, including activated 
components of the classical complement pathway. Agents which are potential 
activators of the pathway include beta-amyloid protein (A beta) and amyloid P 
(AP), since these in vitro activators have been reported to be associated with 
both senile plaques (SPs) and eNFTs. To investigate the apparent order in which 
these proteins are deposited, we studied by immunohistochemistry the relative 
association of AP, A beta, and the classical complement protein C4d with eNFTs 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD), parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam 
(lytico-bodig, LB), and elderly non-demented cases. In normal elderly cases with 
mild tangle development, most but not all eNFTs were AP positive. Substantially 
fewer eNFTs were C4d positive, and in two of the three cases no eNFTs were A 
beta positive. In AD and mild LB cases with more extensive tangle development, a 
high portion of eNFTs were AP positive, and most of them were C4d positive. Only 
a few were A beta positive. In severe LB cases, with dense tangle development, 
almost all eNFTs were AP and C4d positive, and a significant number were also A 
beta positive. AP seems to be deposited early in eNFT exposure and could 
therefore be a potential activator of the complement pathway, while A beta 
deposition occurs relatively late in the process, and is therefore unlikely to 
be responsible.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010050586
PMID: 9006661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Brain. 1997 Jan;120 ( Pt 1):65-74. doi: 10.1093/brain/120.1.65.

Which clinical features differentiate progressive supranuclear palsy 
(Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome) from related disorders? A 
clinicopathological study.

Litvan I(1), Campbell G, Mangone CA, Verny M, McKee A, Chaudhuri KR, Jellinger 
K, Pearce RK, D'Olhaberriague L.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-9130, USA.

The difficulty in differentiating progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP, also 
called Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome) from other related disorders was 
the incentive for a study to determine the clinical features that best 
distinguish PSP. Logistic regression and classification and regression tree 
analysis (CART) were used to analyse data obtained at the first visit from a 
sample of 83 patients with a clinical history of parkinsonism or dementia 
confirmed neuropathologically, including PSP (n = 24), corticobasal degeneration 
(n = 11), Parkinson's disease (PD, n = 11), diffuse Lewy body disease (n = 14). 
Pick's disease (n = 8) and multiple system atrophy (MSA, n = 15). Supranuclear 
vertical gaze palsy, moderate or severe postural instability and falls during 
the first year after onset of symptoms classified the sample with 9% error using 
logistic regression analysis. The CART identified similar features and was also 
helpful in identifying particular attributes that separate PSP from each of the 
other disorders. Unstable gait, absence of tremor-dominant disease and absence 
of a response to levodopa differentiated PSP from PD. Supranuclear vertical gaze 
palsy, gait instability and the absence of delusions distinguished PSP from 
diffuse Lewy body disease. Supranuclear vertical gaze palsy and increased age at 
symptom-onset distinguished PSP from MSA. Gait abnormality, severe upward gaze 
palsy, bilateral bradykinesia and absence of alien limb syndorme separated PSP 
from corticobasal degeneration. Postural instability successfully classified PSP 
from Pick's disease. The present study may help to minimize the difficulties 
neurologists experience when attempting to classify these disorders at early 
stages.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/120.1.65
PMID: 9055798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Neuroepidemiology. 1997;16(2):60-8. doi: 10.1159/000109672.

The Kinmen Neurological Disorders Survey (KINDS): a study of a Chinese 
population.

Liu HC(1), Wang SJ, Fuh JL, Liu CY, Lin KP, Lin CH, Wang PN, Lin KN, Wang HC, 
Chen HM, Chang R, Larson EB, Wu GS, Chou P, Teng EL.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Institute, Veterans General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

We conducted an epidemiological study of several neurological disorders among 
the Chinese aged 50 years or older on the islet of Kinmen. All participants were 
interviewed and examined by neurologists. From the targeted population of 5,061 
individuals, 3,915 (77.4%) of them completed the evaluations. Among the 4,087 
individuals with whom face-to-face contact was made, the refusal rate was 4.2%. 
The disorders of interest were dementia, Parkinson's disease, essential tremor, 
stroke, transient ischemic attacks, and migraine. Among the 3,915 participants, 
366 cases were found with 1 or more of the surveyed neurological disorders on 
the prevalence day, August 1, 1993, yielding a prevalence of 93.5/1,000. The 
purpose of this study, the general methodology, and some overall findings are 
presented in this communication in order to provide a common background for 
detailed findings on each disorder to be reported separately.

DOI: 10.1159/000109672
PMID: 9057167 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Gerontology. 1997;43 Suppl 1:2-10. doi: 10.1159/000213879.

Apolipoprotein E genotyping and cerebrospinal fluid tau protein: implications 
for the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Arai H(1), Higuchi S, Sasaki H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tohoku University School of Medicine, 
Sendai, Japan.

Apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotyping was conducted in sporadic Alzheimer's disease 
(AD, n = 91) as well as in other dementing disorders including Parkinson's 
disease (PD, n = 73), autopsy-confirmed diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD, n = 
16), progressive supranuclear palsy (n = 13), vascular dementia (n = 55), 
alcoholic dementia (n =25) and normal control subjects (n = 77). ApoE epsilon 4 
allele frequency was significantly higher in AD (33.5%, p < 0.001), DLBD (40.6%, 
p < 0.001) and demented PD (29.4%, p < 0.05) compared to that in normal controls 
(11.7%). The association of the ApoE epsilon 4 allele with AD was more 
pronounced in early-onset AD (46.4%) than in late-onset AD (27.8%). 46% of the 
AD individuals developed AD without association to ApoE epsilon 4, and epsilon 4 
homozygotes were found not only in AD, but also in many of other dementing 
disorders. These results suggest that ApoE genotyping cannot provide certainty 
about the presence of absence of AD, and that it should be used as an adjunct to 
other diagnostic tests for AD. On the other hand, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) tau 
levels were significantly elevated (p < 0.0001) in AD (78.0 +/- 44.2 pg/ml) 
compared to those in normal controls (10.6 +/- 8.6 pg/ml). The specificity and 
the sensitivity of distinguishing AD from normal controls was 95.0 and 91.2%, 
respectively. Elevated CSF-tau levels were also detected in some patients with 
acute neurological diseases including meningoencephalitis, Creutzfeld-Jacob 
disease, normal pressure hydrocephalus and vitamin B12 deficiency 
encephalopathy. Increased CSF-tau levels in AD were found regardless of the age 
at onset, clinical stage, ApoE genotype, alpha 1-antichymotrypsin genotype, and 
presenilin-1 genotype. The CSF-tau levels continued to be abnormal during the 
progression of AD. These results suggest that CSF-tau serves as an unequivocal 
and reliable biological marker to aid in the clinical diagnosis of AD.

DOI: 10.1159/000213879
PMID: 9187933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 1997;68:18-23. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6513-3_4.

Selection criteria for unilateral posteroventral pallidotomy.

Alterman RL(1), Kelly P, Sterio D, Fazzini E, Eidelberg D, Perrine K, Beric A.

Author information:
(1)New York University Center for the Study and Treatment of Movement Disorders, 
Manhasset, NY, USA.

In an attempt to refine the indications for posteroventral pallidotomy (PVP) the 
authors instituted strict selection criteria which are based on the experience 
gained from the first 60 pallidotomy patients treated at their institution. In 
addition to clinical evaluation, all pallidotomy candidates undergo 
neuropsychological testing and 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose utilization positron 
emission tomography (FDG/PET). The data from which these criteria were developed 
are presented as are early clinical results. The authors demonstrate that these 
criteria enhance the efficacy of the procedure by assuring therapeutic response 
and reducing the incidence of post-operative dementia. Their indications and 
contraindications for pallidotomy are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6513-3_4
PMID: 9233408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;49:23-31. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6844-8_3.

The relationship of Alzheimer-type pathology to dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Jendroska K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Clinic Charité, Berlin, Federal Republic 
of Germany.

Lewy body degeneration of the subcortical nuclei other than the substantia nigra 
is common in PD and may represent the substrate for a higher vulnerability to 
dementia in patients with PD. Cortical pathologies of Alzheimer and Lewy body 
type seem to be the major determinants of dementia. The prevalence of 
Alzheimer's disease is not increased in PD, but "early" cortical Alzheimer 
lesions (usually sub-clinical in normal controls) are frequently associated with 
dementia in PD. Furthermore, dementia in PD is heterogeneous and should always 
prompt the clinician to search for treatable causes.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6844-8_3
PMID: 9266411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;49:33-42. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6844-8_4.

Models to study the role of neurotrophic factors in neurodegeneration.

Lindholm D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Neuroscience, Uppsala University, Sweden.

The physiological functions of neurotrophic factors, such as nerve growth factor 
(NGF), in supporting the survival and differentiation of specific neurons during 
early development has in many cases been well established. Recent studies have 
shown that neurotrophic factors can also protect vulnerable neurons against a 
variety of mechanical and chemical injuries. The role and the effects of 
neurotrophic factors in various neurological diseases are however less known. 
Neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson and Alzheimer's diseases as well as 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are characterized by an impaired function 
and ultimate loss of specific populations of neurons. The study of the ethiology 
and molecular biology of these diseases has for a long time been hampered by the 
lack of good animal models mimicked part of the human disease in experimental 
animals. Here we will discuss some of the current approaches taken in these 
studies as well as address the important question of the possible beneficial 
effect of neurotrophic factors in alleviating the symptoms and possibly 
retarding the course of neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6844-8_4
PMID: 9266412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;51:49-55. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_5.

Neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads as a cause of dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Braak H(1), Braak E, Yilmazer D, de Vos RA, Jansen EN, Bohl J.

Author information:
(1)Zentrum der Morphologie, Universität Frankfurt/Main, Federal Republic of 
Germany.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are the most common 
age-related degenerative disorders of the human brain. Both diseases involve 
multiple neuronal systems and are the consequences of cytoskeletal 
abnormalities. In AD susceptible neurons produce neurofibrillary changes, while 
in Parkinson's disease, they develop Lewy bodies. In AD six developmental stages 
can be distinguished on account of the predictable manner in which the 
neurofibrillary changes spread across the cerebral cortex. During the course of 
PD numerous limbic determined parts of the brain undergo specific lesions 
regulating endocrine and autonomic functions. In general, the extranigral 
destructions are in themselves not sufficient to produce overt intellectual 
deterioration. Fully developed Parkinson's disease with concurring incipient 
Alzheimer's disease is likely to cause impaired cognition.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_5
PMID: 9470128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


389. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;51:111-20. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_9.

Pathological diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with cortical Lewy 
bodies: review and proposal for a descriptive approach.

Lowe J(1), Dickson D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory Sciences, University of Nottingham Medical 
School, Queen's Medical Centre, United Kingdom.

In recent years dementia histologically characterised by the presence of 
cortical Lewy bodies has been increasingly recognised. There is now need for a 
scheme for an internationally acceptable scheme for pathological diagnosis and 
classification so that clinical, pathological and molecular features of disease 
can be correlated. Recent observations made by different groups in large patient 
series have used slightly different pathological criteria resulting in at least 
seven different diagnostic terms. In some patients the only cortical pathology 
is the presence of Lewy bodies, while in the majority of patients there are 
coexisting pathological changes which either overlap with those seen in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Cortical Lewy bodies can also be present in patients 
who do not have any obvious cognitive abnormality. A problem with equating 
studies from different groups is that different criteria have been used to 
define AD, so that establishing the relevance of cortical Lewy bodies themselves 
to cognitive decline and separating this from the contribution which may be 
related to the AD pathology is problematic. The lesions which appear to be of 
most relevance to potential cognitive decline in DLB are cortical Lewy bodies, 
Lewy-related neurites, senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, neuronal and 
synaptic loss, spongiform change, and cortical cholinergic deficits. It is 
possible to operationally classify patients with cognitive decline and cortical 
Lewy bodies into three main groups, Cortical Lewy body disease, Cortical Lewy 
body disease with plaques, and Cortical Lewy body disease with plaques and 
tangles. There are frequent cases which overlap these groups making operational 
classification difficult in practice. A descriptive classification, in which the 
severity of different pathological changes is rated, is easy to use in practice. 
As new molecular risk factors for AD or DLB are revealed they will need to be 
related to morphological and clinical features. A descriptive diagnostic 
assessment for DLB will facilitate such studies and makes no judgements as to 
what these relationships will be.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_9
PMID: 9470132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;51:121-35. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_10.

Pathology of familial Alzheimer's disease with Lewy bodies.

Revesz T(1), McLaughlin JL, Rossor MN, Lantos PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.

The neuropathological findings of three cases from two pedigrees with early 
onset familial Alzheimer's disease (FAD) are reported. Affected members of the 
first family, including cases 1 and 2 reported here, are known to have 717 
valine to isoleucine mutation of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene, while 
the genetic background of the disease has not been clarified yet in the second 
family. In all three cases, in addition to the classical histological findings 
associated with Alzheimer's disease (AD), both nigral and cortical Lewy bodies 
(LBs) occurred. The association of LBs with AD type pathology, which may be 
observed in both sporadic and familial AD, raises important nosological issues. 
These include a possible overlap between AD and other neurodegenerative 
conditions presenting primarily with LBs. In this respect the clinically and 
neuropathologically distinct disease entity described under the terms of "senile 
dementia of the Lewy body type" and "Lewy body variant of AD" may be especially 
important. The occurrence of LBs in association with severe AD-type histological 
changes in sporadic and especially in some familial AD cases indicate that these 
inclusions may be another expression of the altered cytoskeleton in AD.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_10
PMID: 9470133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;51:161-5. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_13.

Apolipoprotein E gene in Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia and Alzheimer's 
disease.

St Clair D(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Health, University of Aberdeen, United Kingdom.

Apolipoprotein E (Apo E) epsilon 4 allele is a risk factor for early and late 
onset Alzheimer's disease. This prompted us to examine other neurophyschiatric 
phenotypes. Epsilon 4 allele was significantly enriched in Lewy body dementia (n 
= 39) but not in Parkinson's disease (n = 50) or Schizophrenia (n = 175) 
compared to aged non-demented controls (n = 47) and the Scottish population (n = 
400). We conclude that Lewy body disease should be regarded as a variant of 
Alzheimer's but not Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_13
PMID: 9470136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1997;51:175-204. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_15.

Treatment of behavioural disturbances in Parkinson's disease.

Valldeoriola F(1), Nobbe FA, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Hospital Clínic i Provincial 
de Barcelona, Institut Pi Sunyer, University of Barcelona, Spain.

Behavioural disorders in Parkinson's disease can grossly be subdivided in 
primary disturbances and those which are related to drug treatment. Depression 
and anxiety are a common feature in parkinsonian patients. Both occur 
independently of drug treatment. In general, most current antidepressive and 
anxiolytic drugs could be administered in Parkinson's disease with the same 
precautions as in the normal population. However, in single case reports modern 
serotonin reuptake blockers in Parkinson's disease have been accused to worsen 
parkinsonian motor condition. Combinations of serotonin reuptake inhibitors with 
MAO-inhibitors like selegiline should be used with caution. In the case of 
cognitive decline firstly an underlying depression should be disclosed or if 
existent be treated. Depression seems to be the single most important factor 
associated with the severity of dementia and early antidepressant treatment 
seems to decrease cognitive decline in depressed parkinsonian patients. 
Anticholinergic medications should be discontinued since they may cause mental 
side effects. Sleep disorders in Parkinson's disease are mainly caused by 
nocturnal akinesia, which causes sleep fragmentation or altered dreaming and 
nightmares, which might be a side-effect of dopaminergic treatment. In the first 
case the administration of a controlled release preparation of levodopa at 
bedtime may be indicated. If the sleep disorder is considered to be due to 
dopaminergic medication, a reduction of long-term acting agents like modern 
dopamine agonists and controlled-release levodopa should be considered. In 
severe psychotic states related to drug treatment antiparkinsonian therapy must 
be carefully analysed and, if possible, reduced. If motor condition worsens 
and/or psychiatric symptoms do not improve, initiation with "atypical" 
neuroleptics like clozapine is indicated. The pharmacological and clinical 
properties of new antipsychotic drugs that can be used in Parkinson's disease 
are revised.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6846-2_15
PMID: 9470138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Neurology. 1997 Feb;48(2):546-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.48.2.546-a.

Early frontal impairment as a predictor of dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Piccirilli M, D'Alessandro P, Finali G, Piccinin G.

Comment on
    Neurology. 1995 Sep;45(9):1691-6.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.48.2.546-a
PMID: 9040764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1997 Feb;62(2):119-24. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.62.2.119.

Alzheimer's disease after remote head injury: an incidence study.

Schofield PW(1), Tang M, Marder K, Bell K, Dooneief G, Chun M, Sano M, Stern Y, 
Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York City 10032, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate a history of remote head injury as a risk factor for 
subsequent dementia due to Alzheimer's disease.
METHODS: 271 participants of a community based longitudinal study of aging in 
north Manhattan without evidence of significant cognitive impairment were 
interrogated for a history of head injury on two occasions at entry into the 
study. The examining physician sought a history of head injury with loss of 
conciousness. Independently, a risk factor interviewer inquired about a history 
of head injury with loss of consiousness or amnesia, the duration of any loss of 
consiousness, and the date of the head injury. Patients were followed up with 
standardised annual evaluations for up to five years to determine the first 
occurrence of dementia.
RESULTS: Over the course of the study incident dementia due to probable or 
possible Alzheimer's disease was diagnosed in 39 patients. Cox proportional 
hazards modelling showed that a history of head injury with loss of consiousness 
reported to the physician was associated with earlier onset of dementia due to 
Alzheimer's disease (relative risk (RR) = 4.1, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 
1.3-12.7). head injury with loss of consiousness or amnesia reported to the risk 
factor interviewer was not significantly associated with earlier onset of 
Alzheimer's disease overall (RR 2.0, 95% CI 0.7-6.2), but those who reported 
loss of consiousness exceeding five minutes were at significantly increased risk 
(RR 11.2, 95% CI 2.3-59.8). Incident Alzheimer's disease was significantly 
associated with head injury which occurred within the preceding 30 years (RR 
5.4, 95% CI 1.5-19.5).
CONCLUSION: The results of this cohort study are consistent with the findings of 
several case-control studies suggesting that head injury may be a risk factor 
for Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.62.2.119
PMCID: PMC486721
PMID: 9048710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


395. J Neurol Sci. 1997 Feb 27;146(1):53-7. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(96)00282-1.

Close relationship between spongiform change and ubiquitin-positive granular 
structures in diffuse Lewy body disease.

Iseki E(1), Li F, Kosaka K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 
Kanazawa-ku, Japan.

The origin of spongiform change seen in diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD) cases 
was elucidated, as compared with Alzheimer-type dementia (ATD) cases. Spongiform 
change was composed of numerous vacuoles in the neuropil, predominantly in 
layers II-IIIab of the transentorhinal cortex and in the intermediate area of 
the accessory basal amygdaloid nucleus. The distribution of spongiform change 
was identical to that of ubiquitin-positive granular structures (UPG) in 
non-demented cases. The degree of spongiform change was correlated with loss of 
the large pyramidal neurons in layers IIIc and V of the transentorhinal cortex 
and with the disappearance of their ubiquitin-positive granular processes. With 
electron microscopy, the early vacuoles of spongiform change appeared to arise 
in the presynaptic terminals as well as in the postsynaptic terminals and 
dendritic processes. These findings indicate that the vacuoles derive from 
degeneration of terminal axons of the large pyramidal neurons. The occurrence of 
spongiform change characteristic to DLBD suggests that the large pyramidal 
neurons degenerate more rapidly in DLBD than in ATD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(96)00282-1
PMID: 9077496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


396. J Neurol. 1997 Mar;244(3):175-81. doi: 10.1007/s004150050069.

Medial temporal lobe atrophy in memory disorders.

Pasquier F(1), Hamon M, Lebert F, Jacob B, Pruvo JP, Petit H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Lille, France.

Medial temporal lobe atrophy determined by temporal lobe oriented computed 
tomography (CT), 1 year before death, is strongly associated with 
histopathologically confirmed Alzheimer's disease (AD). The aim of this study 
was to assess the diagnostic accuracy of medial temporal lobe measurement for 
the diagnosis of AD in patients referred to a memory disorders clinic, 
especially those at an early stage of the disease. CT oriented to the temporal 
lobe was performed in 333 subjects aged 41-93 years consecutively recruited in a 
Memory Disorders Clinic: 124 had probable AD, Mini Mental State score (MMS) = 17 
(8); 50 possible AD [MMS = 21 (5)]; and 119 patients had miscellaneous memory 
disorders [MMS = 22 (7): frontotemporal lobe dementia, subcortical dementia, 
cortical Lewy body disease, vascular dementia, Korsakoff syndrome, focal 
atrophy, etc.]. There were also 19 anxious/depressed patients [MMS = 29 (1)] 
with normal performance on memory tests, and 21 controls. The minimum width of 
the medial temporal lobe was measured. The best cut-off to distinguish AD 
patients from non-AD patients was 11.5 mm, in agreement with data in the 
literature. At this threshold, 84% of probable AD patients had a positive test 
and 90% of controls and anxious/depressed patients had a negative test. For the 
diagnosis of probable AD, sensitivity of the measurement was 0.81, specificity 
0.95, predictive positive value 0.99, predictive negative value 0.45, and 
diagnostic accuracy 0.83. The test was positive in half the possible AD 
patients, and half those with miscellaneous memory disorders. It was negative in 
all anxious/depressed patients. Therefore, temporal lobe oriented CT might be a 
valuable tool for assessment of medial temporal lobe atrophy in AD routine 
practice.

DOI: 10.1007/s004150050069
PMID: 9050958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1997 Mar-Apr;8(2):110-6. doi: 10.1159/000106615.

Electroencephalography as a diagnostic tool in dementia.

Rosén I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Clinical electroencephalography is a relatively simple and inexpensive 
diagnostic tool with a high sensitivity for diffuse organic encephalopathy of 
various aetiologies but with a rather low specificity for the type of diagnosis. 
The highest sensitivity is shown in DAT and Parkinson dementia, and in these 
conditions the degree of EEG abnormality is correlated with the disease 
severity. Quantification of EEG makes these correlations more reliable and 
provides a method for monitoring therapeutic effects. Dementias with 
predominantly frontal pathology show much less EEG abnormality, and in these 
conditions the EEG is often normal despite obvious clinical dementia. Also, 
alcohol dementias often show normal EEG patterns. At an early stage of clinical 
evaluation, EEG may be useful in the discrimination of organic dementia from 
pseudodementia, because EEG is usually normal in depression, confusion, 
agitation and other psychiatric conditions. In pseudodementia due to 
intoxication with sedatives the EEG is usually dominated by diffuse beta 
activity. At the stage of differential diagnosis of an organic brain disorder, 
EEG cannot reliably discriminate between encephalopathies secondary to 
hydrocephalus, AIDS, cerebrovascular disease, B12 deficiency and primary 
degenerative diseases such as DAT. More specific EEG patterns are seen in acute 
cerebrovascular lesions, metabolic encephalopathies, i.e. of hepatic origin, 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, herpes encephalitis, and nonconvulsive status 
epilepticus as possible causes of a rapidly deteriorating mental and 
neurological condition. Repeated EEG recordings over time would add 
significantly to the diagnostic information. New techniques such as 
topographical brain mapping, analysis of the EEG during REM sleep, coherence 
analysis of the EEG activity, and the combination of quantified EEG techniques 
with evoked potentials and event-related potentials will presumably add to the 
sensitivity as well as the specificity of the electrophysiological methods in 
the diagnosis of dementia.

DOI: 10.1159/000106615
PMID: 9065324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Arch Neurol. 1997 Mar;54(3):260-4. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550150024011.

Mortality from Parkinson disease.

Louis ED(1), Marder K, Cote L, Tang M, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, 
New York, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Levodopa therapy for Parkinson disease (PD) has improved quality of 
life, but mortality rates remain high. Although the presence of dementia and 
severity of extrapyramidal signs (EPSs) influence morbidity in PD, it is not 
known whether these manifestations contribute to mortality.
METHODS: Patients with PD were compared with nondemented and demented elderly 
subjects. Each underwent annual neurological and neuropsychological 
examinations. Dementia was diagnosed by Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders, Third Edition, Revised criteria, and EPSs were rated with the 
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Survival rates were compared using 
Kaplan-Meier analysis and Cox proportional hazards models.
RESULTS: The risk of mortality, when compared with nondemented elderly subjects, 
was highest among those with both PD and dementia (rate ratio, 4.9; 95% 
confidence interval, 3.4-7.1), but also was elevated in patients with PD only 
(rate ratio, 2.7; 95% confidence interval, 1.7-4.4). Dementia in the absence of 
PD also was associated with an increased risk of mortality (rate ratio, 1.6; 95% 
confidence interval, 1.1-2.3). A high baseline total EPS score was associated 
with significantly earlier mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Compared with nondemented elderly people in the same community, 
patients with PD have a 2- to 5-fold increased risk of mortality. The risk is 
strongly related to the presence of severe EPSs, especially bradykinesia. 
Despite the introduction of levodopa and other advances in the treatment of PD, 
these factors greatly increase mortality.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550150024011
PMID: 9074394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mov Disord. 1997 Mar;12(2):190-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.870120209.

Dietary antioxidants and other dietary factors in the etiology of Parkinson's 
disease.

Scheider WL(1), Hershey LA, Vena JE, Holmlund T, Marshall JR, Freudenheim.

Author information:
(1)Department of Social and Preventive Medicine, State University of New York at 
Buffalo 14214, USA.

It has been suggested that dietary antioxidants reduce Parkinson's disease (PD) 
risk by neutralizing free radicals, thus preventing injury to neurons in the 
substantia nigra. This case-control study examined the possible role of 
long-term dietary antioxidant intake in PD etiology. Cases (n = 57) were males 
45-79 years old with at least two cardinal signs of PD and no evidence of other 
forms of parkinsonism or dementia. Age-matched friend controls (n = 50) were 
chosen from lists provided by the cases. Usual dietary intake 20 years ago, 
including vitamins E and C and carotenoids, was assessed by a 102-item food 
frequency questionnaire. Odds ratios and 95% confidence intervals were 
calculated using conditional logistic regression. Antioxidant intake, adjusted 
for age, education, smoking, rural living, and total energy intake, was not 
associated with reduced PD risk. Trends toward greater PD risk were associated 
with higher intakes of vitamin C and carotenoids, especially xanthophylls, 
reflecting higher intakes by PD cases of fruit and certain vegetables. Intakes 
of sweet foods, including fruit, were associated with higher PD risk, suggesting 
that the observed trends may be due to a preference for sweet foods. This study 
does not provide support for a protective effect of long-term dietary 
antioxidant intake on PD risk.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870120209
PMID: 9087977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Presse Med. 1997 Mar 1;26(6):290-6.

[Atypical familial parkinsonian syndromes. Parkinson diseases or specific 
entities?].

[Article in French]

Taussig D(1), Planté-Bordeneuve V.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie (DT), Centre Hospitalier Sainte-Anne, Paris.

RECENT DESCRIPTION: Recent report have described "atypical" familial 
extrapyramidal syndromes similar to authentic Parkinson's disease and 
well-defined genetic diseases. PERRY SYNDROME: Onset occurs between 35 and 57 
years, leading to death within 3 to 7 years. The syndrome associates a 
Parkinson's syndrome, athymormia and hypoventilation. Massive neuronal 
depopulation in the locus niger and rare Lewy bodies are seen. PARKINSON'S 
SYNDROME WITH PERIPHERAL NEUROPATHY: In addition to the extrapyramidal signs, 
there is ptosis, neuropathy and sometimes dementia and major neurone loss in the 
locus niger. No Lewy bodies have been identified. PARKINSON'S SYNDROME WITH 
PALLIDOPONTONIGRAL DEGENERATION: Onset occurs between 32 and 58 years, leading 
to death within 8 years. Extrapyramidal signs, falls, supranuclear palsy and 
dementia are observed. Neurone loss is severe in the pars compacta, locu sniger, 
palladium, pons, and mesencephalic tegmentum. There are no Lewy bodies. 
EARLY-ONSET PARKINSON'S SYNDROME: Beginning between 2 and 39 years, there are no 
associated neurological signs. Severe neurone loss in the pars compacta and the 
pars reticulata of the niger locus without Lewy bodies. PARKINSON'S 
SYNDROME-DEMENTIA WITH "BALLOON NEURONES": This syndrome begins at 24-59 years 
and leads to death in 8 to 11 years. There are extrapyramidal signs, a pyramidal 
syndrome, dementia, generalized seizures and dysautonomia. Major neurone loss 
occurs with balloon neurones in the anterior temporal cortex, the amygdala, the 
parahippocampal gyrus, the hypothalamus, the dorsal nucleus of the X and rare 
Lewy bodies. PARKINSON'S SYNDROME FRONTAL DEMENTIA AND AMYOTROPHY: Beginning 
between 27 and 56 years, the syndrome leads to death in 13 years and associates 
frontal dementia with motor neurone defects with the extrapyramidal signs. There 
is neurone loss in the locus niger and amygdala as well as in the anterior horn 
of the cord. There are no Lewy bodies. SPECIFIC CLINICOPATHOLOGICAL ENTITIES: is 
the most likely hypothesis. There is no anatomoclinical evidence suggesting 
these syndromes should be considered to be Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 9122134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


