3401. Occup Ther Health Care. 2014 Apr;28(2):82-121. doi: 
10.3109/07380577.2014.904535.

Screening and assessment tools for determining fitness to drive: a review of the 
literature for the pathways project.

Dickerson AE(1).

Author information:
(1)Occupational Therapy, East Carolina University , Greenville, North Carolina , 
USA.

With a brief introduction, 10 tables summarize the findings from the literature 
describing screening and assessment tools used with older adults to identify 
risk or determine fitness to drive. With a focus on occupational therapy's duty 
to address driving as a valued activity, this paper offers information about 
tools used by occupational therapy practitioners across practice settings and 
specialists in driver rehabilitation. The tables are organized into groups of 
key research studies of assessment tools, screening batteries, tools used in 
combination (i.e., as a battery), driving simulation as an assessment tool, and 
screening/assessment for individuals with stroke, vision impairment, Parkinson's 
disease, dementia, and aging. Each table has a summary of important concepts to 
consider as occupational therapists choose the methods and tools to evaluate 
fitness to drive.

DOI: 10.3109/07380577.2014.904535
PMID: 24754758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3402. BMC Geriatr. 2014 Apr 23;14:54. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-54.

Harm avoidance is associated with progression of parkinsonism in 
community-dwelling older adults: a prospective cohort study.

Buchman AS(1), Yu L, Wilson RS, Shulman JM, Boyle PA, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA. Aron_S_Buchman@rush.edu.

BACKGROUND: We tested the hypothesis that harm avoidance, a trait associated 
with behavioral inhibition, is associated with the rate of change in 
parkinsonism in older adults.
METHODS: At baseline harm avoidance was assessed with a standard self-report 
instrument in 969 older people without dementia participating in the Rush Memory 
and Aging Project, a longitudinal community-based cohort study. Parkinsonism was 
assessed annually with a modified version of the motor section of the Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (mUPDRS).
RESULTS: Average follow-up was 5 years. A linear mixed-effects model controlling 
for age, sex and education showed that for an average participant (female, 80 
years old at baseline, with 14 years of education and a harm avoidance score of 
10), the overall severity of parkinsonism increased by about 0.05 unit/ year 
(Estimate, 0.054, S.E., 0.007, p <0.001) and that the level of harm avoidance 
was associated with the progression of parkinsonism (Estimate, 0.004, S.E., 
0.001, p <0.001). Thus, for an average participant, every 6 point (~1 SD) 
increase in harm avoidance score at baseline, the rate of progression of 
parkinsonism increased about 50% compared to an individual with an average harm 
avoidance score. This amount of change in parkinsonism over the course of the 
study was associated with about a 5% increased risk of death. The association 
between harm avoidance and progression of parkinsonism persisted when 
controlling for cognitive function, depressive symptoms, loneliness, 
neuroticism, late-life cognitive, social and physical activities and chronic 
health conditions.
CONCLUSION: A higher level of the harm avoidance trait is associated with a more 
rapid progression of parkinsonism in older adults.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-54
PMCID: PMC4022545
PMID: 24754876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3403. Int J Clin Pract. 2014 Nov;68(11):1345-51. doi: 10.1111/ijcp.12445. Epub 2014 
Apr 22.

Combined DaT imaging and olfactory testing for differentiating parkinsonian 
disorders.

Borghammer P(1), Knudsen K, Østergaard K, Danielsen EH, Pavese N, Arveschoug A, 
Bluhme H, Bode M, Morsing A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine and PET Centre, Aarhus University Hospital, 
Aarhus C, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: Dopamine transporter (DaT) imaging with single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) detects loss of striatal dopaminergic innervation 
with very high sensitivity. It cannot readily distinguish idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (iPD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from atypical disorders (aPD). 
However, most iPD/DLB patients are hyposmic, whereas the majority of aPD 
patients were reported to have intact olfaction. For this reason, we conducted a 
longitudinal follow-up study to investigate the power of combined DaT imaging 
and olfactory testing to predict the final diagnosis of the patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 129 patients received [123I]FP-CIT SPECT and 
olfactory testing at baseline assessment. Clinical follow-up 30 ± 12 months 
later was the diagnostic standard of truth. A normative dataset of 24 healthy 
controls was used for comparison.
RESULTS: Baseline DaT imaging predicted a dopamine-deficient diagnosis with 98% 
sensitivity and 98% specificity. The combined DaT/olfactory testing correctly 
classified 91% of patients as iPD/DLB (PPV 91%). The PPV rose to 97% or greater 
in anosmic patients. In contrast, only 45% of aPD patients were categorised 
correctly by combined DaT/olfactory testing - mainly because of the presence of 
normosmic iPD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with an abnormal DaT SPECT, hyposmia yields an a 
posteriori likelihood of iPD/DLB of > 90%. In contrast, a finding of normosmia 
only increases the a posteriori likelihood of aPD to approximately the 50%.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ijcp.12445
PMID: 24754902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3404. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jun;71(6):742-51. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.445.

Cross-sectional and longitudinal relationships between cerebrospinal fluid 
biomarkers and cognitive function in people without cognitive impairment from 
across the adult life span.

Li G(1), Millard SP(2), Peskind ER(3), Zhang J(4), Yu CE(5), Leverenz JB(6), 
Mayer C(2), Shofer JS(1), Raskind MA(3), Quinn JF(7), Galasko DR(8), Montine 
TJ(4).

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of Washington, Seattle.
(2)Veterans Affairs (VA) Northwest Network Mental Illness Research, Education, 
and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle, Washington.
(3)School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of Washington, Seattle2Veterans Affairs (VA) Northwest Network Mental 
Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care 
System, Seattle, Washington.
(4)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle.
(5)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of Washington, 
Seattle5Geriatric Research, Education, and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound 
Health Care System, Seattle, Washington.
(6)School of Medicine, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
University of Washington, Seattle6Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, 
University of Washington, Seattle.
(7)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland8VA Parkinson's Disease Research, Education, and Clinical 
Centers, Portland, Oregon.
(8)School of Medicine, Department of Neurosciences, University of California, 
San Diego, La Jolla.

IMPORTANCE: Age-related cognitive decline among older individuals with normal 
cognition is a complex trait that potentially derives from processes of aging, 
inherited vulnerabilities, environmental factors, and common latent diseases 
that can progress to cause dementia, such as Alzheimer disease and vascular 
brain injury.
OBJECTIVE: To use cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers to gain insight into this 
complex trait.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Secondary analyses of an academic multicenter 
cross-sectional (n = 315) and longitudinal (n = 158) study of 5 
neuropsychological tests (Immediate Recall, Delayed Recall, Trail Making Test 
Parts A and B, and Category Fluency) in cognitively normal individuals aged 21 
to 100 years.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: To investigate the association of these cognitive 
function test results with age, sex, educational level, inheritance of the ε4 
allele of the apolipoprotein E gene, and CSF concentrations of β-amyloid 42 
(Aβ42) and tau (biomarkers of Alzheimer disease) as well as F2-isoprostanes 
(measures of free radical injury).
RESULTS: Age and educational level were broadly predictive of cross-sectional 
cognitive performance; of the genetic and CSF measures, only greater CSF 
F2-isoprostane concentration was significantly associated with poorer executive 
function (adjusted R2 ≤0.31). Longitudinal measures of cognitive abilities, 
except Category Fluency, also were associated broadly with age; of the genetic 
and CSF measures, only lower baseline CSF Aβ42 concentration was associated with 
longitudinal measures of immediate and delayed recall (marginal R2 ≤0.31).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our results suggest that age and educational level 
accounted for a substantial minority of variance in cross-sectional or 
longitudinal cognitive test performance in this large group of cognitively 
normal adults. Latent Alzheimer disease and other diseases that produce free 
radical injury, such as vascular brain injury, accounted for a small amount of 
variation in cognitive test performance across the adult human life span. 
Additional genetic and environmental factors likely contribute substantially to 
age-related cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.445
PMCID: PMC4051849
PMID: 24756381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3405. Drugs. 2014 Apr;74(6):645-57. doi: 10.1007/s40265-014-0209-5.

Early versus delayed initiation of pharmacotherapy in Parkinson's disease.

Löhle M(1), Ramberg CJ, Reichmann H, Schapira AH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Dresden University of Technology, Dresden, Germany.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder 
after Alzheimer's disease and pathologically is characterised by a progressive 
loss of dopaminergic cells of the nigrostriatal pathway. Clinically, PD is 
mainly defined by the presence of the motor symptoms of bradykinesia, rigidity, 
rest tremor and postural instability, but non-motor symptoms such as depression, 
dementia and autonomic disturbances are recognised as integral parts of the 
disease. Although pharmacotherapy for PD was introduced almost 50 years ago, and 
has improved significantly over the intervening period, the timing of initiation 
of treatment in newly diagnosed PD remains controversial. While some physicians 
favour an early start of pharmacotherapy at or soon after diagnosis, others 
prefer to delay pharmacological treatment until a certain degree of disability 
has developed. This article aims to discuss the advantages and disadvantages of 
both strategies by exploring their effects on symptoms, disease progression and 
quality of life. Although the data on putative disease-modifying effects of 
early pharmacological intervention in PD are still inconclusive, we believe that 
the most important indication for an early initiation of anti-parkinsonian 
treatment should be to maintain the quality of life of PD patients and to secure 
their socioeconomic status as long as possible.

DOI: 10.1007/s40265-014-0209-5
PMID: 24756431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3406. Mov Disord. 2014 Apr 15;29(5):608-21. doi: 10.1002/mds.25866.

The spectrum of cognitive impairment in Lewy body diseases.

Goldman JG(1), Williams-Gray C, Barker RA, Duda JE, Galvin JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Section of Parkinson Disease and 
Movement Disorders, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Cognitive impairment represents an important and often defining component of the 
clinical syndromes of Lewy body disorders: Parkinson's disease and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. The spectrum of cognitive deficits in these Lewy body diseases 
encompasses a broad range of clinical features, severity of impairment, and 
timing of presentation. It is now recognized that cognitive dysfunction occurs 
not only in more advanced Parkinson's disease but also in early, untreated 
patients and even in those patients with pre-motor syndromes, such as rapid eye 
movement behavior disorder and hyposmia. In recent years, the concept of mild 
cognitive impairment as a transitional or pre-dementia state in Parkinson's 
disease has emerged. This has led to much research regarding the diagnosis, 
prognosis, and underlying neurobiology of mild cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease, but has also raised questions regarding the usefulness of 
this concept and its application in clinical and research settings. In addition, 
the conundrum of whether Parkinson's disease dementia and dementia with Lewy 
bodies represent the same or different entities remains unresolved. Although 
these disorders overlap in many aspects of their presentations and 
pathophysiology, they differ in other elements, such as timing of cognitive, 
behavioral, and motor symptoms; medication responses; and neuropathological 
contributions. This article examines the spectrum and evolution of cognitive 
impairment in Lewy body disorders and debates these controversial issues in the 
field using point-counterpoint approaches.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25866
PMCID: PMC4126402
PMID: 24757110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3407. Mov Disord. 2014 Apr 15;29(5):622-33. doi: 10.1002/mds.25846.

What can biomarkers tell us about cognition in Parkinson's disease?

Mollenhauer B(1), Rochester L, Chen-Plotkin A, Brooks D.

Author information:
(1)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Kassel and University Medical Center, Göttingen, 
Germany.

Cognitive decline is common in Parkinson's disease (PD), even in the early motor 
stage, and this non-motor feature impacts quality of life and prognosis 
tremendously. In this article, we discuss marker candidates for cognitive 
decline in PD from different angles, including functional and structural imaging 
techniques, biological fluid markers in cerebrospinal fluid, and blood genetic 
predictors, as well as gait as a surrogate marker of cognitive decline. 
Specifically, imaging-based markers of cognitive impairment in PD include 
cortical atrophy, reduced cortical metabolism, loss of cortical cholinergic and 
frontal dopaminergic function, as well as an increased cortical amyloid load. 
Reduced β-amyloid(1-42) in cerebrospinal fluid and lower plasma levels of 
epidermal growth factor are predictors for cognitive decline in PD. In addition, 
genetic variation in the apolipoprotein E (APOE), catechol-O-methyltransferase 
(COMT), microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), and glucocerebrosidase (GBA) 
genes may confer risk for cognitive impairment in PD; and gait disturbance may 
also indicate an increased risk for dementia. Other marker candidates have been 
proposed and are discussed. All of the current studies are hampered by gaps in 
our knowledge about the molecular causes of cognitive decline, which will have 
to be considered in future biomarker studies.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25846
PMCID: PMC4384332
PMID: 24757111 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3408. Mov Disord. 2014 Apr 15;29(5):634-50. doi: 10.1002/mds.25857.

The neurobiological basis of cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Halliday GM(1), Leverenz JB, Schneider JS, Adler CH.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia and the University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, Australia.

The recent formalization of clinical criteria for Parkinson's disease with 
dementia (PDD) codifies many studies on this topic, including those assessing 
biological correlates. These studies show that the emergence of PDD occurs on 
the background of severe dopamine deficits with, the main pathological drivers 
of cognitive decline being a synergistic effect between alpha-synuclein and 
Alzheimer's disease pathology. The presence of these pathologies correlates with 
a marked loss of limbic and cortically projecting dopamine, noradrenaline, 
serotonin, and acetylcholine neurons, although the exact timing of these 
relationships remains to be determined. Genetic factors, such as triplications 
in the α-synuclein gene, lead to a clear increased risk of PDD, whereas others, 
such as parkin mutations, are associated with a reduced risk of PDD. The very 
recent formalization of clinical criteria for PD with mild cognitive impairment 
(PD-MCI) allows only speculation on its biological and genetic bases. Critical 
assessment of animal models shows that chronic low-dose MPTP treatment in 
primates recapitulates PD-MCI over time, enhancing the current biological 
concept of PD-MCI as having enhanced dopamine deficiency in frontostriatal 
pathways as well as involvement of other neurotransmitter systems. Data from 
other animal models support multiple transmitter involvement in cognitive 
impairment in PD. Whereas dopamine dysfunction has been highlighted because of 
its obvious role in PD, the role of the other neurotransmitter systems, 
neurodegenerative pathologies, and genetic factors in PD-MCI remains to be fully 
elucidated.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25857
PMCID: PMC4049032
PMID: 24757112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3409. Mov Disord. 2014 Apr 15;29(5):663-72. doi: 10.1002/mds.25870.

Cognitive impairment and dementia in Parkinson's disease: practical issues and 
management.

Emre M(1), Ford PJ, Bilgiç B, Uç EY.

Author information:
(1)Istanbul University, Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Department of Neurology, 
Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Istanbul, Turkey.

Cognitive impairment and dementia pose particular challenges in the management 
of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD). Decision-making capacity can render 
patients vulnerable in a way that requires careful ethical considerations by 
clinicians with respect to medical decision making, research participation, and 
public safety. Clinicians should discuss how future decisions will be made as 
early in the disease course as possible. Because of cognitive, visual, and motor 
impairments, PD may be associated with unsafe driving, leading to early driving 
cessation in many. DBS of the STN and, to a lesser degree, globus pallidus 
interna (GPi) has consistently been associated with decreased verbal fluency, 
but significant global cognitive decline is usually not observed in patients who 
undergo rigorous selection. There are some observations suggesting lesser 
cognitive decline in GPi DBS than STN DBS, but further research is required. 
Management of PD dementia (PDD) patients involves both pharmacological and 
nonpharmacological measures. Patients with PDD should be offered treatment with 
a cholinesterase inhibitor taking into account expected benefits and potential 
risks. Treatment with neuroleptics may be necessary to treat psychosis; 
classical neuroleptics, as well as risperidone and olanzapine, should be 
avoided. Quetiapine might be considered first-line treatment because it does not 
need special monitoring, although the strongest evidence for efficacy exists for 
clozapine. Evidence from randomized, controlled studies in the PDD population is 
lacking; selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors or serotonin-norepinephrine 
reuptake inhibitors may be used to treat depressive features. Clonazepam or 
melatonin may be useful in the treatment of rapid eye movement behavior 
disorder.

© 2014 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25870
PMID: 24757114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3410. BMC Neurol. 2014 Apr 23;14:88. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-14-88.

Brainstem infarcts predict REM sleep behavior disorder in acute ischemic stroke.

Tang WK(1), Hermann DM, Chen YK, Liang HJ, Liu XX, Chu WC, Ahuja AT, Abrigo J, 
Mok V, Ungvari GS, Wong KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, SAR, 
China. tangwk@cuhk.edu.hk.

BACKGROUND: Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a sleep 
disturbance in which patients enact their dreams while in REM sleep. The 
behavior is typically violent in association with violent dream content, so 
serious harm can be done to the patient or the bed partner. The prevalence of 
RBD is well-known in Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia, and multiple 
systems atrophy. However, its prevalence and causes in stroke remained unclear. 
The aim of this study was to determine factors influencing the appearance of RBD 
in a prospective cohort of patients with acute ischemic stroke.
METHODS: A total of 2,024 patients with first-ever or recurrent acute ischemic 
stroke were admitted to the Acute Stroke Unit at the Prince of Wales Hospital 
between January 2010 and November 2011; 775 of them received an MRI scan. Within 
2 days of admission, a research nurse collected demographic and clinical data 
and assessed the severity of each stroke using the National Institute of Health 
Stroke Scale (NIHSS). One hundred and nineteen of the 775 patients meeting study 
entry criteria formed the study sample. All eligible participants were invited 
to attend a research clinic 3 months after the onset of the index stroke. In the 
attendance, a research assistant administered the MMSE and the 13-item RBD 
questionnaire (RBDQ).
RESULTS: Among 119 stroke patients, 10.9% were exhibited RBD, defined as an REM 
sleep behavior disorder questionnaire score of 19 or above. The proportion of 
patients with acute brainstem infarct was significantly higher in RBD patients 
than those without RBD. Compared with patients without RBD, RBD patients were 
more likely to have brainstem infarcts and had smaller infarct volumes. In a 
multivariate analysis, in which stroke location and infarct volume were 
inserted, brainstem infarcts were an independent predictor of RBD (odds 
ratio = 3.686; P = 0.032).
CONCLUSIONS: The results support the notion of a predominant role of brainstem 
injury in the development of RBD and suggest that patients with brainstem 
infarcts RBD should be evaluated by a clinical neurologist.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-14-88
PMCID: PMC4004510
PMID: 24758223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3411. J Neurol. 2014 Jul;261(7):1344-8. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7352-5. Epub 2014 Apr 
24.

TDP-43 in Alzheimer's disease is not associated with clinical FTLD or 
Parkinsonism.

Jung Y(1), Dickson DW, Murray ME, Whitwell JL, Knopman DS, Boeve BF, Jack CR Jr, 
Parisi JE, Petersen RC, Josephs KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology (Behavioral Neurology), Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, 
USA.

Widespread deposition of TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDa (TDP-43), a major 
protein inclusion commonly found in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) can also be seen in a subset of cases with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Some of these AD cases have TDP-43 immunoreactivity in 
basal ganglia (BG) and substantia nigra (SN), regions that when affected can be 
associated with parkinsonian signs or symptoms, or even features suggestive of 
frontotemporal dementia. Here, we examined the presence of clinical features of 
FTLD, parkinsonian signs and symptoms, and BG atrophy on MRI, in 51 
pathologically confirmed AD cases (Braak neurofibrillary tangle stage IV-VI) 
with widespread TDP-43 deposition, with and without BG and SN involvement. All 
51 cases had presented with progressive cognitive impairment with prominent 
memory deficits. None of the patients demonstrated early behavioral 
disinhibition, apathy, loss of empathy, stereotyped behavior, hyperorality, 
and/or executive deficits. Furthermore, TDP-43 deposition in BG or SN had no 
significant association with tremor (p = 0.80), rigidity (p = 0.19), 
bradykinesia (p = 0.19), and gait/postural instability (p = 0.39). Volumes of 
the BG structures were not associated with TDP-43 deposition in the BG. The 
present study demonstrates that TDP-43 deposition in pathologically confirmed AD 
cases is not associated with a clinical manifestation suggestive of FTLD, or 
parkinsonian features.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7352-5
PMCID: PMC4101047
PMID: 24760339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest On behalf of all authors, 
the corresponding author states that there is no conflict of interest.


3412. An Bras Dermatol. 2014 Mar-Apr;89(2):274-8. doi: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142516.

Bullous pemphigoid and comorbidities: a case-control study in Portuguese 
patients.

Teixeira VB(1), Cabral R(1), Brites MM(1), Vieira R(1), Figueiredo A(1).

Author information:
(1)Coimbra University Hospital, Portugal.

BACKGROUND: Although rare, bullous pemphigoid (BP) is the most common autoimmune 
blistering disease. Recent studies have shown that patients with bullous 
pemphigoid are more likely to have neurological and psychiatric diseases, 
particularly prior to the diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid.
OBJECTIVE: The aims were: (i) to evaluate the demographic and clinical features 
of bullous pemphigoid from a database of patients at a Portuguese university 
hospital and (ii) to compare the prevalence of comorbid conditions before the 
diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid with a control group.
METHODS: Seventy-seven patients with bullous pemphigoid were enrolled in the 
study. They were compared with 176 age- and gender-matched controls, which also 
had the same inpatient to outpatient ratio, but no history of bullous or 
cutaneous malignant disease. Univariate and multivariate analyses were used to 
calculate odds ratios for specific comorbid diseases.
RESULTS: At least one neurologic diagnosis was present in 55.8% of BP patients 
compared with 20.5% controls (p<0.001). Comparing cases to controls, stroke was 
seen in 35.1 vs. 6.8%, OR 8.10 (3.80-17.25); dementia in 37.7 vs. 11.9%, OR 5.25 
(2.71-10.16); and Parkinson's disease in 5.2 vs. 1.1%, OR 4.91 (0.88-27.44). 
Using multivariate analysis, all diseases except Parkinson's retained their 
association with BP. Patients under systemic treatment were eight times more 
likely to have complications than those treated with topical steroids (p< 
0.017).
CONCLUSIONS: The results of this study substantiate the association between BP 
and neurological diseases. In addition, they highlight the potential 
complications associated with the treatment of BP.

DOI: 10.1590/abd1806-4841.20142516
PMCID: PMC4008058
PMID: 24770504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None


3413. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2014 Nov;29(7):630-6. doi: 
10.1177/1533317514531442. Epub 2014 Apr 24.

Dementia and cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease from 
India: a 7-year prospective study.

Sanyal J(1), Banerjee TK(2), Rao VR(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Delhi, New Delhi-110007, India.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Neurosciences Centre, Kolkata, West Bengal, 
India.
(3)Department of Anthropology, University of Delhi, New Delhi-110007, India 
parkinsons_research@rediffmail.com.

Depression and cognitive impairment are frequent manifestations in Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Although a few longitudinal studies have reported on depression 
and dementia in PD, there is a yet a lack of such studies in India. This 7-year 
longitudinal study is a hospital-based prospective case (n = 250)-control (n = 
280) study. In all, 36.8% had PD with no cognitive impairment (PD-Normal), 27.2% 
of the patients with PD were affected by dementia (PDD), and 36% of the 
remaining patients with PD had mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) at baseline. 
After 7 years of evaluation, 32 new patients, 12 patients from the PD-MCI group 
and 9 patients from the PD-Normal group, were diagnosed with dementia. The 
7-year prevalence rate for dementia was estimated to be 49.28%. In the Indian 
population, an early onset of dementia is noted among patients with PD, with the 
age of onset being less than 55 years. Patients with early-onset PDD showed 
depression symptoms that differed significantly from the controls of the same 
age-group. There was a major difference in verbal fluency, word list recall, 
constructional praxis and recall, word list recognition, abridged Boston Naming 
Test, word list memory with repetition, and Mini-Mental State Examination 
between PD-MCI and PDD groups. Hallucinations before baseline (odds ratio [OR] = 
4.427, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 2.122-9.373), akinetic/tremor dominancy 
(OR = 0.380, 95%CI = 0.149-0.953), and asymmetrical disease onset (OR = 0.3285, 
95%CI = 0.1576-0.685) can be considered as risk factors for patients with 
dementia. Patients with early-onset PD might be more prone to complex depression 
and dementia. As the disease progresses, akinetic-dominant PD, early 
hallucinations, and asymmetrical disease onset are the potential risk factors 
for the development of dementia in patients with PD.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317514531442
PMCID: PMC10852774
PMID: 24771763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


3414. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Sep 15;23(18):4814-21. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu196. Epub 2014 
Apr 28.

The genetic contributions of SNCA and LRRK2 genes to Lewy Body pathology in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Linnertz C(1), Lutz MW(2), Ervin JF(1), Allen J(3), Miller NR(3), Welsh-Bohmer 
KA(4), Roses AD(5), Chiba-Falek O(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA, Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(3)Institute for Genome Sciences and Policy, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC 27708, USA.
(4)Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA, Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA, Zinfandel Pharmaceuticals, 
Chapel Hill, NC, USA and.
(6)Department of Neurology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, 
USA, Joseph and Kathleen Bryan Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA, Institute for Genome Sciences 
and Policy, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27708, USA 
o.chibafalek@duke.edu.

The molecular genetic basis that leads to Lewy Body (LB) pathology in 15-20% of 
Alzheimer disease cases (LBV/AD) was largely unknown. Alpha-synuclein (SNCA) and 
Leucine-rich repeat kinase2 (LRRK2) have been implicated in the pathogenesis of 
Parkinson's disease (PD), the prototype of LB spectrum disorders. We tested the 
association of SNCA variants with LB pathology in AD. We then stratified the 
SNCA association analyses by LRRK2 genotype. We also investigated the expression 
regulation of SNCA and LRRK2 in relation to LB pathology. We evaluated the 
differences in SNCA-mRNA and LRRK2-mRNA levels as a function of LB pathology in 
the temporal cortex (TC) from autopsy-confirmed LBV/AD cases and AD controls. We 
further investigated the cis-effect of the LB pathology-associated genetic 
variants within the SNCA and LRRK2 loci on the mRNA expression of these genes. 
SNCA SNPs rs3857059 and rs2583988 showed significant associations with increased 
risk for LB pathology. When the analyses were stratified by LRRK2-rs1491923 
genotype, the associations became stronger for both SNPs and an association was 
also observed with rs2619363. Expression analysis demonstrated that SNCA- and 
LRRK2-mRNA levels were significantly higher in TC from LBV/AD brains compared 
with AD controls. Furthermore, SNCA-mRNA expression level in the TC was 
associated with rs3857059; homozygotes for the minor allele showed significant 
higher expression. LRRK2-transcript levels were increased in carriers of 
rs1491923 minor allele. Our findings demonstrated that SNCA contributes to LB 
pathology in AD patients, possibly via interaction with LRRK2, and suggested 
that expression regulation of these genes may be the molecular basis underlying 
the observed LB associations.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. 
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu196
PMCID: PMC4140463
PMID: 24777780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3415. Neuropsychiatry (London). 2014 Feb;4(1):33-54. doi: 10.2217/npy.14.3.

Current electroconvulsive therapy practice and research in the geriatric 
population.

Kerner N(1), Prudic J(1).

Author information:
(1)Electroconvulsive Therapy Service & the Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, New 
York State Psychiatric Institute, & the College of Physicians & Surgeons of 
Columbia University, 1051 Riverside Drive, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is utilized worldwide for various severe and 
treatment-resistant psychiatric disorders. Research studies have shown that ECT 
is the most effective and rapid treatment available for elderly patients with 
depression, bipolar disorder and psychosis. For patients who suffer from 
intractable catatonia and neuroleptic malignant syndrome, ECT can be life 
saving. For elderly patients who cannot tolerate or respond poorly to 
medications and who are at a high risk for drug-induced toxicity or toxic drug 
interactions, ECT is the safest treatment option. Organic causes are frequently 
associated with late-life onset of neuropsychiatric conditions, such as 
parkinsonism, dementia and stroke. ECT has proven to be efficacious even when 
these conditions are present. During the next decade, research studies should 
focus on the use of ECT as a synergistic therapy, to enhance other biological 
and psychological treatments, and prevent symptom relapse and recurrence.

DOI: 10.2217/npy.14.3
PMCID: PMC4000084
PMID: 24778709


3416. Clin Lab. 2014;60(4):629-34. doi: 10.7754/clin.lab.2013.130440.

Analysis of combined CSF biomarkers in AD diagnosis.

De Riva V, Galloni E, Marcon M, Di Dionisio L, Deluca C, Meligrana L, Bolner A, 
Perini F.

BACKGROUND: The new proposed diagnostic criteria for early diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's Disease (AD) underline the value of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
biomarkers. The first aim of the study was to determine the diagnostic accuracy 
of CSF biomarker Abeta1-42, T-tau, and P-tau in differentiating AD patients in 
our cohort by means of "pure" biomarkers and in form of a combined analysis of 
these biomarkers. The second aim of the study was to determine the diagnostic 
accuracy of these markers for predicting incipient AD in patients with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: We studied 102 CSF samples: 33 AD [mean age at baseline 71.2 (54-86)], 
16 MCI [mean age at baseline 71.3 (57-78)], 24 non AD dementia, including 7 
vascular dementia, 4 frontotemporal degeneration, 5 dementia with Lewy Body, and 
8 with other dementia [mean age at baseline 72.7 (51-87)] and 32 non-demented 
neurological patients [mean age at baseline 71.3 (45-87) referred to as control 
(CO) later in the text]. A double sandwich ELISA (Innotest beta amyloid 
Abeta1-42, hTau and P-tau181 by Innogenetics, Gent, Belgium) was performed to 
quantify the concentration of the above biomarkers. The three biomarkers were 
then combined in the IATI index [(measured Ab1-42)/(240 + 1.18 *measured tau)], 
and in the ratios Abeta1-42/T-tau, Abeta1-42/P-tau, T-tau/Abeta1-42 and 
P-tau/Abeta1-42.
RESULTS: Abeta1-42, T-tau and P-tau181 concentration showed statistically 
significant differences between AD and CO (327.2 pg/mL +/- 150.2 pg/mL and 659.4 
pg/mL +/- 254.2 pg/mL; 508.2 pg/mL +/- 360.2 pg/mL and 305.3 pg/mL +/- 228.9 
pg/mL; 82.2 pg/mL +/- 26.1 pg/mL and 45.3 pg/mL +/- 26.4 pg/mL, respectively, p 
< 0.05), while the difference between AD and MCI was statistically different 
only for Abeta1-42 (327.2 pg/mL +/- 150.2 pg/mL and 600.8 +/- 271.9 pg/mL, 
respectively, p < 0.05). The IATI index was 0.5 +/- 0.3 in AD, 0.9 +/- 0.6 in 
MCI, 1.37 +/- 0.9 in non AD dementia and 1.26 +/- 0.8 in non-demented 
neurological patients. With a cut-off fixed at 1 the sensitivity and specificity 
of the IATI index in discriminating AD from CO was 84% and 52%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the great significance of CSF biomarker 
measurements in AD diagnosis in clinical routine. It is understood that a 
clinical diagnostic work-up is necessary in the process. Moreover, a biochemical 
profile of CSF biomarkers requires further investigations.

DOI: 10.7754/clin.lab.2013.130440
PMID: 24779297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3417. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jun;71(6):725-34. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.446.

Emerging β-amyloid pathology and accelerated cortical atrophy.

Mattsson N(1), Insel PS(2), Nosheny R(3), Tosun D(2), Trojanowski JQ(4), Shaw 
LM(4), Jack CR Jr(5), Donohue MC(6), Weiner MW(2); Alzheimer’s Disease 
Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California2Clinical Neurochemistry 
Laboratory, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy, 
University of Gothenburg, Möl.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California3Department of Radiology 
and Biomedical Imaging, University of California, San Francisco.
(3)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, California.
(4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Perelman School of Medicine, University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.
(5)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.
(6)Division of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Department of Family and 
Preventive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla.

IMPORTANCE: The effect of β-amyloid (Aβ) accumulation on regional structural 
brain changes in early stages of Alzheimer disease (AD) is not well understood.
OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that the development of Aβ pathology is 
related to increased regional atrophy in the brains of cognitively normal (CN) 
persons.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Longitudinal clinicobiomarker cohort study 
involving 47 CN control subjects and 15 patients with AD dementia. All 
participants underwent repeated cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42 and structural magnetic 
resonance imaging measurements for up to 4 years. Cognitively normal controls 
were classified using the longitudinal cerebrospinal fluid Aβ42 data and 
included 13 stable Aβ negative (normal baseline Aβ42 levels, with less than the 
median reduction over time), 13 declining Aβ negative (normal baseline Aβ42 
levels, with greater than the median reduction over time), and 21 Aβ positive 
(pathologic baseline Aβ42 levels). All 15 patients with AD dementia were Aβ 
positive.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Group effects on regional gray matter volumes at 
baseline and over time, tested by linear mixed-effects models.
RESULTS: Baseline gray matter volumes were similar among the CN Aβ groups, but 
atrophy rates were increased in frontoparietal regions in the declining 
Aβ-negative and Aβ-positive groups and in amygdala and temporal regions in the 
Aβ-positive group. Aβ-positive patients with AD dementia had further increased 
atrophy rates in hippocampus and temporal and cingulate regions.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Emerging Aβ pathology is coupled to increased 
frontoparietal (but not temporal) atrophy rates. Atrophy rates peak early in 
frontoparietal regions but accelerate in hippocampus, temporal, and cingulate 
regions as the disease progresses to dementia. Early-stage Aβ pathology may have 
mild effects on local frontoparietal cortical integrity while effects in 
temporal regions appear later and accelerate, leading to the atrophy pattern 
typically seen in AD.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.446
PMCID: PMC4410966
PMID: 24781145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Trojanowski 
may accrue revenue in the future on patents submitted by the University of 
Pennsylvania on which he is coinventor, has received revenue from the sale of 
Avid to Eli Lilly and Company as coinventor on imaging-related patents submitted 
by the University of Pennsylvania, and is the William Maul Measey–Truman G. 
Schnabel, Jr, MD, Professor of Geriatric Medicine and Gerontology. Dr Shaw 
previously was a consultant for Innogenetics, collaborates on quality assessment 
activities as part of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative, and 
serves as a consultant to Janssen Research & Development LLC on biomarker 
studies. Dr Jack provides consulting services for Siemens Healthcare and Janssen 
Research & Development LLC, holds the Alexander Family Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Professorship of the Mayo Foundation, and is the recipient of research 
grants R01-AG011378, R01-AG041851, R01-AG037551, U01-HL096917, U01-AG032438, and 
U01-AG024904 from the National Institutes of Health. Dr Weiner has stock options 
in Synarc Inc and Elan Corporation; serves as an associate editor of Alzheimer's 
& Dementia; has served on scientific advisory boards for Pfizer Inc and BOLT 
International; has received honoraria from Pfizer Inc, Tohoku University, and 
Danone Trading BV; has research support from Merck & Co Inc, Avid, the 
Department of Defense, and the Department of Veterans Affairs; has received 
funding for travel from Pfizer Inc, the International Conference on Alzheimer's 
and Parkinson's Diseases, Paul Sabatier University, Novartis, Tohoku University, 
MCI Group, France, Travel eDreams Inc, Neuroscience School of Advanced Studies, 
Danone Trading BV, and the Clinical Trials on Alzheimer's Disease ANT Congrès; 
and has been a consultant for Pfizer Inc, Janssen Research & Development LLC, 
KLJ Associates, Easton Associates, Harvard University, inThought, INC Research 
LLC, the Alzheimer's Drug Discovery Foundation, Sanofi Groupe, and the 
University of California, Los Angeles. No other disclosures were reported.


3418. Science. 2014 May 2;344(6183):519-23. doi: 10.1126/science.1249547.

Polarization of the effects of autoimmune and neurodegenerative risk alleles in 
leukocytes.

Raj T(1), Rothamel K, Mostafavi S, Ye C, Lee MN, Replogle JM, Feng T, Lee M, 
Asinovski N, Frohlich I, Imboywa S, Von Korff A, Okada Y, Patsopoulos NA, Davis 
S, McCabe C, Paik HI, Srivastava GP, Raychaudhuri S, Hafler DA, Koller D, Regev 
A, Hacohen N, Mathis D, Benoist C, Stranger BE, De Jager PL.

Author information:
(1)Program in Translational NeuroPsychiatric Genomics, Institute for the 
Neurosciences, Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Brigham and Women's 
Hospital, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2014 Sep;29(10):1242.

To extend our understanding of the genetic basis of human immune function and 
dysfunction, we performed an expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) study of 
purified CD4(+) T cells and monocytes, representing adaptive and innate 
immunity, in a multi-ethnic cohort of 461 healthy individuals. Context-specific 
cis- and trans-eQTLs were identified, and cross-population mapping allowed, in 
some cases, putative functional assignment of candidate causal regulatory 
variants for disease-associated loci. We note an over-representation of T 
cell-specific eQTLs among susceptibility alleles for autoimmune diseases and of 
monocyte-specific eQTLs among Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease variants. This 
polarization implicates specific immune cell types in these diseases and points 
to the need to identify the cell-autonomous effects of disease susceptibility 
variants.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1249547
PMCID: PMC4910825
PMID: 24786080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3419. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;41(4):1207-22. doi: 10.3233/JAD-132786.

Utility of SPM8 plus DARTEL (VSRAD) combined with magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy as adjunct techniques for screening and predicting dementia due to 
Alzheimer's disease in clinical practice.

Waragai M(1), Hata S(2), Suzuki T(2), Ishii R(3), Fujii C(3), Tokuda T(3), Arai 
H(4), Ohrui T(5), Higuchi S(6), Yoshida M(7), Igarashi K(7), Moriya M(1), Iwai 
N(1), Uemura K(1).

Author information:
(1)Higashi Matsudo Municipal Hospital, Matsudo, Takatsuka shinden, Japan.
(2)Laboratory of Neuroscience, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Hokkaido University, Hokkaido, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Pathobiology of Brain Diseases (Department of 
Neurology), Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Graduate School of Medical 
Science, Kyoto, Japan.
(4)Department of Geriatrics & Gerontology, Division of Brain Science Institute 
of Development, Aging and Cancer Tohoku University, Tohoku, Japan.
(5)Division of Geriatric Pharmacotherapy, Institute of Development, Aging and 
Cancer, Tohoku University, Tohoku, Japan.
(6)National Hospital Organization, Kurihama Medical and Addiction Center, 
Kanagawa, Japan.
(7)Amine Pharma Research Institute, Innovation Plaza at Chiba University, Chiba, 
Japan.

We validated the utility of SPM8 plus DARTEL (VSRAD) combined with magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (1H MRS) as an adjunct screening technique for dementia 
due to Alzheimer's disease (AD). We examined the posterior cingulate gyri of 228 
subjects using VSRAD and 1H MRS in addition to conventional cerebrospinal fluid 
biomarkers at baseline. At the 3-year follow-up, the 228 subject were classified 
as follows: 93 healthy subjects, 42 MCI-non-converters (MCI-NC), 25 
MCI-converters to AD (MCI-C), 44 AD, 8 dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 5 normal 
pressure hydrocephalus, and 11 patients with other neurological diseases. Our 
results demonstrated that subjects with increased medial temporal atrophy (MTA) 
severity on VSRAD, increased Cho/Cr, MI/Cr ratio, and decreased NAA/Cr and 
NAA/MI ratio on 1H MRS at baseline were at risk of dementia due to AD. Receiver 
operating characteristic analysis showed that severity of MTA and the NAA/MI 
ratio distinguished patients with AD and MCI-C from controls. Furthermore, the 
118 subjects without dementia and MTA showing only a decreased NAA/MI ratio at 
baseline developed to MCI-C, AD, and DLB 3 years later. 1H MRS detected 
biochemical abnormalities preceding brain atrophy and cognitive decline. VSRAD 
combined with 1H MRS may be routinely applied to screen for MCI/AD and prodromal 
AD in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-132786
PMID: 24787913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3420. Med Hypotheses. 2014 Jul;83(1):25-31. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.04.016. Epub 2014 
Apr 13.

Unexpected and unexplained increase in death due to neurological disorders in 
2012 in England and Wales: is cytomegalovirus implicated?

Jones RP(1), Goldeck D(2).

Author information:
(1)Healthcare Analysis & Forecasting, Honister Walk, Camberley GU15 1RQ, UK. 
Electronic address: hcaf_rod@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Tuebingen Ageing & Tumor Immunology Group, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Tuebingen Medical School, Waldhoernlestr.22, D 72072 Tuebingen, 
Germany.

In early 2012 deaths (all-cause mortality) in England and Wales showed an 
unexpected and unexplained increase which continued for 18 months before 
abating. The highest percentage increase in deaths was noted to be for 
neurological degenerations (mainly dementia, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's). This 
study seeks to understand why increased deaths should focus on these conditions 
and if an unrecognized infectious outbreak could be implicated. Cause of death 
statistics for England and Wales were compared for 2012 versus 2011 as was the 
diagnosis for first outpatient appointment and inpatient admissions for these 
conditions. Deaths for dementia, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's showed a 15% 
increase with associated age specificity. The increase could not be explained by 
changes in the coding relating to cause of death. The increase coincided with 
increased GP referral (as first outpatient attendance) and inpatient admission 
for a range of neurological conditions. These increases were also observed on 
previous occasions of a similar event where deaths peaked in 2003 and 2008. A 
cascade of debility leading to immobility and institutionalization along with 
specific immune impairments appears to render those suffering from neurological 
degenerations sensitive to infectious outbreaks and more specifically to the 
particular agent behind these events. These and other studies point to outbreaks 
of a previously uncharacterized agent with the outbreak peaking in 2003, 2008 
and 2012 (and in other years prior to these dates). Cytomegalovirus is a 
potential candidate and the necessary research to test this hypothesis is 
outlined.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2014.04.016
PMID: 24793640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3421. Maturitas. 2014 Oct;79(2):209-15. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2014.04.005. Epub 
2014 Apr 13.

Neuropsychiatric aspects of dementia.

Ford AH(1).

Author information:
(1)Western Australian Centre for Health & Ageing (M573), Centre for Medical 
Research, University of Western Australia, 35 Stirling Highway, Crawley, Perth, 
WA 6009, Australia. Electronic address: andrew.ford@uwa.edu.au.

Dementia affects approximately 6.5% of people over the age of 65. Whilst 
cognitive impairment is central to the dementia concept, neuropsychiatric 
symptoms are invariably present at some stage of the illness. Neuropsychiatric 
symptoms result in a number of negative outcomes for the individual and their 
caregivers and are associated with higher rates of institutionalization and 
mortality. A number of factors have been associated with neuropsychiatric 
symptoms including neurobiological changes, dementia type, and illness severity 
and duration. Specific patient, caregiver and environmental factors are also 
important. Neuropsychiatric symptoms can be broadly divided into four clusters: 
psychotic symptoms, mood/affective symptoms, apathy, and agitation/aggression. 
Neuropsychiatric symptoms tend to persist over time although differing symptom 
profiles exist at various stages of the illness. Assessment should take into 
account the presenting symptoms together with an appreciation of the myriad of 
likely underlying causes for the symptoms. A structured assessment/rating tool 
can be helpful. Management should focus on non-pharmacological measures 
initially with pharmacological approaches reserved for more troubling symptoms. 
Pharmacological approaches should target specific symptoms although the 
evidence-base for pharmacological management is quite modest. Any medication 
trial should include an adequate appreciation of the risk-benefit profile in 
individual patients and discussion of these with both the individual and their 
caregiver.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2014.04.005
PMID: 24794580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3422. Nihon Rinsho. 2014 Apr;72(4):681-6.

[Imaging diagnosis of dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Ishii K.

The role of neuroimaging in the diagnosis of dementia diseases is overviewed. In 
the clinical practice, screening imaging examinations such as X-ray CT and MRI 
of the brain are useful to exclude cerebrovascular disorders, brain tumors, 
subdural hematomas, and normal pressure hydrocephalus from neurodegenerative 
disorders. After differentiating those disorders, the regional distribution 
patterns of atrophy, neuronal injury, or functional impairment detected by 
morphological MRI, perfusion SPECT, or 18F-FDG PET are useful for the 
differential diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases. Cardiac scintigraphy by 
123I- MIBG, dopamine transporter imaging, and amyloid imaging give us pathology 
specific information such as cardiac autonomic dysfunction mainly by Lewy body 
disease, nigral degeneration with parkinson's syndrome, and amyloid deposition 
with Alzheimer's disease. Those structural, functional, and pathology specific 
neuroimaging tools can be used not only for the early diagnosis, but also for 
tracing disease progression in understanding the relationship between life style 
diseases and dementia, and developing disease modifying therapies.

PMID: 24796097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3423. Nihon Rinsho. 2014 Apr;72(4):739-43.

[Sleep disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Tagaya H, Murayama N, Hakamata Y.

Some sleep disorders and sleep problems are reported as risk of dementia. It is 
reported that 50-80% of idiopathic REM sleep behavior had a later conversion to 
a synucleinopathy, thus this parasomnia is regarded as early marker of Parkinson 
disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple system atrophy. Obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome causes reversible decline of cognitive functions in 
children and adults, and it increases the risk of dementia and mild cognitive 
impairment in elderly women. A decrease of amplitude of circadian activity 
rhythm and habitual long sleep duration (> or = 9 hours) are reported to 
increase the risk of dementia in elderly people. Some reports indicate that 
hypnotic use may be a risk factor of dementia. However, it is not cleared 
whether insomnia itself related with dementia or not, since no study evaluated 
the risk of insomnia without hypnotic treatment.

PMID: 24796108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3424. Am J Occup Ther. 2014 May-Jun;68(3):353-62. doi: 10.5014/ajot.2014.010330.

Instrumental activities of daily living performance among people with 
Parkinson's disease without dementia.

Foster ER(1).

Author information:
(1)Erin R. Foster, OTD, MSCI, OTR/L, is Assistant Professor, Program in 
Occupational Therapy, Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Washington 
University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8505, 4444 Forest Park Boulevard, St. 
Louis, MO 63108; erfoster@wustl.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the performance of cognitively demanding instrumental 
activities of daily living (IADLs) among people with Parkinson's disease (PD) 
without dementia.
METHOD: Seventy-seven participants with PD and 57 participants without PD 
underwent standardized, performance-based IADL evaluation using the Performance 
Assessment of Self-care Skills. Activity performance was rated for independence, 
adequacy, and safety.
RESULTS: The PD group had lower independence and adequacy scores than the non-PD 
group for almost every activity. Medication management, shopping, and sharp 
utensil use were the activities most sensitive to group differences. In the PD 
group, older age, lower Mini-Mental State Examination scores, and decreased 
motor function were associated with poorer IADL performance.
CONCLUSIONS: People with relatively early and mild PD demonstrated measurable 
deficits in the performance of cognitively demanding IADLs. This work highlights 
the importance of using objective assessments of IADL function to detect early 
functional changes in people with PD.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Occupational Therapy Association, Inc.

DOI: 10.5014/ajot.2014.010330
PMCID: PMC4011459
PMID: 24797199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3425. Rinsho Byori. 2014 Mar;62(3):241-5.

[Alpha-Synuclein in blood and cerebrospinal fluid of patients with 
alpha-synucleinopathy].

[Article in Japanese]

Ono K, Yamada M.

Alpha-Synuclein protein(alphaS) aggregates from a monomer to assemblies such as 
oligomers, protofibrils, and mature fibrils. The early intermediate aggregate, 
that is, the oligomer, has been reported to be the most toxic species. We 
recently reported that melatonin inhibits alphaS aggregation, including 
protofibril and oligomer formations. While the alphaS concentration in 
cerebrospinal fluid was reported to significantly decrease in patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies, there have been reports 
that the alphaS oligomer concentration was elevated in the cerebrospinal fluid 
of PD patients. Moreover, it was reported that the alphaS oligomer concentration 
was also elevated in the blood of PD patients. Further studies may establish 
alphaS in cerebrospinal fluid and blood as a biomarker of 
alpha-synucleinopathies, including PD.

PMID: 24800499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3426. J Pain Symptom Manage. 2014 Oct;48(4):660-77. doi: 
10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2013.11.009. Epub 2014 May 5.

Are there differences in the prevalence of palliative care-related problems in 
people living with advanced cancer and eight non-cancer conditions? A systematic 
review.

Moens K(1), Higginson IJ(2), Harding R(2); EURO IMPACT.

Collaborators: Brearley S, Caraceni A, Cohen J, Costantini M, Deliens L, Francke 
AL, Kaasa S, Linden K, Meeussen K, Miccinesi G, Onwuteaka-Philipsen B, Pardon K, 
Pasman R, Pautex S, Payne S, Van den Block L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, Cicely Saunders 
Institute, King's College London, London, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
Katrien.Moens@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Palliative Care, Policy & Rehabilitation, Cicely Saunders 
Institute, King's College London, London, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: If access to effective palliative care is to extend beyond cancer 
patients, an understanding of the comparative prevalence of palliative care 
problems among cancer and non-cancer patients is necessary.
OBJECTIVES: This systematic review aimed to describe and compare the prevalence 
of seventeen palliative care-related problems across the four palliative care 
domains among adults with advanced cancer, acquired immune deficiency syndrome, 
chronic heart failure, end-stage renal disease (ESRD), chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease, multiple sclerosis, motor neuron disease, Parkinson's 
disease, and dementia.
METHODS: Three databases were searched using three groups of keywords. The 
results of the extraction of the prevalence figures were summarized.
RESULTS: The electronic searches yielded 4697 hits after the removal of 1784 
duplicates. Of these hits, 143 met the review criteria. The greatest number of 
studies were found for advanced cancer (n=57) and ESRD patients (n=47), and 75 
of the 143 studies used validated scales. Few data were available for people 
living with multiple sclerosis (n=2) and motor neuron disease (n=3). The 
problems with a prevalence of 50% or more found across most of the nine studied 
diagnostic groups were: pain, fatigue, anorexia, dyspnea, and worry.
CONCLUSION: There are commonalities in the prevalence of problems across cancer 
and non-cancer patients, highlighting the need for palliative care to be 
provided irrespective of diagnosis. The methodological heterogeneity across the 
studies and the lack of non-cancer studies need to be addressed in future 
research.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Hospice and Palliative Medicine. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2013.11.009
PMID: 24801658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3427. Front Neurol. 2014 Apr 28;5:59. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00059. eCollection 2014.

Lack of c9orf72 repeat expansion in taiwanese patients with mixed 
neurodegenerative disorders.

Lin CH(1), Chen TF(1), Chiu MJ(1), Lin HI(1), Wu RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University 
Hospital, National Taiwan University , Taipei , Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The hexanucleotide repeat expansion in intron 1 of the C9orf72 gene 
is recognized as the most common genetic cause of frontotemporal dementia (FTD). 
There are overlapping clinical and pathological characteristics between FTD and 
Parkinsonism syndrome, and some FTD patients may present with Parkinsonism. The 
aim of this study was to analyze the hexanucleotide repeat numbers of C9orf72 
gene in a mixed Taiwanese cohort with FTD, Parkinsonism syndrome, Parkinson's 
disease (PD), and Alzheimer's dementia (AD).
METHOD: The number of hexanucleotide repeats was estimated in a total of 482 
patients with mixed neurodegenerative disorders and 485 control subjects, using 
a two-step repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction-based genotyping strategy. 
The individual groups of patients included patients with Parkinsonism syndrome 
(n = 95), familial PD (n = 109), young-onset PD (n = 201), FTD (n = 9), sporadic 
AD (n = 61), and early-onset AD (n = 7).
RESULTS: We did not identify any pathogenic repeats (>30 repeats) of C9orf72 in 
either the patients or control subjects. However, we found one young-onset PD 
patient and one control subject that each had an intermediate number of repeats 
(25 and 21 repeats, respectively). The clinical phenotype of the young-onset PD 
in this patient was similar to typical idiopathic PD without additional 
features, and the patient responded well to levodopa treatment.
CONCLUSION: The repeat expansion in C9orf72 is not a common cause of PD, 
Parkinsonism syndrome, or dementia in our population. Further studies are needed 
to investigate the clinical and biological significance of intermediate repeats 
in C9orf72.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2014.00059
PMCID: PMC4009437
PMID: 24803912


3428. Brain Nerve. 2014 May;66(5):581-90.

[Hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS): a review of the 
literature on its clinical characteristics and mutations in the 
colony-stimulating factor-1 receptor gene].

[Article in Japanese]

Konno T(1), Tada M, Tada M, Nishizawa M, Ikeuchi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University.

Hereditary diffuse leukoencephalopathy with spheroids (HDLS) is an early-onset 
dementia that predominantly affects the cerebral white matter. After the 
discovery of a gene encoding the colony stimulating factor 1 receptor (CSF-1R) 
as a causative gene in patients with HDLS, gene analysis of CSF-1R enabled the 
diagnosis of HDLS without histopathological evidence. To clarify the genetic and 
clinical characteristics of HDLS, here, we reviewed the characteristics of 
patients with HDLS with CSF-1R mutations in the literature. Seventy-three 
patients from 54 pedigrees with HDLS from various ethnic backgrounds have been 
reported. Among them, Japanese patients account for 22% (16 patients from 15 
pedigrees). Mean age at onset was 45 years (18 to 78 years). A wide range of 
clinical features including cognitive decline, behavioral changes, seizures, 
pyramidal signs, and parkinsonism have been described in these patients. Various 
kinds of mutations were found in the tyrosine kinase domain of CSF-1R. A 
frameshift mutation causing nonsense-mediated mRNA decay was also described. 
This suggests that haploinsufficiency of CSF-1R is sufficient to cause HDLS. 
Neuropathological analysis revealed that microglia in the brains of patients 
demonstrated distinct morphology and distribution. These results suggest that 
primary microglial dysfunction due to CSF-1R signaling perturbation may underlie 
the pathogenesis of HDLS.

PMID: 24807373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3429. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2014 Nov;69(11):1325-30. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/glu061. Epub 2014 May 7.

Neuronal vesicular trafficking and release in age-related cognitive impairment.

Deák F(1).

Author information:
(1)Reynolds Oklahoma Center on Aging, Department of Geriatric Medicine, 
University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center. Ferenc-Deak@ouhsc.edu.

Aging is a common major risk factor for many neurological disorders resulting in 
cognitive impairment and neurodegeneration including Parkinson's and Alzheimer's 
diseases. Novel results from the fields of molecular neuroscience and aging 
research provide evidence for a link between decline of various cognitive, 
executive functions and changes in neuronal mechanisms of intracellular 
trafficking and regulated vesicle release processes in the aging nervous system. 
In this Perspective, we review these recent findings and formulate a hypothesis 
on how cargo delivery to the synapses and the release of neurotrophic factors 
may be involved in maintaining learning and memory capabilities during healthy 
aging and present examples on how defects of those disrupt normal cognition. We 
provide an overview of emerging new concepts and approaches that will 
significantly advance our understanding of the aging brain and pathophysiology 
of dementia. This knowledge will be instrumental in defining drug targets and 
designing novel therapeutic strategies.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of The 
Gerontological Society of America. All rights reserved. For permissions, please 
e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/glu061
PMID: 24809352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3430. Nervenarzt. 2014 Jun;85(6):680-9. doi: 10.1007/s00115-013-3995-1.

[Differential diagnostics of Parkinson's disease with nuclear medicine 
procedures].

[Article in German]

Meyer PT(1), Amtage F, Hellwig S.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Nuklearmedizin, Universitätsklinikum Freiburg, Hugstetter Str. 55, 
79106, Freiburg, Deutschland, philipp.meyer@uniklinik-freiburg.de.

Early differential diagnosis of parkinsonism is of paramount therapeutic and 
prognostic importance. In the present review, the diagnostic value of routinely 
used nuclear medicine procedures is presented and critically discussed. The 
[(123)I]FP-CIT single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) is the method 
of choice for differentiation between neurodegenerative and 
non-neurodegenerative parkinsonism. The [(18)F]fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography ([(18)F]FDG-PET) method provides a very high diagnostic 
accuracy for differentiating between Parkinson's disease (PD) and atypical 
Parkinsonian syndromes (APS), which is clearly superior to the accuracy of 
[(123)I]FP-CIT SPECT, [(123)I]IBZM SPECT and [(123)I]MIBG scintigraphy. 
Furthermore, [(18)F]FDG-PET is the only of the aforementioned techniques that 
also allows a reliable differentiation between APS subgroups (e.g., multiple 
system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration). 
Current studies are investigating the probable value of [(18)F]FDG-PET for risk 
stratification of dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-013-3995-1
PMID: 24821290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3431. Mov Disord. 2014 Nov;29(13):1615-22. doi: 10.1002/mds.25898. Epub 2014 May 13.

Mortality in Parkinson's disease: a systematic review and meta-analysis.

Macleod AD(1), Taylor KS, Counsell CE.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Applied Health Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Polwarth 
Building, Foresterhill, Aberdeen, UK.

This study was undertaken to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis of 
studies of mortality in Parkinson's disease (PD) and to investigate which 
factors were associated with mortality. We conducted comprehensive searches of 
studies reporting a ratio of mortality in PD versus controls, descriptive 
survival measures, or factors predicting survival; assessed study quality; and 
extracted relevant data. Descriptive analysis, meta-analysis, and 
meta-regression were performed as appropriate. Eighty-eight studies were 
included in the review with variable study methods and quality. Almost all 
studies reported increased mortality in PD (vs. controls), with mortality ratios 
ranging from 0.9 to 3.8, with major between-study heterogeneity. Inception 
cohorts were more consistent with a pooled mortality ratio of approximately 1.5. 
Inception cohorts, measurements at longer follow-up duration, and older study 
recruitment year were associated with lower mortality ratios, but these findings 
were not robust in sensitivity analyses. Within studies, mortality ratios 
increased over time. No robust evidence was found that mortality has decreased 
after the introduction of levodopa (L-dopa). On average, PD survival reduced by 
approximately 5% every year of follow-up, although there was significant 
heterogeneity. In post-mortem studies, mean duration until death ranged from 6.9 
to 14.3 years. Increasing age and presence of dementia were most commonly 
associated with increased mortality. Parkinson's disease is associated with 
increased mortality, but major heterogeneity is seen in estimates of mortality, 
which is probably explained by variable methodology and patient selection. 
Individual-patient-data meta-analysis of high-quality inception studies with 
long-term follow-up would be the optimal way to investigate the factors 
influencing mortality.

© 2014 The Authors. Movement Disorders published by Wiley Periodicals, Inc. on 
behalf of International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25898
PMID: 24821648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3432. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Feb;86(2):135-43. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2014-307659. Epub 2014 May 14.

Efficacy and safety of cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine in cognitive 
impairment in Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's disease dementia, and dementia 
with Lewy bodies: systematic review with meta-analysis and trial sequential 
analysis.

Wang HF(1), Yu JT(2), Tang SW(3), Jiang T(1), Tan CC(4), Meng XF(4), Wang C(4), 
Tan MS(5), Tan L(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, China Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, 
School of Medicine, Qingdao University, Qingdao, China Department of Neurology, 
Qingdao Municipal Hospital, College of Medicine and Pharmaceutics, Ocean 
University of China, Qingdao, China.
(3)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School of Public Health, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, School of Medicine, 
Qingdao University, Qingdao, China.
(5)Department of Neurology, Qingdao Municipal Hospital, College of Medicine and 
Pharmaceutics, Ocean University of China, Qingdao, China.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, several large randomised controlled trials about the 
treatments of cognitive impairment or dementia due to Parkinson's disease 
(CIND-PD or PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) were completed. Here, we 
systematically reviewed the studies (including the recent reports) to provide 
updated evidence for the treatments of CIND-PD, PDD and DLB.
METHODS: We searched Cochrane Dementia and Cognitive Improvement Group 
Specialised Register, Pubmed, Embase, and other sources for eligible trials. We 
selected global impression and cognitive function as primary efficacy outcomes, 
and dropouts and adverse events as safety outcomes. Furthermore, Meta-analysis 
and trial sequential analysis (TSA) were used here.
RESULTS: Ten trials were included in this study. Cholinesterase inhibitors and 
memantine produced small global efficacy on clinicians' global impression of 
change (CGIC), from a weighted mean difference of -0.40 (95% CI -0.77 to -0.03) 
to -0.65 (95% CI -1.28 to -0.01); however, cholinesterase inhibitors but not 
memantine significantly improved cognition on Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), from 1.04 (95% CI 0.43 to 1.65) to 2.57 (95% CI 0.90 to 4.23). 
Additionally, both of them had good safety outcomes, although rivastigmine 
showed an increased risk on adverse events than placebo (risk ratio, RR 1.19, 
TSA adjusted 95% CI 1.04 to 1.36), these events were usually mild or moderate, 
and the risk disappeared on serious adverse events.
CONCLUSIONS: Cholinesterase inhibitors and memantine slightly improve global 
impression; however, only cholinesterase inhibitors enhance cognitive function. 
Besides, all the drugs have good safety outcomes. But the limited trials 
precluded the generalisation of these outcomes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-307659
PMID: 24828899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3433. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2014 Dec;29(8):723-31. doi: 
10.1177/1533317514534954. Epub 2014 May 16.

Differential diagnosis of degenerative dementias using basic neuropsychological 
tests: multivariable logistic regression analysis of 301 patients.

Jiménez-Huete A(1), Riva E(2), Toledano R(2), Campo P(3), Esteban J(2), Barrio 
AD(2), Franch O(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, General Neurology Unit, Hospital Ruber 
Internacional, Madrid, Spain ajimenez@ruberinternacional.es.
(2)Department of Neurology, General Neurology Unit, Hospital Ruber 
Internacional, Madrid, Spain.
(3)Department of Basic Psychology, Autonoma University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: The validity of neuropsychological tests for the differential 
diagnosis of degenerative dementias may depend on the clinical context. We 
constructed a series of logistic models taking into account this factor.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed the demographic and neuropsychological data 
of 301 patients with probable Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontotemporal 
degeneration (FTLD), or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Nine models were 
constructed taking into account the diagnostic question (eg, AD vs DLB) and 
subpopulation (incident vs prevalent).
RESULTS: The AD versus DLB model for all patients, including memory recovery and 
phonological fluency, was highly accurate (area under the curve = 0.919, 
sensitivity = 90%, and specificity = 80%). The results were comparable in 
incident and prevalent cases. The FTLD versus AD and DLB versus FTLD models were 
both inaccurate.
CONCLUSION: The models constructed from basic neuropsychological variables 
allowed an accurate differential diagnosis of AD versus DLB but not of FTLD 
versus AD or DLB.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317514534954
PMCID: PMC10852726
PMID: 24838533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


3434. Clin Neurophysiol. 2014 Aug;125(8):1509-32. doi: 10.1016/j.clinph.2014.04.010. 
Epub 2014 Apr 30.

The contribution of transcranial magnetic stimulation in the diagnosis and in 
the management of dementia.

Cantone M(1), Di Pino G(2), Capone F(2), Piombo M(2), Chiarello D(2), Cheeran 
B(3), Pennisi G(4), Di Lazzaro V(5).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Via Álvaro del Portillo 
200, 00128 Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Neurology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Via Álvaro del Portillo 
200, 00128 Rome, Italy; Fondazione Alberto Sordi - Research Institute for 
Ageing, Via Álvaro del Portillo 5, 00128 Rome, Italy.
(3)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Level 6, 
West Wing, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DU, UK.
(4)Department "G.F. Ingrassia", Section of Neurosciences, University of Catania, 
Via Santa Sofia, 78-95123 Catania, Italy.
(5)Institute of Neurology, Campus Bio-Medico University, Via Álvaro del Portillo 
200, 00128 Rome, Italy; Fondazione Alberto Sordi - Research Institute for 
Ageing, Via Álvaro del Portillo 5, 00128 Rome, Italy. Electronic address: 
v.dilazzaro@unicampus.it.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) is emerging as a promising tool to 
non-invasively assess specific cortical circuits in neurological diseases. A 
number of studies have reported the abnormalities in TMS assays of cortical 
function in dementias. A PubMed-based literature review on TMS studies targeting 
primary and secondary dementia has been conducted using the key words 
"transcranial magnetic stimulation" or "motor cortex excitability" and 
"dementia" or "cognitive impairment" or "memory impairment" or "memory decline". 
Cortical excitability is increased in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and in vascular 
dementia (VaD), generally reduced in secondary dementias. Short-latency afferent 
inhibition (SAI), a measure of central cholinergic circuitry, is normal in VaD 
and in frontotemporal dementia (FTD), but suppressed in AD. In mild cognitive 
impairment, abnormal SAI may predict the progression to AD. No change in 
cortical excitability has been observed in FTD, in Parkinson's dementia and in 
dementia with Lewy bodies. Short-interval intracortical inhibition and 
controlateral silent period (cSP), two measures of gabaergic cortical 
inhibition, are abnormal in most dementias associated with parkinsonian 
symptoms. Ipsilateral silent period (iSP), which is dependent on integrity of 
the corpus callosum is abnormal in AD. While single TMS measure owns low 
specificity, a panel of measures can support the clinical diagnosis, predict 
progression and possibly identify earlier the "brain at risk". In dementias, TMS 
can be also exploited to select and evaluate the responders to specific drugs 
and, it might become a rehabilitative tool, in the attempt to restore impaired 
brain plasticity.

Copyright © 2014 International Federation of Clinical Neurophysiology. Published 
by Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clinph.2014.04.010
PMID: 24840904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3435. Expert Opin Pharmacother. 2014 Aug;15(11):1553-64. doi: 
10.1517/14656566.2014.918955. Epub 2014 May 20.

Treating psychosis in movement disorder patients: a review.

Borek LL(1), Friedman JH.

Author information:
(1)SAGE program, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Department of 
Geriatric Psychiatry , 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478 , USA +1 617 855 3124 
; +1 617 855 3246 ; leolisa@yahoo.com.

INTRODUCTION: Psychosis is a major psychiatric problem that often occurs at the 
interface of psychiatry and the neurological specialty of movement disorders. 
Psychotic syndromes are common in treated movement disorder patients, and almost 
all antipsychotic drugs produce movement disorders. There is little published 
data on psychosis in movement disorders aside from Parkinson's disease (PD).
AREAS COVERED: In this review, we focus primarily on PD, in which about 30% of 
treated patients have visual hallucinations and 5-10% have paranoid delusions; 
dementia with Lewy bodies, a variant of PD in which dementia occurs early and 
psychotic symptoms are common; Huntington's disease (HD), an inherited disorder 
that causes behavioral problems, frequently including psychosis; and tardive 
dyskinesia (TD), a group of movement disorder syndromes caused by antipsychotic 
drugs. All articles were reviewed in each of the more common movement disorders 
and indexed in PubMed with keywords including psychosis, psychotic symptoms, 
antipsychotics, hallucinations and delusions.
EXPERT OPINION: Although there are no approved drugs for treating psychotic 
symptoms in any of the movement disorders, pimavanserin, a 5-HT2A inverse 
agonist, is thought likely to gain approval in 2015 for treating PD psychosis. 
We present evidence that clozapine is currently the drug of choice for treating 
psychosis in patients with parkinsonism; however, blood monitoring requirements 
make it difficult to use. The choice of treatment of hyperkinetic disorders such 
as HD and the TD disorders depends on the clinical scenario.

DOI: 10.1517/14656566.2014.918955
PMID: 24846479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3436. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;42(1):211-26. doi: 10.3233/JAD-140267.

Cerebrospinal fluid levels of a 20-22 kDa NH2 fragment of human tau provide a 
novel neuronal injury biomarker in Alzheimer's disease and other dementias.

Amadoro G(1), Corsetti V(2), Sancesario GM(3), Lubrano A(4), Melchiorri G(4), 
Bernardini S(3), Calissano P(5), Sancesario G(4).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Translational Pharmacology (IFT)-CNR, Rome, Italy European Brain 
Research Institute (EBRI), Rome, Italy.
(2)Institute of Translational Pharmacology (IFT)-CNR, Rome, Italy.
(3)Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery, Tor Vergata General 
Hospital, The University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Systems Medicine, Tor Vergata General Hospital, The University 
of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy.
(5)European Brain Research Institute (EBRI), Rome, Italy.

Truncation at N-terminal domain of tau protein is early associated with 
neurofibrillary pathology in several human tauopathies, including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). In affected subjects, the monitoring of total (t-tau) and/or 
phosphorylated tau (p-tau) levels in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) provides a 
reliable, indirect evaluation of cellular changes occurring in vivo and the 
identification of additional CSF biomarkers would better assist with the 
clinical practice, allowing a broader profile of underlying ongoing 
neurodegeneration. Here we show that a 20-22 kDa NH2-truncated form of human tau 
(i.e., NH2htau), a neurotoxic fragment of the full length protein (htau40) that 
we previously found in synapses from subjects affected by different tauopathies: 
(i) is not a normal constituent of CSF, unlike t-tau and p-tau, being 
exceptionally detected in patients without cognitive impairment; (ii) 
discriminates, with a weak specificity of 65% but a high sensitivity of 85%, 
patients carrying a large spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases associated with 
cognitive deterioration (i.e., AD, frontotemporal lobar degeneration, 
Parkinson's disease with dementia, vascular dementia, mixed dementia, etc.) from 
subjects affected by other neurological disorders without mnesic disability; and 
(iii) is a neuronal injury biomarker as its levels in CSF are not related to the 
severity and progression of cognitive decline. The dynamic evaluation of NH2htau 
in CSF might add some useful hints in the ordinary clinical practice as it 
provides a novel, general biomarker for human tauopathies and other 
neurodegenerative diseases associated with dementia.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-140267
PMID: 24851856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3437. Molecules. 2014 May 23;19(5):6891-910. doi: 10.3390/molecules19056891.

Circulating miRNAs as biomarkers for neurodegenerative disorders.

Grasso M(1), Piscopo P(2), Confaloni A(3), Denti MA(4).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of RNA Biology and Biotechnology, Centre for Integrative Biology, 
University of Trento, via Sommarive 9, 38123 Trento, Italy. 
margherita.grasso@unitn.it.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. paola.piscopo@iss.it.
(3)Department of Cell Biology and Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 
Viale Regina Elena 299, 00161 Rome, Italy. annamaria.confaloni@iss.it.
(4)Laboratory of RNA Biology and Biotechnology, Centre for Integrative Biology, 
University of Trento, via Sommarive 9, 38123 Trento, Italy. 
denti@science.unitn.it.

Neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and frontotemporal dementias (FTD), are considered distinct 
entities, however, there is increasing evidence of an overlap from the clinical, 
pathological and genetic points of view. All neurodegenerative diseases are 
characterized by neuronal loss and death in specific areas of the brain, for 
example, hippocampus and cortex for AD, midbrain for PD, frontal and temporal 
lobes for FTD. Loss of neurons is a relatively late event in the progression of 
neurodegenerative diseases that is typically preceded by other events such as 
metabolic changes, synaptic dysfunction and loss, neurite retraction, and the 
appearance of other abnormalities, such as axonal transport defects. The brain's 
ability to compensate for these dysfunctions occurs over a long period of time 
and results in late clinical manifestation of symptoms, when successful 
pharmacological intervention is no longer feasible. Currently, diagnosis of AD, 
PD and different forms of dementia is based primarily on analysis of the 
patient's cognitive function. It is therefore important to find non-invasive 
diagnostic methods useful to detect neurodegenerative diseases during early, 
preferably asymptomatic stages, when a pharmacological intervention is still 
possible. Altered expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) in many disease states, 
including neurodegeneration, and increasing relevance of miRNAs in biofluids in 
different pathologies has prompted the study of their possible application as 
neurodegenerative diseases biomarkers in order to identify new therapeutic 
targets. Here, we review what is known about the role of miRNAs in the 
pathogenesis of neurodegeneration and the possibilities and challenges of using 
these small RNA molecules as a signature for neurodegenerative conditions.

DOI: 10.3390/molecules19056891
PMCID: PMC6271879
PMID: 24858274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3438. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Jan;86(1):50-9. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-306389. Epub 2014 May 23.

Delirium and dementia with Lewy bodies: distinct diagnoses or part of the same 
spectrum?

Gore RL(1), Vardy ER(2), O'Brien JT(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Department of Old Age Psychiatry, 
Northumberland Tyne and Wear NHS Trust, Morpeth, Northumberland, UK.
(2)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Department of Older Peoples Medicine, 
Newcastle upon Tyne Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle 
upon Tyne, UK.
(3)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridgeshire and Peterborough NHS Foundation Trust, Level E4 
Cambridge Biomedical Campus, Cambridge, UK.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is recognised as the second most common form of 
dementia in older people. Delirium is a condition of acute brain dysfunction for 
which a pre-existing diagnosis of dementia is a risk factor. Conversely delirium 
is associated with an increased risk of developing dementia. The reasons for 
this bidirectional relationship are not well understood. Our aim was to review 
possible similarities in the clinical presentation and pathophysiology between 
delirium and DLB, and explore possible links between these diagnoses. A 
systematic search using Medline, Embase and Psychinfo was performed. References 
were scanned for relevant articles, supplemented by articles identified from 
reference lists and those known to the authors. 94 articles were selected for 
inclusion in the review. Delirium and DLB share a number of clinical 
similarities, including global impairment of cognition, fluctuations in 
attention and perceptual abnormalities. Delirium is a frequent presenting 
feature of DLB. In terms of pathophysiological mechanisms, cholinergic 
dysfunction and genetics may provide a common link. Neuroimaging studies suggest 
a brain vulnerability in delirium which may also occur in dementia. The basal 
ganglia, which play a key role in DLB, have also been implicated in delirium. 
The role of Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and serum biomarkers for both diagnoses is 
an interesting area although some results are conflicting and further work in 
this area is needed. Delirium and DLB share a number of features and we 
hypothesise that delirium may, in some cases, represent early or 'prodromal' 
DLB. Further research is needed to test the novel hypothesis that delirium may 
be an early marker for future DLB, which would aid early diagnosis of DLB and 
identify those at high risk.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-306389
PMID: 24860139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3439. Interdiscip Top Gerontol. 2014;39:86-107. doi: 10.1159/000358901. Epub 2014 May 
13.

Oxidative stress, mitochondrial dysfunction and the mitochondria theory of 
aging.

Kong Y(1), Trabucco SE, Zhang H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, Mass., USA.

Aging is characterized by a progressive decline in cellular function, organismal 
fitness and increased risk of age-associated diseases and death. One potential 
cause of aging is the progressive accumulation of dysfunctional mitochondria and 
oxidative damage with age. Considerable efforts have been made in our 
understanding of the role of mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in 
aging and age-associated diseases. This chapter outlines the interplay between 
oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction, and discusses their impact on 
senescence, cell death, stem cell function, age-associated diseases and 
longevity.

DOI: 10.1159/000358901
PMID: 24862016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3440. Interdiscip Top Gerontol. 2014;39:177-86. doi: 10.1159/000358905. Epub 2014 May 
13.

Aging of the brain, dementias, role of infectious proteins: facts and theories.

Morinet F(1).

Author information:
(1)Groupe Hospitalier Saint-Louis, Lariboisiére, Fernand Widal, Université Paris 
Diderot-Paris Sorbonne Cité, Paris, France.

Neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and prion 
diseases are a major and growing public health issue for aging populations as 
aging is the greatest risk factor for neurodegeneration. Protein misfolding and 
spreading are common to these neurodegenerative diseases. There are many 
high-quality reviews concerning these diseases; also in this brief chapter, I 
have tried to give a summary of the principal points involved in the 
pathogenesis of these three clinical entities.

DOI: 10.1159/000358905
PMID: 24862020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3441. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2014 Dec;40(7):833-43. doi: 10.1111/nan.12160.

Memory deficits correlate with tau and spine pathology in P301S MAPT transgenic 
mice.

Xu H(1), Rösler TW, Carlsson T, de Andrade A, Bruch J, Höllerhage M, Oertel WH, 
Höglinger GU.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Technical University Munich, Munich, Germany; 
Department of Translational Neurodegeneration, German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.

AIM: P301S MAPT transgenic mice (P301S mice) are a widely used model of 
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 with tau 
pathology (FTDP-17-tau). However, a systematic correlation between cognitive 
deficits and cellular tau pathology at different ages is still missing. 
Therefore, our study investigated memory deficits of P301S mice in relation to 
pathological tau species and dendritic spine pathology throughout adulthood.
METHODS: We analysed P301S mice behaviourally with the novel open field, 
rotarod, and Morris water maze tests to measure deficits in locomotion, balance 
and cognition, respectively; immunohistochemically with different tau antibodies 
for specific tau species; and with Golgi staining for dendritic spine pathology.
RESULTS: We confirmed the occurrence of locomotor deficits at an age of 5 months 
and newly report memory deficits from 2.5 months of age onwards. At this early 
age, MC1 and CP13, but not AT180 immunoreactivity, was prominent in the 
hippocampus of P301S mice. Neuronal cell loss in the hippocampus of P301S mice 
was not observed to occur till 6 months of age. However, there was a significant 
reduction in the density of dendritic spines from young adulthood onwards in 
hippocampal pyramidal neurones.
CONCLUSION: In P301S mice, memory deficits precede the onset of locomotor 
dysfunction and coincide with the appearance of conformationally changed, 
S202-phosphorylated tau and reduced spine density in the absence of neuronal 
cell loss in the hippocampus. Our finding provides insights into the toxic 
effects of different tau species in vivo and may facilitate the development of 
new therapies against neurodegenerative tauopathies.

© 2014 British Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/nan.12160
PMID: 24865638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3442. Behav Neurol. 2014;2014:694296. doi: 10.1155/2014/694296. Epub 2014 Apr 27.

Preclinical polymodal hallucinations for 13 years before dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Abbate C(1), Trimarchi PD(2), Inglese S(1), Viti N(2), Cantatore A(2), De 
Agostini L(2), Pirri F(2), Marino L(2), Bagarolo R(2), Mari D(3).

Author information:
(1)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Unità Operativa 
Complessa di Geriatria, Via Pace 9, 20122 Milan, Italy.
(2)Fondazione IRCCS Don Carlo Gnocchi, ONLUS, S. Maria Nascente, Via Capecelatro 
66, 20148 Milan, Italy.
(3)Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Unità Operativa 
Complessa di Geriatria, Via Pace 9, 20122 Milan, Italy ; Dipartimento di Scienze 
Cliniche e di Comunità, Università degli Studi di Milano, Via Della Commenda 
9/12, 20122 Milan, Italy.

OBJECTIVE: We describe a case of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) that presented 
long-lasting preclinical complex polymodal hallucinations.
BACKGROUND: Few studies have deeply investigated the characteristics of 
hallucinations in DLB, especially in the preclinical phase. Moreover, the 
clinical phenotype of mild cognitive impairment-(MCI-) DLB is poorly understood.
METHODS: The patient was followed for 4 years and a selective phenomenological 
and cognitive study was performed at the predementia stage.
RESULTS: The phenomenological study showed the presence of hypnagogic and 
hypnopompic hallucinations that allowed us to make a differential diagnosis 
between DLB and Charles Bonnet syndrome (CBS). The neuropsychological evaluation 
showed a multiple domain without amnesia MCI subtype with prefrontal 
dysexecutive, visuoperceptual, and visuospatial impairments and simultanagnosia, 
which has not previously been reported in MCI-DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: This study extends the prognostic value of hallucinations for DLB 
to the preclinical phases. It supports and refines the MCI-DLB concept and 
identifies simultanagnosia as a possible early cognitive marker. Finally, it 
confirms an association between hallucinations and visuoperceptual impairments 
at an intermediate stage of the disease course and strongly supports the 
hypothesis that hallucinations in the earliest stages of DLB may reflect a 
narcolepsy-like REM-sleep disorder.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/694296
PMCID: PMC4020531
PMID: 24868122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3443. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2015 Mar;86(3):324-30. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2014-307822. Epub 2014 May 29.

Hospitalisation and comorbidities in Parkinson's disease: a large Australian 
retrospective study.

Lubomski M(1), Rushworth RL(2), Tisch S(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Notre Dame Australia, School of Medicine, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia Department of Neurology, St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney, New 
South Wales, Australia.
(2)The University of Notre Dame Australia, School of Medicine, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) require higher levels of care 
during hospitalisation. Management of comorbidities in these patients aims to 
optimise function while minimising complications. The objective of this study 
was to examine patterns of hospitalisation of patients with PD in NSW with 
regards to sociodemographic factors, comorbidities and aspects of clinical 
management.
METHODS: A retrospective study of all patients with idiopathic PD and a control 
group of non-PD patients admitted for acute care to NSW hospitals between 2008 
and 2012.
RESULTS: The study group comprised 5637 cases and 8143 controls. The mean PD 
patient age was 75.0 years (±10.9). Patients with PD had a significantly longer 
hospital stay (median 7 days, IQR 3-13 vs 1 day, IQR 1-7, p<0.001) than control 
patients. Patients with PD were five times more likely to be treated for 
delirium, three times more likely to experience an adverse drug event and 
syncope, more than twice as likely to require management of falls/fractures, 
dementia, gastrointestinal complications, genitourinary infections, reduced 
mobility and other trauma but half as likely to require hospitalisation for 
chronic airways disease and neoplasia, including melanoma, than the control 
group (all p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with PD are more likely to suffer serious health problems, 
including delirium, adverse drug reactions, syncope, falls and fractures than 
controls. These findings highlight PD as a multisystem neuropsychiatric disorder 
in which motor and non-motor features contribute to morbidity. Increased 
awareness of the added risk PD poses in acute hospitalised patients can be used 
to inform strategies to improve patient outcomes.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2014-307822
PMID: 24876185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3444. Acta Neurol Belg. 2015 Mar;115(1):27-31. doi: 10.1007/s13760-014-0310-2. Epub 
2014 May 31.

Early onset degenerative dementias: demographic characteristics and etiologic 
classification in a tertiary referral center.

Maiovis P(1), Ioannidis P, Konstantinopoulou E, Karacostas D.

Author information:
(1)B' Department of Neurology, AHEPA University Hospital, St. Kyriakidi 1, 
54636, Thessaloniki, Greece, panmaio@hotmail.com.

Early onset dementia (EOD) is a major diagnostic challenge as it often presents 
with atypical features and may be attributed to treatable diseases. Primary 
degenerative dementias (Alzheimer's disease-AD, frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration-FTLD, Lewy body dementia-LBD), although traditionally considered to 
affect older people, are still a main cause of EOD. 491 demented patients were 
assessed from January 1, 2003 to December 31, 2010 in the Neurology Department 
of a tertiary referral center. Patients were classified as AD, behavioral 
variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), non-fluent agrammatic variant primary 
progressive aphasia (naPPA), semantic variant PPA (svPPA), corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD), or progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) who also met 
criteria for naPPA and LBD. Finally, their demographic characteristics were 
analysed, according to age at onset (EOD <65 years, late onset dementia-LOD ≥65 
years). From the 491 patients, 137 (27.9 %) were EOD. In the EOD group, 52 (38 
%) were diagnosed with bvFTD, 34 (24.8 %) with AD, 27 (19.7 %) with naPPA, 10 
(7.2 %) with svPPA, 12 (8.8 %) with CBD or PSP, and 2 (1.5 %) with LBD. 
Demographic characteristics did not differ significantly among diagnostic 
categories in the EOD group, while in the LOD group FTLD patients were younger 
and more frequently men compared to both AD and LBD patients. EOD patients had 
more years of education than LOD patients. Degenerative disorders as causes of 
EOD are not rare. High clinical alertness is warranted to achieve correct and 
timely diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s13760-014-0310-2
PMID: 24878660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3445. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Oct;35(10):2422.e13-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.026. Epub 2014 May 2.

Exome sequencing identifies 2 novel presenilin 1 mutations (p.L166V and p.S230R) 
in British early-onset Alzheimer's disease.

Sassi C(1), Guerreiro R(2), Gibbs R(2), Ding J(3), Lupton MK(4), Troakes C(4), 
Lunnon K(4), Al-Sarraj S(4), Brown KS(5), Medway C(5), Lord J(5), Turton J(5), 
Mann D(6), Snowden J(7), Neary D(7), Harris J(7), Bras J(8); ARUK Consortium; 
Morgan K(5), Powell JF(4), Singleton A(3), Hardy J(8).

Collaborators: Passmore P, Craig D, Johnston J, McGuinness B, Todd S, Heun R, 
Kölsch H, Kehoe PG, Hooper NM, Vardy ER, Mann DM, Pickering-Brown S, Brown K, 
Lowe J, Morgan K, Smith A, Wilcock G, Warden D, Holmes C.

Author information:
(1)University College London (UCL) Institute of Neurology, London, UK; 
Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Electronic address: celeste.sassi.10@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)University College London (UCL) Institute of Neurology, London, UK; 
Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, London, UK.
(5)School of Molecular Medical Sciences, Institute of Genetics, Queen's Medical 
Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(6)Institute of Brain, Behaviour, and Mental Health, The University of 
Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(7)Cerebral Function Unit Greater Manchester Neuroscience Centre, Manchester, 
UK.
(8)University College London (UCL) Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

Early-onset Alzheimer's disease (EOAD) represents 1%-2% of the Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) cases, and it is generally characterized by a positive family 
history and a rapidly progressive symptomatology. Rare coding and fully 
penetrant variants in amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 (PSEN1), and 
presenilin 2 (PSEN2) are the only causative mutations reported for autosomal 
dominant AD. Thus, in this study we used exome sequencing data to rapidly screen 
rare coding variability in APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2, in a British cohort composed 
of 47 unrelated EOAD cases and 179 elderly controls, neuropathologically proven. 
We report 2 novel and likely pathogenic variants in PSEN1 (p.L166V and p.S230R). 
A comprehensive catalog of rare pathogenic variants in the AD Mendelian genes is 
pivotal for a premortem diagnosis of autosomal dominant EOAD and for the 
differential diagnosis with other early onset dementias such as frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD) and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.026
PMCID: PMC4099516
PMID: 24880964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3446. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Aug 15;343(1-2):228-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.05.027. Epub 
2014 May 22.

Parkinsonism in early Creutzfeldt-Jacob disease: possible pre- and post-synaptic 
mechanism.

Kim YE(1), Kim JM(2), Jeong HY(3), Choi SJ(3), Lee HY(4), Kim SE(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hallym University Sacred Heart Hospital, Hallym 
University College of Medicine, Anyang, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Republic of Korea. Electronic address: 
jongmin1@snu.ac.kr.
(3)Department of Neurology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seoul 
National University College of Medicine, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Republic of Korea.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.05.027
PMID: 24881866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3447. J Clin Neurosci. 2014 Sep;21(9):1473-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2013.11.040. Epub 
2014 Jun 2.

Modulation of mind: therapeutic neuromodulation for cognitive disability.

Zibly Z(1), Shaw A(2), Harnof S(3), Sharma M(2), Graves C(2), Deogaonkar M(2), 
Rezai A(2).

Author information:
(1)Center of Neuromodulation, Department of Neurosurgery, Wexner Medical Center, 
Ohio State University, 480 Medical Center Drive, Columbus, OH 43210, USA; 
Department of Neurosurgery, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. 
Electronic address: Zion.zibly@osumc.edu.
(2)Center of Neuromodulation, Department of Neurosurgery, Wexner Medical Center, 
Ohio State University, 480 Medical Center Drive, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosurgery, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.

Neuromodulation using deep brain stimulation (DBS) has become an established 
therapy for the treatment of certain disorders such as Parkinson's disease and 
tremors. Recent advances in surgical and imaging techniques further decrease the 
surgical risk associated with these procedures. Symptoms such as tremor, 
bradykinesia, rigidity and gait disturbances can be significantly controlled 
with DBS. This results in an opportunity to decrease anti-parkinsonism 
medications, and their dyskinetic side-effects. Following the success of DBS in 
the management of movement disorders, the role of this therapy is being 
extensively studied in more complex disorders that involve cognition and 
behavior. The inherent complexity in cognitive circuitry makes neuromodulation 
using DBS more difficult than in movement disorders. The goal of DBS surgery in 
these diseases is not only to slow the cognitive decline, but also restoration 
of function and ultimately improvement in the quality of life. DBS as a 
treatment for patients with advanced dementia holds significant promise in 
delaying or reversing the progressive cognitive decline by enhancing 
connectivity in the memory networks. In appropriately selected patients this 
potentially reversible surgical therapy can lead to a significant improvement in 
the quality of life and reduce the burden on patients, families and the 
healthcare system. This review focuses on the recent and future studies 
involving neuromodulation for cognitive disorders such as Alzheimer's disease 
and Huntington's disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2013.11.040
PMID: 24882563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3448. BMC Geriatr. 2014 May 28;14:70. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-70.

Multimorbidity and long-term care dependency--a five-year follow-up.

Koller D(1), Schön G, Schäfer I, Glaeske G, van den Bussche H, Hansen H.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Social Policy Research, University of Bremen, 
Mary-Somerville-Straße 5, 28359 Bremen, Germany. dkoller@zes.uni-bremen.de.

BACKGROUND: Not only single, but also multiple, chronic conditions are becoming 
the normal situation rather than the exception in the older generation. While 
many studies show a correlation between multimorbidity and various health 
outcomes, the long-term effect on care dependency remains unclear. The objective 
of this study is to follow up a cohort of older adults for 5 years to estimate 
the impact of multimorbidity on long-term care dependency.
METHODS: This study is based on claims data from a German health insurance 
company. We included 115,203 people (mean age: 71.5 years, 41.4% females). To 
identify chronic diseases and multimorbidity, we used a defined list of 46 
chronic conditions based on ICD-10 codes. Multimorbidity was defined as three or 
more chronic conditions from this list. The main outcome was "time until 
long-term care dependency". The follow-up started on January 1st, 2005 and 
lasted for 5 years until December 31st, 2009. To evaluate differences between 
those with multimorbidity and those without, we calculated Kaplan-Meier curves 
and then modeled four distinct Cox proportional hazard regressions including 
multimorbidity, age and sex, the single chronic conditions, and disease 
clusters.
RESULTS: Mean follow-up was 4.5 years. People with multimorbidity had a higher 
risk of becoming care dependent (HR: 1.85, CI 1.78-1.92). The conditions with 
the highest risks for long-term care dependency are Parkinson's disease (HR: 
6.40 vs. 2.68) and dementia (HR: 5.70 vs. 2.27). Patients with the 
multimorbidity pattern "Neuropsychiatric disorders" have a 79% higher risk of 
care dependency.
CONCLUSIONS: The results should form the basis for future health policy 
decisions on the treatment of patients with multiple chronic diseases and also 
show the need to introduce new ways of providing long-term care to this 
population. A health policy focus on chronic care management as well as the 
development of guidelines for multimorbidity is crucial to secure health 
services delivery for the older population.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-14-70
PMCID: PMC4046081
PMID: 24884813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3449. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 2;9(6):e94944. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094944. eCollection 
2014.

Delirium and high fever are associated with subacute motor deterioration in 
Parkinson disease: a nested case-control study.

Umemura A(1), Oeda T(1), Tomita S(1), Hayashi R(1), Kohsaka M(1), Park K(1), 
Sugiyama H(2), Sawada H(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Center, National Hospital of Utano, Kyoto, Japan; 
Department of Neurology, National Hospital of Utano, Kyoto, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Hospital of Utano, Kyoto, Japan.

BACKGROUND: In Parkinson disease (PD), systemic inflammation caused by 
respiratory infections such as pneumonia frequently occurs, often resulting in 
delirium in the advanced stages of this disease. Delirium can lead to cognitive 
and functional decline, institutionalization, and mortality, especially in the 
elderly. Inflammation causes rapid worsening of PD motor symptoms and signs, 
sometimes irreversibly in some, but not all, patients.
PURPOSE: To identify factors associated with subacute motor deterioration in PD 
patients with systemic inflammation.
METHODS: The association of clinical factors with subacute motor deterioration 
was analyzed by a case-control study. Subacute motor deterioration was defined 
as sustained worsening by one or more modified Hoehn and Yahr (H-Y) stages. 
Using multivariable logistic regression incorporating baseline characteristics 
(age, sex, PD duration, modified H-Y stage, dementia, and psychosis history) and 
statistically selected possible predictors (peak body temperature, duration of 
leukocytosis, and presence of delirium), the odds ratios for these factors were 
estimated as relative risks.
RESULTS: Of 80 PD patients with systemic inflammation, 26 with associated 
subacute motor deterioration were designated as cases and the remainder as 
controls. In the 26 cases, 6 months after its onset the motor deterioration had 
persisted in 19 patients and resolved in four (three were lost for follow-up). 
Multivariable logistic regression analysis showed that delirium and body 
temperature are significantly associated with motor deterioration after systemic 
inflammation (P = 0.001 for delirium and P = 0.026 for body temperature), the 
adjusted odds ratios being 15.89 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 3.23-78.14) and 
2.78 (95% CI: 1.13-6.83), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In patients with PD and systemic inflammation, delirium and high 
body temperature are strong risk factors for subsequent subacute motor 
deterioration and such deterioration can persist for over 6 months.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094944
PMCID: PMC4041721
PMID: 24887491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3450. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014 Mar;68(3):169-75. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12111.

Milnacipran influences the indexes of I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy in 
elderly depressed patients.

Yokoyama K, Yamada T, Terachi S, Pu S, Ohta Y, Yamanashi T, Matsumura H, 
Nakagome K, Kaneko K.

AIM: This study investigated whether or not and how much milnacipran influences 
the indexes of I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (I-MIBG) scintigraphy, early 
heart-to-mediastinum (H/M) ratio, delayed H/M ratio, and wash-out rate.
METHODS: Six elderly depressed patients participated in the study. All six 
patients met the diagnostic criteria for a major depressive disorder. They were 
taking milnacipran for their depression. They needed differential diagnosis for 
Lewy body diseases due to their symptomatology. I-MIBG scintigraphy was 
performed twice for each subject, once under prescription of milnacipran and the 
other without prescription of milnacipran.
RESULTS: Both early and delayed phase H/M ratio were significantly lower when 
taking milnacipran (early phase H/M ratio, P < 0.01, Cohen's d 1.62; delayed 
phase H/M ratio, P < 0.005, Cohen's d 1.98) than when not taking the drug. 
Wash-out rate (%) was significantly higher when taking milnacipran (P < 0.05, 
Cohen's d 2.31) than when off the drug.
CONCLUSION: Taking milnacipran substantially influences the indexes of I-MIBG 
scintigraphy, indicating that taking the drug possibly causes a false-positive 
result for Lewy body diseases diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1111/pcn.12111
PMID: 24895731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3451. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:175062. doi: 10.1155/2014/175062. Epub 2014 May 12.

Mitochondrial dysfunctions in neurodegenerative diseases: relevance to 
Alzheimer's disease.

Hroudová J(1), Singh N(1), Fišar Z(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Ke Karlovu 11, 120 00 Prague 
2, Czech Republic.

Mitochondrial dysfunctions are supposed to be responsible for many 
neurodegenerative diseases dominating in Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD), and Huntington's disease (HD). A growing body of evidence suggests 
that defects in mitochondrial metabolism and particularly of electron transport 
chain may play a role in pathogenesis of AD. Structurally and functionally 
damaged mitochondria do not produce sufficient ATP and are more prominent in 
producing proapoptotic factors and reactive oxygen species (ROS), and this can 
be an early stage of several mitochondrial disorders, including 
neurodegenerative diseases. Mitochondrial dysfunctions may be caused by both 
mutations in mitochondrial or nuclear DNA that code mitochondrial components and 
by environmental causes. In the following review, common aspects of 
mitochondrial impairment concerned about neurodegenerative diseases are 
summarized including ROS production, impaired mitochondrial dynamics, and 
apoptosis. Also, damaged function of electron transport chain complexes and 
interactions between pathological proteins and mitochondria are described for AD 
particularly and marginally for PD and HD.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/175062
PMCID: PMC4036420
PMID: 24900954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3452. Biomed Res Int. 2014;2014:648740. doi: 10.1155/2014/648740. Epub 2014 May 12.

Shared mechanisms of neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease.

Xie A(1), Gao J(1), Xu L(1), Meng D(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao 
University, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, China.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, Affiliated Hospital of Medical College, Qingdao 
University, No. 16 Jiangsu Road, Qingdao, Shandong 266003, China.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) have markedly different 
clinical and pathological features, but these two diseases are the most common 
neurodegenerative disorders. Previous studies have showed that there are common 
mechanisms in AD and PD. Several genetic studies have revealed mutations in 
genes associated with the risk of AD and PD. Circumstantial evidences have shown 
that dysregulation of brain iron homeostasis leads to abnormal iron accumulation 
and results in AD as well as PD. α -Synuclein and tau take part in the 
mechanisms of these diseases by oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction. 
Some studies indicated that the loss of LC noradrenergic neurons may occur early 
in the progression of AD and PD. Nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are 
members of the Cys-loop superfamily of pentameric ligand-gated ion channels; 
some evidence showed that nicotinic receptors may be associated with AD and PD. 
These experimental and clinical studies may provide a scientific foundation for 
common shared mechanisms in AD and PD.

DOI: 10.1155/2014/648740
PMCID: PMC4037122
PMID: 24900975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3453. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2015 Feb;36(2):229-35. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3970. Epub 2014 
Jun 5.

The role of functional dopamine-transporter SPECT imaging in parkinsonian 
syndromes, part 1.

Booth TC(1), Nathan M(2), Waldman AD(3), Quigley AM(2), Schapira AH(4), Buscombe 
J(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroradiology (T.C.B.), National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK tombooth@doctors.org.uk.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine (M.N., A.-M.Q.), Royal Free Hospital National 
Health Service Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Imaging (A.D.W.), Imperial College Healthcare National Health 
Service Trust, London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences (A.H.S.), Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine (J.B.), Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.

As we defeat infectious diseases and cancer, one of the greatest medical 
challenges facing us in the mid-21st century will be the increasing prevalence 
of degenerative disease. Those diseases, which affect movement and cognition, 
can be the most debilitating. Dysfunction of the extrapyramidal system results 
in increasing motor disability often manifest as tremor, bradykinesia, and 
rigidity. The common pathologic pathway of these diseases, collectively 
described as parkinsonian syndromes, such as Parkinson disease, multiple system 
atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and dementia 
with Lewy bodies, is degeneration of the presynaptic dopaminergic pathways in 
the basal ganglia. Conventional MR imaging is insensitive, especially in early 
disease, so functional imaging has become the primary method used to 
differentiate a true parkinsonian syndrome from vascular parkinsonism, 
drug-induced changes, or essential tremor. Unusually for a modern functional 
imaging technique, the method most widely used in European clinics depends on 
SPECT and not PET. This SPECT technique (described in the first of 2 parts) 
commonly reports dopamine-transporter function, with decreasing striatal uptake 
demonstrating increasingly severe disease.

© 2015 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A3970
PMCID: PMC7965655
PMID: 24904053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3454. Front Aging Neurosci. 2014 May 19;6:89. doi: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00089. 
eCollection 2014.

Caenorhabditis elegans: a model to investigate oxidative stress and metal 
dyshomeostasis in Parkinson's disease.

Chege PM(1), McColl G(1).

Author information:
(1)The Florey Institute of Neuroscience and Mental Health, University of 
Melbourne Parkville, VIC, Australia.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is characterized by progressive motor impairment 
attributed to progressive loss of dopaminergic (DAergic) neurons in the 
substantia nigra pars compacta. Additional clinical manifestations include 
non-motor symptoms such as insomnia, depression, psychosis, and cognitive 
impairment. PD patients with mild cognitive impairment have an increased risk of 
developing dementia. The affected brain regions also show perturbed metal ion 
levels, primarily iron. These observations have led to speculation that metal 
ion dyshomeostasis plays a key role in the neuronal death of this disease. 
However, the mechanisms underlying this metal-associated neurodegeneration have 
yet to be completely elucidated. Mammalian models have traditionally been used 
to investigate PD pathogenesis. However, alternate animal models are also being 
adopted, bringing to bear their respective experimental advantage. The nematode, 
Caenorhabditis elegans, is one such system that has well-developed genetics, is 
amenable to transgenesis and has relatively low associated experimental costs. 
C. elegans has a well characterized neuronal network that includes a simple 
DAergic system. In this review we will discuss mechanisms thought to underlie PD 
and the use of C. elegans to investigate these processes.

DOI: 10.3389/fnagi.2014.00089
PMCID: PMC4032941
PMID: 24904406


3455. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Oct;35(10):2419.e23-2419.e25. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.010. Epub 2014 Apr 18.

Homozygous TREM2 mutation in a family with atypical frontotemporal dementia.

Le Ber I(#)(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), De Septenville A(#)(1)(2)(3), Guerreiro R(#)(6), 
Bras J(6), Camuzat A(1)(2)(3), Caroppo P(1)(2)(3), Lattante S(1)(2)(3), Couarch 
P(1)(2)(3), Kabashi E(1)(2)(3), Bouya-Ahmed K(1)(2)(3), Dubois B(1)(2)(3)(4)(5), 
Brice A(1)(2)(3)(5)(7).

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité Mixte de 
Recherche_S1127, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, 
Paris, France.
(2)Université Pierre et Marie Curie Univ, Unité Mixte de Recherche_S975, Centre 
de Recherche de l'Institut du Cerveau et de la Moelle, Paris, France.
(3)Centre National de Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche_S7225, 
Paris, France.
(4)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
Centre de Référence des Démences Rares, Paris, France.
(5)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
Département de Neurologie, Paris, France.
(6)Reta Lilla Weston Laboratories and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, 
Institute of Neurology London, London, England.
(7)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, 
Département de Génétique et Cytogénétique, Unité Fonctionnelle de Neurogénétique 
Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Paris, France.
(#)Contributed equally

TREM2 mutations were first identified in Nasu-Hakola disease, a rare autosomal 
recessive disease characterized by recurrent fractures because of bone cysts and 
presenile dementia. Recently, homozygous and compound heterozygous TREM2 
mutations were identified in rare families with frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (FTLD) but without bone involvement. We identified a p.Thr66Met 
heterozygous mutation in a new consanguineous Italian family. Two sibs had early 
onset autosomal recessive FTLD without severe bone disorders. Atypical signs 
were present in this family: early parietal and hippocampus involvement, 
parkinsonism, epilepsy, and corpus callosum thickness on brain magnetic 
resonance imaging. This study further demonstrates the implication of TREM2 
mutations in FTLD phenotypes. It illustrates the variability of bone phenotype 
and underlines the frequency of atypical signs in TREM2 carriers. This and 
previous studies evidence that TREM2 mutation screening should be limited to 
autosomal recessive FTLD with atypical phenotypes characterized by: (1) a very 
young age at onset (20-50 years); (2) early parietal and hippocampal deficits; 
(3) the presence of seizures and parkinsonism; (4) suggestive extensive white 
matter lesions and corpus callosum thickness on brain magnetic resonance 
imaging.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.04.010
PMCID: PMC4208293
PMID: 24910390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3456. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 9;9(6):e98961. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098961. eCollection 
2014.

Antihypertensive agents and risk of Parkinson's disease: a nationwide cohort 
study.

Lee YC(1), Lin CH(2), Wu RM(2), Lin JW(3), Chang CH(4), Lai MS(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(3)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Cardiovascular Center, National Taiwan University Hospital 
Yun-Lin Branch, Dou-Liou City, Yun-Lin County, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Medicine, College of Medicine, National Taiwan University, 
Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, 
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Preventive Medicine, College of Public Health, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Hypertension has been associated with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), but data on antihypertensive drugs and PD are inconclusive. We aim 
to evaluate antihypertensive drugs for an association with PD in hypertensive 
patients.
METHODS: Hypertensive patients who were free of PD, dementia and stroke were 
recruited from 2005-2006 using Taiwan National Health Insurance Database. We 
examined the association between the use of calcium channel blockers (CCBs), 
angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs), angiotensin receptor blockers 
(ARBs) and the incidence of PD using beta-blockers as the reference. Cox 
regression model with time-varying medication use was applied.
RESULTS: Among 65,001 hypertensive patients with a mean follow-up period of 4.6 
years, use of dihydropyridine CCBs, but not non-dihydropyridine CCBs, was 
associated with a reduced risk of PD (adjusted hazard ratio [aHR]  = 0.71; 95% 
CI, 0.57-0.90). Additionally, use of central-acting CCBs, rather than 
peripheral-acting ones, was associated with a decreased risk of PD (aHR = .69 
[55-0.87]. Further decreased association was observed for higher cumulative 
doses of felodipine (aHR = 0.54 [0.36-0.80]) and amlodipine (aHR = 0.60 
[0.45-0.79]). There was no association between the use of ACEIs (aHR = 0.80 
[0.64-1.00]) or ARBs (aHR = 0.86 [0.69-1.08]) with PD. A potentially decreased 
association was only found for higher cumulative use of ACEIs (HR = 0.52 
[0.34-0.80]) and ARBs (HR = 0.52 [0.33-0.80]).
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests centrally-acting dihydropyridine CCB use and 
high cumulative doses of ACEIs and ARBs may associate with a decreased incidence 
of PD in hypertensive patients. Further long-term follow-up studies are needed 
to confirm the potential beneficial effects of antihypertensive agents in PD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098961
PMCID: PMC4049613
PMID: 24910980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3457. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 10;9(6):e98426. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098426. 
eCollection 2014.

Changes in QTc interval in the citalopram for agitation in Alzheimer's disease 
(CitAD) randomized trial.

Drye LT(1), Spragg D(2), Devanand DP(3), Frangakis C(4), Marano C(5), Meinert 
CL(6), Mintzer JE(7), Munro CA(8), Pelton G(9), Pollock BG(10), Porsteinsson 
AP(11), Rabins PV(12), Rosenberg PB(13), Schneider LS(14), Shade DM(15), 
Weintraub D(16), Yesavage J(17), Lyketsos CG(18); CitAD Research Group.

Collaborators: Lyketsos C, Shade D, Devanand DP, Mintzer J, Rosenberg P, Pollock 
BG, Porsteinsson A, Schneider S, Yesavage J, Weintraub D, Lyketsos C, Carlson A, 
Avramopoulos D, Munro C, Rabins P, Roche A, Shade D, Casper AS, Drye L, 
Frangakis C, Jenkins G, Meinert C, Pan HM, Tonascia S, Topaloglu O, Toepfner M, 
Vaidya V, Ryan L, Rosenberg P, Pedroso J, Bergey A, Carlson A, Gogel C, Marano 
C, Pollutra J, Smith L, Steinberg M, Devanand DP, de la Pena C, Pelton GH, 
Mintzer J, Gregory N, Brawman-Mintzer O, Moroni A, Watts A, Lucas S, Stuckey M, 
Gandy A, Hatchell M, Weintraub D, Czerniakowski J, DiFilippo S, Mamikonyan E, 
Streim J, Porsteinsson A, Goldstein B, Salem-Spencer S, Kowalski N, Martin KS, 
LaFountain J, Makino K, Stear K, Porter A, Yesavage J, Newell J, Ashford W, 
Bratcher K, Chao S, Fairchild JK, Friedman L, Georgette G, Gere E, Kim E, 
Periyakoil V, Traum A, Vicencio A, Wicks D, Pollock BG, Miranda D, Bies R, 
Burhan A, Gerretsen P, Ismail Z, Mulsant BH, Nguyen MQ, Rajji T, Tang-Wai D, 
Schneider S, Becerra M, Dagerman K, Pawluczyk S, Spann B, Teodoro L, Yaffe K, 
Arndt S, Cummings J, Drye L, Lyketsos C, Ryan L, Shade D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Center for Clinical Trials, Johns Hopkins 
Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of 
America.
(2)Electrophysiology Laboratory, Johns Hopkins Hospital and Johns Hopkins 
Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(3)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, New York, United States of America.
(4)Department of Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(5)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neuropsychiatry, Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(6)Departments of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School 
of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.
(7)Clinical Biotechnology Research Institute, Roper St. Francis Healthcare, 
Department of Health Studies, Medical University of South Carolina, Ralph H. 
Johnson VA Medical Center, Charleston, South Carolina, United States of America.
(8)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Neurology, Johns 
Hopkins Bayview and Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(9)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons of Columbia University, New York, New York, 
United States of America.
(10)Campbell Family Mental Health Research Institute, Division of Geriatric 
Psychiatry and Centre for Addiction and Mental Health, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(11)Alzheimer's Disease Care, Research and Education Program (AD-CARE), 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York, 
United States of America.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins University 
School of Medicine and Johns Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland, United 
States of America.
(13)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, John Hopkins University 
School of Medicine and Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center, Baltimore, 
Maryland, United States of America.
(14)Departments of Psychiatry, Neurology, and Gerontology, Keck School of 
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United 
States of America.
(15)Departments of Medicine (Pulmonary) and Epidemiology and Center for Clinical 
Trials, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, Baltimore, Maryland, 
United States of America.
(16)Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, Perelman School of Medicine at the 
University of Pennsylvania, Parkinson's Disease Research, Education and Clinical 
Center (PADRECC), Mental Illness Research, Education and Clinical Center 
(MIRECC), Philadelphia Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania, United States of America.
(17)Aging Clinical Research Center, Mental Illness Research Education and 
Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Departments of 
Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo 
Alto, California, United States of America.
(18)Memory and Alzheimer's Treatment Center, Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bayview and Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: A Food and Drug Administration (FDA) safety communication in August 
2011 warned that citalopram was associated with a dose dependent risk of QT 
prolongation and recommended dose restriction in patients over the age of 60 but 
did not provide data for this age group.
METHODS: CitAD was a randomized, double-masked, placebo-controlled, multicenter 
clinical trial for agitation in Alzheimer's disease (AD). Participants were 
assigned to citalopram (target dose of 30 mg/day) or placebo in a 1 ∶ 1 ratio. 
186 people, 181 of whom were over the age of 60, having probable AD with 
clinically significant agitation were recruited from September 2009 to January 
2013. After the FDA safety communication about citalopram, ECG was added to the 
required study procedures before enrollment and repeated at week 3 to monitor 
change in QTc interval. Forty-eight participants were enrolled after enhanced 
monitoring began.
RESULTS: Citalopram treatment was associated with a larger increase in QTc 
interval than placebo (difference in week 3 QTc adjusting for baseline QTc: 18.1 
ms [95% CI: 6.1, 30.1]; p = 0.004). More participants in the citalopram group 
had an increase ≥ 30 ms from baseline to week 3 (7 in citalopram versus 1 in 
placebo; Fisher's exact p = 0.046), but only slightly more in the citalopram 
group met a gender-specific threshold for prolonged QTc (450 ms for males; 470 
ms for females) at any point during follow-up (3 in citalopram versus 1 in 
placebo, Fisher's exact p = 0.611). One of the citalopram participants who 
developed prolonged QTc also displayed ventricular bigeminy. No participants in 
either group had a cardiovascular-related death.
CONCLUSION: Citalopram at 30 mg/day was associated with improvement in agitation 
in patients with AD but was also associated with QT prolongation.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00898807.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098426
PMCID: PMC4051660
PMID: 24914549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts. Dr. Porsteinsson reports 
receiving research funding from Avanir, Baxter, BMS, Elan, EnVivo, 
Genentech/Roche, Janssen Alzheimer Initiative, Merck, Pfizer, Toyama, 
Medivation, National Institutes of Health (NIH), and Department of Defense; is a 
paid consultant for Elan, Janssen Alzheimer Initiative, and Pfizer; is a board 
member on Data Safety and Monitoring Boards for Quintiles, Functional 
Neuromodulation, and New York State Psychiatric Institute; participated on a 
Speaker's Bureau for Forest and developed educational presentations for CME, 
inc. Dr. Pollock reports being a board member on Data Safety and Monitoring 
Boards for Lundbeck Canada; is a paid consultant for Wyeth; has received travel 
and accommodation expenses from Lundbeck International Neuroscience Foundation. 
Dr. Devanand reports receiving grant funding from the NIH and Eli Lilly. Dr. 
Ismail reports being paid for lectures by Calgary Foothills Primary Care 
Network, Calgary West Central Primary Care Network, Canadian Conference on 
Dementia, Alberta College of Family Physicians, and University of British 
Columbia and is a paid consultant for Astra Zeneca, Janssen, Lundbeck, Otsuka, 
Pfizer, and Sunovion. Dr. Meinert reports receiving grant funding from the NIH. 
Dr. Mintzer reports receiving research funding from Accera, Avanir, Baxter, 
Elan, Eli Lilly, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Genentech, Janssen Alzheimer Initiative, 
Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Takeda Global Research & Development Center, Wyeth, and 
NIH; he is employed by Roper St. Francis Healthcare, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Ralph H. Johnson VA Medical Center, and NeuroQuest and is founder of 
BioPharma Connex. Dr. Munro reports receiving grant funding from the NIH; being 
paid for expert testimony from various law firms, Office of Federal Public 
Defender, and US Attorney's Office; and being paid for lectures for Episcopal 
Ministries. Dr. Rabins reports being paid for legal testimony from Janssen. Dr. 
Rosenberg reports receiving research funding from Elan, Eli Lilly, Merck, and 
Functional Neuromodulation, Inc.; is a paid consultant for Janssen and Pfizer; 
has developed educational presentations for Eli Lilly. Dr. Schneider reports 
receiving grant funding from the NIH; is a paid consultant for Forest 
Laboratories, Eli Lilly, Astra Zeneca, Johnson and Johnson, Bristol Myers Squibb 
and Otsuka, and Abbott and Abbvie. Dr. Lyketsos reports receiving grant funding 
from the NIH; is a paid consultant for Avanir, BMS, Elan, Eli Lilly, Genentech, 
GSK, Janssen, Novartis, NFL, and Pfizer; reports being a board member on Data 
Safety and Monitoring Boards for Eli Lilly and Janssen; and receiving royalties 
from Oxford University Press. Drs. Drye, Spragg, Frangakis, Marano, Pelton, 
Weintraub, Yesavage and Mr. Shade report no conflicts of interest.


3458. Neuropharmacology. 2014 Oct;85:284-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.05.028. 
Epub 2014 Jun 7.

Non-ergot dopamine agonist rotigotine as a promising therapeutic tool in 
atypical parkinsonism syndromes: a 24 months pilot observational open-label 
study.

Moretti DV(1), Binetti G(2), Zanetti O(2), Frisoni GB(2).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS S. Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy. Electronic 
address: davide.moretti@afar.it.
(2)IRCCS S. Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

Rotigotine (RTG) is a non-ergot dopamine agonist developed as a new transdermal 
formulation, indicated for use in early and advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). 
The potential advantages of the RTG patch include immediacy of effect onset, 
constant drug delivery, better tolerability avoiding drug peaks and easy of use, 
helping patient's compliance. So, RTG patch appears to be a suitable candidate 
in the treatment of patients with atypical parkinsonism. The present is an 
observational study to evaluate the efficacy and tolerability of RTG in patients 
affected by atypical parkinsonian disorders. 61 subjects with diagnosis of 
atypical parkinsonian disorders were treated with transdermal RTG. Diagnosis 
was: Parkinson disease with dementia, multiple system atrophy parkinsonian type, 
multiple system atrophy cerebellar type, progressive sopranuclear palsy, 
cortico-basal degeneration, Lewy body dementia and fronto-temporal dementia with 
parkinsonism. Patients were evaluated by UPDRS-III, NPI, MMSE and adverse events 
(AEs) were recorded. Patients treated with RTG show an overall decrease of UPDRS 
III scores without increasing behavioral disturbances. Main adverse events (AE) 
were hypotension (14 patients), nausea (13), vomiting (5), drowsiness (5), 
tachycardia (2) dystonia (3 patients, all treated with concomitant l-dopa). On 
the whole, 16 patients were affected by AE and 7 patients suspended RTG 
treatment due to AE (vomiting, tachycardia and sleepiness). In our population 
transdermal RTG seems to be effective and well tolerated. Due to its system of 
drug delivery, RTG appears to be a suitable therapy in elderly patients as it 
has a good tolerability profile, improves patient's compliance and helps 
management of fragile patients.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2014.05.028
PMID: 24915072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3459. Exp Neurol. 2014 Nov;261:1-9. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.06.003. Epub 2014 
Jun 8.

Intrathecal infusion of BMAA induces selective motor neuron damage and 
astrogliosis in the ventral horn of the spinal cord.

Yin HZ(1), Yu S(1), Hsu CI(1), Liu J(1), Acab A(1), Wu R(1), Tao A(1), Chiang 
BJ(1), Weiss JH(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of CA, Irvine, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, University of CA, Irvine, USA; Department of Anatomy 
& Neurobiology, University of CA, Irvine, USA. Electronic address: 
jweiss@uci.edu.

The neurotoxin beta-N-methylamino-l-alanine (BMAA) was first identified as a 
"toxin of interest" in regard to the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-Parkinsonism 
Dementia Complex of Guam (ALS/PDC); studies in recent years highlighting 
widespread environmental sources of BMAA exposure and providing new clues to 
toxic mechanisms have suggested possible relevance to sporadic ALS as well. 
However, despite clear evidence of uptake into tissues and a range of toxic 
effects in cells and animals, an animal model in which BMAA induces a 
neurodegenerative picture resembling ALS is lacking, possibly in part reflecting 
limited understanding of critical factors pertaining to its absorption, 
biodistribution and metabolism. To bypass some of these issues and ensure 
delivery to a key site of disease pathology, we examined effects of prolonged 
(30day) intrathecal infusion in wild type (WT) rats, and rats harboring the 
familial ALS associated G93A SOD1 mutation, over an age range (80±2 to 
110±2days) during which the G93A rats are developing disease pathology yet 
remain asymptomatic. The BMAA exposures induced changes that in many ways 
resemble those seen in the G93A rats, with degenerative changes in ventral horn 
motor neurons (MNs) with relatively little dorsal horn pathology, marked ventral 
horn astrogliosis and increased 3-nitrotyrosine labeling in and surrounding MNs, 
a loss of labeling for the astrocytic glutamate transporter, GLT-1, surrounding 
MNs, and mild accumulation and aggregation of TDP-43 in the cytosol of some 
injured and degenerating MNs. Thus, prolonged intrathecal infusion of BMAA can 
reproduce a picture in spinal cord incorporating many of the pathological 
hallmarks of diverse forms of human ALS, including substantial restriction of 
overt pathological changes to the ventral horn, consistent with the possibility 
that environmental BMAA exposure could be a risk factor and/or contributor to 
some human disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2014.06.003
PMCID: PMC4194249
PMID: 24918341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3460. J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4(3):331-6. doi: 10.3233/JPD-140390.

Quality of life and mild cognitive impairment in early Parkinson's disease: does 
subtype matter?

Lawson RA(1), Yarnall AJ(1), Duncan GW(1), Khoo TK(2), Breen DP(3), Barker 
RA(3), Collerton D(1), Taylor JP(1), Burn DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.
(2)Griffith Health Institute & School of Medicine, Griffith University, Gold 
Coast, Australia.
(3)John van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
UK.

We evaluated the association between mild cognitive impairment (MCI) subtypes 
and quality of life (QoL) in 219 newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients without dementia. Participants completed neuropsychological tests of 
attention, executive function, visuospatial function, memory, and language, and 
reported QoL using the Parkinson's Disease Questionnaire. Impairments were most 
common in executive function, memory and attention. MCI subtypes were classified 
according to Movement Disorder Society Task Force criteria. More severe 
cognitive impairment was associated with poorer quality of life (p = 0.01), but 
subtype of impairment was not (p > 0.10), suggesting that the nature of 
cognitive impairment is less significant than its severity.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-140390
PMID: 24919824 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3461. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2015 Feb;36(2):236-44. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3971. Epub 2014 
Jun 12.

The role of functional dopamine-transporter SPECT imaging in parkinsonian 
syndromes, part 2.

Booth TC(1), Nathan M(2), Waldman AD(3), Quigley AM(2), Schapira AH(4), Buscombe 
J(5).

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroradiology (T.C.B.), National Hospital for 
Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK tombooth@doctors.org.uk.
(2)Department of Nuclear Medicine (M.N., A.-M.Q.), Royal Free Hospital NHS 
Trust, London, UK.
(3)Department of Imaging (A.D.W.), Imperial College Healthcare NHS Trust, 
London, UK.
(4)Department of Clinical Neurosciences (A.H.S.), Institute of Neurology, 
University College London, London, UK.
(5)Department of Nuclear Medicine (J.B.), Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge 
University Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Cambridge, UK.

The functional imaging technique most widely used in European clinics to 
differentiate a true parkinsonian syndrome from vascular parkinsonism, 
drug-induced changes, or essential tremor is dopamine-transporter SPECT. This 
technique commonly reports dopamine-transporter function, with decreasing 
striatal uptake demonstrating increasingly severe disease. The strength of 
dopamine-transporter SPECT is that nigrostriatal degeneration is observed in 
both clinically inconclusive parkinsonism and early, even premotor, disease. In 
this clinical review (Part 2), we present the dopamine-transporter SPECT 
findings in a variety of neurodegenerative diseases, including multiple system 
atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and dementia 
with Lewy bodies. The findings in vascular parkinsonism, drug-induced 
parkinsonism, and essential tremor are also described. It is hoped that this 
technique will be the forerunner of a range of routinely used, process-specific 
ligands that can identify early degenerative disease and subsequently guide 
disease-modifying interventions.

© 2015 by American Journal of Neuroradiology.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A3971
PMCID: PMC7965658
PMID: 24924549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3462. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jun;10(3 Suppl):S188-95. doi: 
10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.002.

Imaging chronic traumatic brain injury as a risk factor for neurodegeneration.

Little DM(1), Geary EK(2), Moynihan M(3), Alexander A(4), Pennington M(5), Glang 
P(6), Schulze ET(7), Dretsch M(8), Pacifico A(9), Davis ML(10), Stevens AB(10), 
Huang JH(10).

Author information:
(1)BaylorScott&White Health, Temple, TX, USA; Texas A&M University Health 
Sciences, Temple, TX, USA. Electronic address: deborahmlittle@gmail.com.
(2)Northshore Health System, Evanston, IL, USA.
(3)West Virginia School of Osteopathic Medicine, Lewisburg, WV, USA.
(4)Advocate Christ Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)BaylorScott&White Health, Temple, TX, USA.
(6)University of Oregon, Eugene, OR, USA.
(7)Saint Louis University, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(8)National Intrepid Center of Excellence, Walter Reed National Military Medical 
Center, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(9)Telemedicine & Advanced Technology Research Center, U.S. Army Medical 
Research and Materiel Command, USA.
(10)BaylorScott&White Health, Temple, TX, USA; Texas A&M University Health 
Sciences, Temple, TX, USA.

Population-based studies have supported the hypothesis that a positive history 
of traumatic brain injury (TBI) is associated with an increased incidence of 
neurological disease and psychiatric comorbidities, including chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. These epidemiologic studies, however, do not offer a clear 
definition of that risk, and leave unanswered the bounding criteria for greater 
lifetime risk of neurodegeneration. Key factors that likely mediate the degree 
of risk of neurodegeneration include genetic factors, significant premorbid and 
comorbid medical history (e.g. depression, multiple head injuries and repetitive 
subconcussive impact to the brain, occupational risk, age at injury, and 
severity of brain injury). However, given the often-described concerns in 
self-report accuracy as it relates to history of multiple TBIs, low frequency of 
patient presentation to a physician in the case of mild brain injuries, and 
challenges with creating clear distinctions between injury severities, 
disentangling the true risk for neurodegeneration based solely on 
population-based studies will likely remain elusive. Given this reality, 
multiple modalities and approaches must be combined to characterize who are at 
risk so that appropriate interventions to alter progression of neurodegeneration 
can be evaluated. This article presents data from a study that highlights uses 
of neuroimaging and areas of needed research in the link between TBI and 
neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.002
PMID: 24924670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3463. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jun;10(3 Suppl):S213-25. doi: 
10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.014.

The disease intersection of susceptibility and exposure: chemical exposures and 
neurodegenerative disease risk.

Tanner CM(1), Goldman SM(2), Ross GW(3), Grate SJ(4).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education and Clinical Center, San Francisco 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of 
Neurology, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; 
Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
caroline.tanner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Parkinson's Disease Research, Education and Clinical Center, San Francisco 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of 
Neurology, University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, CA, USA; 
Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, CA, USA.
(3)Veterans Affairs Pacific Islands Health Care System, Honolulu, HI, USA.
(4)Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, MSAMRMC, Fort Detrick, 
MD, USA.

Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and motor neuron disease, the most 
common of the late-life neurodegenerative disorders, are in most cases thought 
to have complex etiologies. Common features among these disorders include 
insidious onset, pathological findings of protein aggregates and selected 
neuronal degeneration, and resulting characteristic clinical syndromes. The 
number of elders in the United States, including aging veterans, is increasing. 
Investigation of causes and preventive interventions for neurodegenerative 
disorders is increasingly relevant. Recent epidemiological and laboratory 
studies suggest that exposures years or decades before diagnosis can trigger the 
processes that ultimately result in a neurodegenerative disease. If this is 
correct, preventive measures may be needed in midlife or earlier. This article 
will focus on putative risk factors relevant to military service.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.014
PMID: 24924672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3464. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jun;10(3 Suppl):S226-35. doi: 
10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.005.

Effects of traumatic brain injury and posttraumatic stress disorder on 
Alzheimer's disease in veterans, using the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Weiner MW(1), Veitch DP(2), Hayes J(2), Neylan T(3), Grafman J(4), Aisen PS(5), 
Petersen RC(6), Jack C(7), Jagust W(8), Trojanowski JQ(9), Shaw LM(10), Saykin 
AJ(11), Green RC(12), Harvey D(13), Toga AW(14), Friedl KE(15), Pacifico A(16), 
Sheline Y(17), Yaffe K(18), Mohlenoff B(3); Department of Defense Alzheimer's 
Disease Neuroimaging Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Radiology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Medicine, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; Department of Neurology, 
University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
michael.weiner@ucsf.edu.
(2)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Center for Imaging of 
Neurodegenerative Diseases, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(6)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(7)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
(8)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California Berkeley, 
Berkeley, CA, USA.
(9)Institute on Aging, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA; Udall Parkinson's 
Research Center, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia, PA, USA; Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Research, Perelman School of Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(10)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(11)Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA; Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, 
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(12)Division of Genetics, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.
(13)Division of Biostatistics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University 
of California, Davis, CA, USA.
(14)Laboratory of Neuroimaging, Institute of Neuroimaging and Informatics, 
University of Southern California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(15)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(16)Telemedicine and Advanced Technology Research Center, U.S. Army Medical 
Research and Materiel Command, Fort Detrick, MD, USA.
(17)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, 
Washington University, St. Louis, MO, USA.
(18)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA; 
Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Both traumatic brain injury (TBI) and posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) are 
common problems resulting from military service, and both have been associated 
with increased risk of cognitive decline and dementia resulting from Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) or other causes. This study aims to use imaging techniques and 
biomarker analysis to determine whether traumatic brain injury (TBI) and/or PTSD 
resulting from combat or other traumas increase the risk for AD and decrease 
cognitive reserve in Veteran subjects, after accounting for age. Using military 
and Department of Veterans Affairs records, 65 Vietnam War veterans with a 
history of moderate or severe TBI with or without PTSD, 65 with ongoing PTSD 
without TBI, and 65 control subjects are being enrolled in this study at 19 
sites. The study aims to select subject groups that are comparable in age, 
gender, ethnicity, and education. Subjects with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
or dementia are being excluded. However, a new study just beginning, and similar 
in size, will study subjects with TBI, subjects with PTSD, and control subjects 
with MCI. Baseline measurements of cognition, function, blood, and cerebrospinal 
fluid biomarkers; magnetic resonance images (structural, diffusion tensor, and 
resting state blood-level oxygen dependent (BOLD) functional magnetic resonance 
imaging); and amyloid positron emission tomographic (PET) images with 
florbetapir are being obtained. One-year follow-up measurements will be 
collected for most of the baseline procedures, with the exception of the lumbar 
puncture, the PET imaging, and apolipoprotein E genotyping. To date, 19 subjects 
with TBI only, 46 with PTSD only, and 15 with TBI and PTSD have been recruited 
and referred to 13 clinics to undergo the study protocol. It is expected that 
cohorts will be fully recruited by October 2014. This study is a first step 
toward the design and statistical powering of an AD prevention trial using 
at-risk veterans as subjects, and provides the basis for a larger, more 
comprehensive study of dementia risk factors in veterans.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2014.04.005
PMCID: PMC4392759
PMID: 24924673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The other authors have no conflict of interest 
to report.


3465. J Nucl Med. 2014 Aug;55(8):1288-96. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.114.140228. Epub 2014 
Jun 12.

Individual-reader diagnostic performance and between-reader agreement in 
assessment of subjects with Parkinsonian syndrome or dementia using 
123I-ioflupane injection (DaTscan) imaging.

Seibyl JP(1), Kupsch A(2), Booij J(3), Grosset DG(4), Costa DC(5), Hauser RA(6), 
Darcourt J(7), Bajaj N(8), Walker Z(9), Marek K(10), McKeith I(11), O'Brien 
JT(12), Tatsch K(13), Tolosa E(14), Dierckx RA(15), Grachev ID(16).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders, New Haven, Connecticut 
jseibyl@mnimaging.com.
(2)Department of Neurology and Stereotactic Neurosurgery, 
Otto-von-Guericke-University, Magdeburg, Germany.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Institute of Neurological Sciences, Southern General Hospital and University 
of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland.
(5)Nuclear Medicine-Radiopharmacology, Champalimaud Centre for the Unknown, 
Champalimaud Foundation, Lisbon, Portugal.
(6)Departments of Neurology, Molecular Pharmacology and Physiology, USF Health 
Byrd Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, National Parkinson 
Foundation Center of Excellence, Tampa, Florida.
(7)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Centre Antoine Lacassagne, TIRO Research 
Group, University of Nice Sophia-Antipolis, Nice, France.
(8)Department of Clinical Neurology, National Parkinson's Foundation 
International Centre of Excellence, Nottingham University Hospitals NHS Trust 
and University of Nottingham, Queen's Medical Centre Campus, Nottingham, United 
Kingdom.
(9)Division of Psychiatry, University College London, London, United Kingdom 
North Essex Partnership University NHS Foundation Trust, Essex, United Kingdom.
(10)Institute for Neurodegenerative Disorders, New Haven, Connecticut.
(11)Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge School of Clinical 
Medicine and Cambridgeshire and Peterborough Foundation NHS Trust, Cambridge, 
United Kingdom.
(13)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Municipal Hospital Karlsruhe, Inc., 
Karlsruhe, Germany.
(14)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Universitat de Barcelona, 
IDIBAPS, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red sobre Enfermedades 
Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(15)Departments of Radiology, Nuclear Medicine, and Molecular Imaging, 
University Medical Centre Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands; and.
(16)Medical Affairs, Life Sciences, GE Healthcare, Princeton, New Jersey.

Establishing an early, accurate diagnosis is fundamental for appropriate 
clinical management of patients with movement disorders or dementia. Ioflupane 
(123)I Injection (DaTscan, (123)I-ioflupane) is an important adjunct to support 
the clinical diagnosis. Understanding individual-reader diagnostic performance 
of (123)I-ioflupane in a variety of clinical scenarios is essential.
METHODS: Sensitivity, specificity, interreader, and intrareader data from 5 
multicenter clinical studies were reviewed. The different study designs offered 
an assortment of variables to assess the effects on the diagnostic performance 
of (123)I-ioflupane: on-site versus 3-5 blinded image readers, number of image 
evaluations, early/uncertain versus late/confirmed clinical diagnosis as 
reference standard, and subjects with movement disorders versus dementia.
RESULTS: Eight hundred eighteen subjects had individual-reader efficacy data 
available for analysis. In general, sensitivity and specificity were high and 
comparable between on-site versus blinded independent readers. In subjects with 
dementia, when the clinical diagnosis was made at month 12 versus baseline, 
specificity improved from 77.4%-91.2% to 81.6%-95.0%. In subjects with movement 
disorders, this effect was observed to an even greater extent, when diagnostic 
performance using month-18 diagnosis as a reference standard (sensitivity, 
67.0%-73.7%; specificity, 75.0%-83.3%) was compared versus month-36 diagnosis 
(77.5%-80.3% and 90.3%-96.8%, respectively). Diagnostic performance was similar 
in subjects with dementia (74.4%-89.9% and 77.4%-95.0%, respectively) and 
subjects with movement disorders (67.0%-97.9% and 71.4%-98.4%, respectively). In 
most of the comparisons, between-reader agreement was very good (almost 
perfect), with κ ranging from 0.81 to 1.00. Within-reader agreement, measured in 
1 study, was 100% for 3 blinded readers.
CONCLUSION: Individual-reader diagnostic performance, as assessed by measuring 
sensitivity and specificity of (123)I-ioflupane to detect the presence or 
absence of striatal dopaminergic deficit, using the clinical diagnosis as a 
reference standard, was high in subjects with either movement disorders or 
dementia and was similar in on-site readers versus blinded analyses. Between- 
and within-reader agreements were very good (almost perfect). Longer follow-up 
between imaging and clinical diagnosis improved the diagnostic accuracy, most 
likely due to improvement in the clinical diagnosis reference standard, rather 
than changes in reader accuracy.

© 2014 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.114.140228
PMID: 24925885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3466. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2014 Apr 23;4(1):95-102. doi: 10.1159/000355428. 
eCollection 2014 Jan.

Subcortical and Deep Cortical Atrophy in Frontotemporal Dementia due to Granulin 
Mutations.

Premi E(1), Garibotto V(2), Gazzina S(1), Formenti A(1), Archetti S(3), 
Gasparotti R(4), Padovani A(1), Borroni B(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Ageing Brain and Neurodegenerative Disorders, Neurology Unit, 
Brescia, Italy.
(2)Department of Medical Imaging, Geneva University Hospital, Geneva, 
Switzerland.
(3)III Laboratory of Analysis, Brescia Hospital, Brescia, Italy.
(4)Neuroradiology Unit, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Parkinsonism is often associated with symptoms of 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), but its pathogenesis has been largely neglected. 
In genetic inherited FTD-related granulin (GRN) mutations, parkinsonism is an 
early sign, and it is more common than in sporadic disorders. Our aim was to 
study grey matter (GM) volume changes in subcortical and deep cortical regions 
in GRN-related FTD.
METHODS: A total of 33 FTD patients (13 carriers of the GRN mutation, GRN+, and 
20 non-carriers, GRN-) and 12 healthy controls (HC) were included in the study. 
Each subject underwent an MRI examination (1) for voxel-based morphometry to 
study GM differences in cortical and subcortical regions, and (2) for a region 
of interest approach using a probabilistic atlas of subcortical regions (caudate 
nucleus, putamen, thalamus and amygdala) to assess the regional differences.
RESULTS: The GRN+ group showed greater damage in frontotemporal regions than the 
GRN- group. The FTD patients had greater GM atrophy in the caudate nucleus and 
in the thalamus bilaterally than the HC. Damage to these subcortical and deep 
cortical regions was greater in the GRN+ than in the GRN- patients.
DISCUSSION: Subcortical and deep cortical involvement is a key feature of FTD, 
and more pronounced in GRN-related disease. Damage to the caudate region in GRN+ 
patients may explain the parkinsonism frequently associated since the early 
stages of the disease.

DOI: 10.1159/000355428
PMCID: PMC4036148
PMID: 24926307


3467. Lancet. 2014 Sep 27;384(9949):1196-205. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60683-8. Epub 
2014 Jun 11.

Long-term effectiveness of dopamine agonists and monoamine oxidase B inhibitors 
compared with levodopa as initial treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD MED): a 
large, open-label, pragmatic randomised trial.

PD Med Collaborative Group; Gray R, Ives N, Rick C, Patel S, Gray A, Jenkinson 
C, McIntosh E, Wheatley K, Williams A, Clarke CE.

Collaborators: Sandercock P, Baigent C, Crome P, Williams A, Abbott R, Baker M, 
Castleton B, Clarke CE, Counsell C, Deb AK, Fairweather S, Fitzpatrick R, Gray 
A, Ives N, Jenkinson C, MacPhee G, Malone T, Mant D, McIntosh E, Ming A, Morrish 
P, Ohri P, Pearce V, Wood B, Worth P, Au P, Boodell T, Cheed V, Clarke CE, 
Daniels J, Dowling F, Edmondson A, Gray R, Hawker R, Herd C, Hilken N, Ives N, 
Kaur S, Ottridge R, Patel S, Peto L, Rick C, Sidile C, Tomlinson C, Tyler E, 
Wheatley K, Winkles N, Gray A, McIntosh E, Kent S, Fitzpatrick R, Jenkinson C, 
Caie L, Caslake R, Coleman R, Counsell C, Crowley P, Gerrie L, Gordon J, Harris 
C, Leslie V, Macleod MA, Taylor K, Barker R, Forsyth D, Halls M, Lennox G, Young 
J, Azie E, Barrett J, Monaghan A, Turnbull C, Vanek H, Blake D, Manford M, 
Thangarajah N, Johnson M, Wallis P, Carr P, Cochrane L, Prescott R, Rose A, 
Drover M, Karunaratne P, McLaren A, Jones E, Nasar M, Bayliss M, Jones P, Lewis 
B, Dunn A, Eckley M, Price J, Woodman G, Forsyth D, Halls M, Young J, Aldridge 
G, Bhuvanendran N, Lewis S, Mann C, Patel K, Ghaus N, Grueger A, Mallinson B, 
Wihl G, Ballantyne S, Clarke CE, Coyle S, Hornabrook R, Hutchinson S, Irfan H, 
Lewthwaite A, Nicholl D, Poxon S, Ritch A, Davison J, Dodds S, Gray C, Nath U, 
Robinson G, Deb A, Aftab N, Read D, Villanueva L, Alderton L, Carr P, Cochrane 
L, Prescott R, Rose A, Burrows E, Fletcher P, Folkes E, Gilbert A, Hayes H, 
Morrow P, Silva M, Baxter G, Bell J, Gorman J, Lawrence J, Rhind G, Hindle J, 
Jones J, Ohri P, Parry M, Roberts E, Subashchandran R, Pycock C, Aspden L, 
Partington-Jones L, Raw J, Vanek H, Wadhwa U, Barber R, Haywood B, Heywood P, 
Lewis H, O'Sullivan K, Prout K, Whelan L, Whone A, Fletcher P, Folkes E, Fuller 
G, Medcalf P, Morrish P, Silva M, Aruldoss P, Farmery J, Liveley K, Shelbourn K, 
Sood V, Bouifraden K, Dalziel J, Evans C, Matheson P, Overstall P, Wales E, Ward 
G, Ponsford J, Graham A, Grimmer SF, Lockington TJ, Sheehan LJ, Williams H, 
Fuller J, Harrison P, Roche M, Shields S, Glasspool R, Hubbard I, Walters R, 
Barraclough C, McClung A, Moseley L, Pathirana CK, Abbott R, Critchley P, 
Goodwin Wray L, Kendall B, Lawden M, Lo N, Martey J, Rajabally Y, Simpson B, 
Abbott R, Critchley P, Kendall B, Lawden M, Martey J, Rajabally Y, Hindle J, 
Ohri P, Gale A, Phiri D, Sekaran L, Sharma A, Wijayasiri S, Fleary H, Monaghan 
A, Silverdale M, Vanek H, Walker D, McGee M, Senthil V, Reynolds S, Arnould D, 
Chong S, Diem D, Kundu B, Quinn N, Benamer H, Billings J, Corston R, D'Costa D, 
Green M, Shuri J, Cassidy T, Dodds S, Gani A, Lawson R, Noble J, Chan Y, 
Clipsham K, Cochius J, Dick D, Hipperson M, Lee M, Payne B, Reading F, Roche M, 
Sabanathan K, Shields S, Worth P, Harper G, Honan W, Oxborough L, Saunders J, 
Stanley J, McCann P, Edmonds P, Hand A, O'Hanlon S, Robinson L, Walker R, Bolam 
D, Liddle B, Ballantyne SL, Byravan R, Jones P, Guptha S, Noble C, Roychowdhury 
S, Ellis C, Harries-Jones R, Hillier C, Milligan N, Potter J, Ebenezer L, Raha 
S, Thompson S, Benamer H, Crouch R, Healy K, Hornabrook R, Johnson M, Nicholl D, 
Pall H, Praamstra P, Williams A, Beaumont D, Ell S, McGourty J, Jenkinson M, 
McHenry M, Scoble N, Vahid R, Findley L, Misbahuddin A, Adcock J, Chatterjee A, 
Collins H, Fairweather S, Flossman E, Greenhall R, Hart H, Shaw J, Singh S, 
Talbot K, Thompson S, Weir A, Gray D, Sood V, Sutherland S, Wilson M, Hughes T, 
Jones A, Morgan L, Sastry B, Abdel-Hafiz A, Al-Modaris F, Dutta S, Mallik T, 
Mondal B, Roberts J, Sinha S, Amar K, Atkins S, Devadason G, Martin A, Thompson 
C, Fenwick G, Gormley K, Gutowski N, Harris S, Harrower T, Hemsley A, Honan W, 
James M, Jeffreys O, Malone T, Pearce V, Sheridan R, Soper C, Sword J, Zeman A, 
Gordon C, McElwaine T, Pressly V, Chan D, Saha R, Howcroft D, Mugweni K, 
Robertson D, Stephens A, Whelan E, Wright A, Blane N, Burns S, Mutch W, Roberts 
R, Chikna E, Chamberlain J, Lee J, Marigold J, Adams J, Dulay J, Evans S, 
Frankel J, Garrard P, Gibb W, Gove R, Holmes C, Lawton N, Malik N, McElwaine T, 
Morgan S, Phipps H, Pressly V, Queen V, Roberts H, Tan R, Turner G, Weller R, 
Zaman S, O'Brien A, Grosset D, MacPhee G, McGonigal A, Vennard C, Rektorova I, 
Carey G, Castleton B, Dhakam Z, Kalcantera E, Long C, Mandal B, Martin V, Nari 
R, Nicholas V, Sunderland C, Franks S, Hammans S, Moffitt V, Rice-Oxley M, 
Elizabeth J, Logan A, Summers B, Cooper S, Darch W, Homan J, Hussain M, Sharratt 
D, Solanki T, Bennett J, Vassallo J, Ford A, Kendall G, Stocker K, Chaudhry A, 
Grubneac A, Kenton A, Lindahl A, Lismore J, McConville M, Peskett R, Ponsford J, 
Shehu A, Strens L, Hughes T, Sastry B, Barrett J, Turnbull C, Vanek H, Moore A, 
O'Brien I, Watling D, Wyatt L, Jones C, Mahan T, Ullyart K, Wood B, Desai H, 
Ferry P, Grubneac A, Ponsford J, Ray P, Rose P, Shehu A, Thanvi B, Waters S, 
Rizvi S, Sa'Adu A, Walker E, Berry G, Russell N, Lennox G, Ward T, Abrams J, 
Ashley S, Steiger M, Beal A, Hawkins J, Heller A, Jenkinson M, McHenry M, Samuel 
M, Scoble N, Vahid R, Caie L, Leslie V, Primrose W, Hipperson M, Pycock C, Baker 
K, Buckley C, Bulley S, Gibbons D, Goodland R, Heywood P, Jones L, Martin L, 
Qadiri M, Rashed K, Rowland-Axe R, Stone A, Whittuck M.

Erratum in
    Lancet. 2014 Sep 27;384(9949):1186.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2014 Sep 27;384(9949):1164-6.
    J R Coll Physicians Edinb. 2014;44(4):291-2.
    Evid Based Med. 2015 Feb;20(1):17.

BACKGROUND: Whether initial treatment for Parkinson's disease should consist of 
levodopa, dopamine agonists, or monoamine oxidase type B inhibitors (MAOBI) is 
uncertain. We aimed to establish which of these three classes of drug, as 
initial treatment, provides the most effective long-term control of symptoms and 
best quality of life for people with early Parkinson's disease.
METHODS: In this pragmatic, open-label randomised trial, patients newly 
diagnosed with Parkinson's disease were randomly assigned (by telephone call to 
a central office; 1:1:1) between levodopa-sparing therapy (dopamine agonists or 
MAOBI) and levodopa alone. Patients and investigators were not masked to group 
assignment. Primary outcomes were the mobility dimension on the 39-item 
patient-rated Parkinson's disease questionnaire (PDQ-39) quality-of-life scale 
(range 0-100 with six points defined as the minimally important difference) and 
cost-effectiveness. Analysis was intention to treat. This trial is registered, 
number ISRCTN69812316.
FINDINGS: Between Nov 9, 2000, and Dec 22, 2009, 1620 patients were assigned to 
study groups (528 to levodopa, 632 to dopamine agonist, 460 to MAOBI). With 
3-year median follow-up, PDQ-39 mobility scores averaged 1·8 points (95% CI 
0·5-3·0, p=0·005) better in patients randomly assigned to levodopa than those 
assigned to levodopa-sparing therapy, with no increase or attrition of benefit 
during 7 years' observation. PDQ-39 mobility scores were 1·4 points (95% CI 
0·0-2·9, p=0·05) better in patients allocated MAOBI than in those allocated 
dopamine agonists. EQ-5D utility scores averaged 0·03 (95% CI 0·01-0·05; 
p=0·0002) better with levodopa than with levodopa-sparing therapy; rates of 
dementia (hazard ratio [HR] 0·81, 95% CI 0·61-1·08, p=0·14), admissions to 
institutions (0·86, 0·63-1·18; p=0·4), and death (0·85, 0·69-1·06, p=0·17) were 
not significantly different, but the upper CIs precluded any substantial 
increase with levodopa compared with levodopa-sparing therapy. 179 (28%) of 632 
patients allocated dopamine agonists and 104 (23%) of 460 patients allocated 
MAOBI discontinued allocated treatment because of side-effects compared with 11 
(2%) of 528 patients allocated levodopa (p<0·0001).
INTERPRETATION: Very small but persistent benefits are shown for patient-rated 
mobility scores when treatment is initiated with levodopa compared with 
levodopa-sparing therapy. MAOBI as initial levodopa-sparing therapy was at least 
as effective as dopamine agonists.
FUNDING: UK National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment 
Programme and UK Department of Health.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)60683-8
PMID: 24928805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3468. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2014 Jun 5;10:1003-9. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S64015. 
eCollection 2014.

Rotigotine is safe and efficacious in Atypical Parkinsonism Syndromes induced by 
both α-synucleinopathy and tauopathy.

Moretti DV(1), Binetti G(1), Zanetti O(1), Frisoni GB(1).

Author information:
(1)IRCCS San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.

Transdermal rotigotine (RTG) is a non-ergot dopamine agonist (D3>D2>D1), and is 
indicated for use in early and advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). RTG patch has 
many potential advantages due to the immediacy of onset of the therapeutic 
effect. Of note, intestinal absorption is not necessary and drug delivery is 
constant, thereby avoiding drug peaks and helping patient compliance. In turn, 
transdermal RTG seems a suitable candidate in the treatment of atypical 
Parkinsonian disorders (APS). Fifty-one subjects with a diagnosis of APS were 
treated with transdermal RTG. The diagnoses were: Parkinson's disease with 
dementia, multiple system atrophy Parkinsonian type, multiple system atrophy 
cerebellar type, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, Lewy 
body dementia, and frontotemporal dementia with Parkinsonism. Patients were 
evaluated by the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS; part III), 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI), and mini-mental state examination (MMSE) and 
all adverse events (AEs) were recorded. Patients treated with RTG showed an 
overall decrease of UPDRS III scores without increasing behavioral disturbances. 
Main AEs were hypotension, nausea, vomiting, drowsiness, tachycardia, and 
dystonia. On the whole, 15 patients were affected by AEs and seven patients 
suspended RTG treatment due to AEs. The results show that transdermal RTG is 
effective with a good tolerability profile. RTG patch could be a good 
therapeutic tool in patients with APS.

DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S64015
PMCID: PMC4051815
PMID: 24940065


3469. Lancet Neurol. 2014 Jul;13(7):686-99. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70065-1.

Frontotemporal dementia and its subtypes: a genome-wide association study.

Ferrari R(1), Hernandez DG(2), Nalls MA(3), Rohrer JD(4), Ramasamy A(5), Kwok 
JB(6), Dobson-Stone C(6), Brooks WS(6), Schofield PR(6), Halliday GM(6), Hodges 
JR(6), Piguet O(6), Bartley L(7), Thompson E(8), Haan E(8), Hernández I(9), Ruiz 
A(9), Boada M(10), Borroni B(11), Padovani A(11), Cruchaga C(12), Cairns NJ(13), 
Benussi L(14), Binetti G(14), Ghidoni R(15), Forloni G(16), Galimberti D(17), 
Fenoglio C(17), Serpente M(17), Scarpini E(17), Clarimón J(18), Lleó A(18), 
Blesa R(18), Waldö ML(19), Nilsson K(19), Nilsson C(20), Mackenzie IR(21), 
Hsiung GY(22), Mann DM(23), Grafman J(24), Morris CM(25), Attems J(26), 
Griffiths TD(27), McKeith IG(28), Thomas AJ(29), Pietrini P(30), Huey ED(31), 
Wassermann EM(32), Baborie A(33), Jaros E(34), Tierney MC(32), Pastor P(35), 
Razquin C(36), Ortega-Cubero S(37), Alonso E(36), Perneczky R(38), Diehl-Schmid 
J(39), Alexopoulos P(39), Kurz A(39), Rainero I(40), Rubino E(40), Pinessi 
L(40), Rogaeva E(41), St George-Hyslop P(42), Rossi G(43), Tagliavini F(43), 
Giaccone G(43), Rowe JB(44), Schlachetzki JC(45), Uphill J(46), Collinge J(46), 
Mead S(46), Danek A(47), Van Deerlin VM(48), Grossman M(48), Trojanowski JQ(48), 
van der Zee J(49), Deschamps W(49), Van Langenhove T(49), Cruts M(49), Van 
Broeckhoven C(49), Cappa SF(50), Le Ber I(51), Hannequin D(52), Golfier V(53), 
Vercelletto M(54), Brice A(51), Nacmias B(55), Sorbi S(55), Bagnoli S(55), 
Piaceri I(55), Nielsen JE(56), Hjermind LE(56), Riemenschneider M(57), Mayhaus 
M(58), Ibach B(59), Gasparoni G(58), Pichler S(58), Gu W(60), Rossor MN(61), Fox 
NC(61), Warren JD(61), Spillantini MG(62), Morris HR(63), Rizzu P(64), Heutink 
P(64), Snowden JS(65), Rollinson S(65), Richardson A(66), Gerhard A(67), Bruni 
AC(68), Maletta R(68), Frangipane F(68), Cupidi C(68), Bernardi L(68), Anfossi 
M(68), Gallo M(68), Conidi ME(68), Smirne N(68), Rademakers R(69), Baker M(69), 
Dickson DW(69), Graff-Radford NR(70), Petersen RC(71), Knopman D(71), Josephs 
KA(71), Boeve BF(71), Parisi JE(72), Seeley WW(73), Miller BL(73), Karydas 
AM(73), Rosen H(73), van Swieten JC(74), Dopper EG(75), Seelaar H(75), 
Pijnenburg YA(76), Scheltens P(76), Logroscino G(77), Capozzo R(77), Novelli 
V(78), Puca AA(79), Franceschi M(80), Postiglione A(81), Milan G(82), Sorrentino 
P(82), Kristiansen M(83), Chiang HH(84), Graff C(84), Pasquier F(85), Rollin 
A(85), Deramecourt V(85), Lebert F(85), Kapogiannis D(86), Ferrucci L(87), 
Pickering-Brown S(65), Singleton AB(3), Hardy J(88), Momeni P(89).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Science Center, Lubbock, Texas, USA; Reta Lila Weston Research 
Laboratories, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, 
London, UK.
(2)Reta Lila Weston Research Laboratories, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, 
UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National 
Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(3)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(4)Reta Lila Weston Research Laboratories, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, 
UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Dementia Research Centre, Department of 
Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK.
(5)Reta Lila Weston Research Laboratories, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, 
UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK; Department of Medical and Molecular 
Genetics, King's College London, Guy's Hospital, London, UK.
(6)Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia; University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(7)Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, NSW, Australia.
(8)South Australian Clinical Genetics Service, SA Pathology at Women's and 
Children's Hospital, North Adelaide, SA, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, 
University of Adelaide, Adelaide, SA, Australia.
(9)Memory Clinic of Fundació ACE, Institut Català de Neurociències Aplicades, 
Barcelona, Spain.
(10)Memory Clinic of Fundació ACE, Institut Català de Neurociències Aplicades, 
Barcelona, Spain; Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron-Institut de Recerca, 
Universitat Autonoma de Barcelona (VHIR-UAB), Barcelona, Spain.
(11)Neurology Clinic, University of Brescia, Brescia, Italy.
(12)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri, USA; Hope Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St 
Louis, Missouri, USA.
(13)Hope Center, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri, 
USA; Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University, St Louis, 
Missouri, USA.
(14)NeuroBioGen Lab-Memory Clinic, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio 
Fatebenefratelli, Brescia, Italy.
(15)Proteomics Unit, IRCCS Istituto Centro San Giovanni di Dio Fatebenefratelli, 
Brescia, Italy.
(16)Biology of Neurodegenerative Disorders, IRCCS Istituto di Ricerche 
Farmacologiche Mario Negri, Milano, Italy.
(17)University of Milan, Milan, Italy; Fondazione Cà Granda, IRCCS Ospedale 
Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy.
(18)Memory Unit, Neurology Department and Sant Pau Biomedical Research 
Institute, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de 
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; Center for Networker Biomedical Research in 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain.
(19)Unit of Geriatric Psychiatry, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Sweden.
(20)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Sweden.
(21)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(22)Division of Neurology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
(23)Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, University of Manchester, 
Salford Royal Hospital, Stott Lane, Salford, UK.
(24)Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Departments of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Psychiatry, and Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease 
Center, IL, USA; Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, IL, USA; 
Department of Psychology, Weinberg College of Arts and Sciences, Northwestern 
University, IL, USA.
(25)Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Departments of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Psychiatry, and Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease 
Center, IL, USA; Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, IL, USA; 
Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Newcastle University, Institute for Ageing 
and Health, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Institute 
of Neuroscience, Newcastle University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(26)Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Departments of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Psychiatry, and Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease 
Center, IL, USA; Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, IL, USA; 
Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Newcastle University, Institute for Ageing 
and Health, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(27)Rehabilitation Institute of Chicago, Departments of Physical Medicine and 
Rehabilitation, Psychiatry, and Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer's Disease 
Center, IL, USA; Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, IL, USA; 
Newcastle Brain Tissue Resource, Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Institute of Neuroscience, Newcastle 
University Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(28)Biomedical Research Building, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(29)Newcastle University, Institute for Ageing and Health, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(30)Clinical Psychology Branch, Pisa University Hospital, Pisa, Italy; 
Laboratory of Clinical Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Pisa, 
Pisa, Italy.
(31)Taub Institute, Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA 10032.
(32)Behavioral Neurology Unit, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(33)Neuropathology Department, Walton Centre FT, Liverpool, UK.
(34)Newcastle University, Institute for Ageing and Health, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK; Neuropathology/Cellular Pathology, Royal 
Victoria Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
(35)Center for Networker Biomedical Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases 
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain; Neurogenetics Laboratory, Division of Neurosciences, 
Center for Applied Medical Research, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; 
Department of Neurology, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, University of Navarra 
School of Medicine, Pamplona, Spain.
(36)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Division of Neurosciences, Center for Applied 
Medical Research, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(37)Center for Networker Biomedical Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases 
(CIBERNED), Madrid, Spain; Neurogenetics Laboratory, Division of Neurosciences, 
Center for Applied Medical Research, Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.
(38)Neuroepidemiology and Ageing Research Unit, School of Public Health, Faculty 
of Medicine, The Imperial College of Science, Technology and Medicine, London, 
UK; West London Cognitive Disorders Treatment and Research Unit, West London 
Mental Health Trust, London TW8 8 DS, UK; Department of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(39)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Technische Universität München, 
Munich, Germany.
(40)Neurology I, Department of Neuroscience, University of Torino, Italy; AO 
Città della Salute e della Scienza di Torino, Italy.
(41)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases and Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(42)Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases and Department of 
Medicine, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; Cambridge Institute 
for Medical Research and the Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University of 
Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.
(43)Division of Neurology V and Neuropathology, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto 
Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy.
(44)Cambridge University Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Cambridge CB2 
0SZ, UK; MRC Cognition and Brain Sciences Unit, Cambridge, UK; Behavioural and 
Clinical Neuroscience Institute, Cambridge, UK.
(45)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Freiburg Medical 
School, Germany; Department of Molecular Neurology, University Hospital 
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.
(46)MRC Prion Unit, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.
(47)Neurologische Klinik und Poliklinik, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, 
Germany; German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, Germany.
(48)University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, Department of 
Neurology and Penn Frontotemporal Degeneration Center, Philadelphia, PA, USA.
(49)Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
VIB, Antwerp, Belgium; Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, 
University of Antwerp, Antwerp, Belgium.
(50)Neurorehabilitation Unit, Deptartment Of Clinical Neuroscience, Vita-Salute 
University and San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.
(51)Inserm, UMR_S975, CRICM, F-75013; UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR_S975, F-75013; and 
CNRS UMR 7225, F-75013, Paris, France; AP-HP, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 
Département de Neurologie-Centre de Références des Démences Rares, F-75013, 
Paris, France.
(52)Service de Neurologie, Inserm U1079, CNR-MAJ, Rouen University Hospital, 
France.
(53)Service de neurologie, CH Saint Brieuc, France.
(54)Service de Neurologie, CHU Nantes, France.
(55)Department of Neurosciences, Psychology, Drug Research and Child Health 
(NEUROFARBA) University of Florence, Florence, Italy.
(56)Danish Dementia Research Centre, Neurogenetics Clinic, Department of 
Neurology, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen University Hospital, Denmark; Department 
of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Section of Neurogenetics, The Panum 
Institute, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.
(57)Saarland University Hospital, Department for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, 
Homburg/Saar, Germany; Saarland University, Laboratory for Neurogenetics, 
Kirrberger, Homburg/Saar, Germany.
(58)Saarland University, Laboratory for Neurogenetics, Kirrberger, Homburg/Saar, 
Germany.
(59)University Regensburg, Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and 
Psychosomatics, Universitätsstr 84, Regensburg, Germany.
(60)Saarland University, Laboratory for Neurogenetics, Kirrberger, Homburg/Saar, 
Germany; Luxembourg Centre For Systems Biomedicine (LCSB), University of 
Luxembourg, Luxembourg.
(61)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, UK.
(62)University of Cambridge, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, John Van 
Geest Brain Repair Centre, Cambridge, UK.
(63)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Cardiff University, 
School of Medicine, Cardiff, UK.
(64)German Center of Neurodegenerative Diseases-Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany.
(65)Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, Faculty of Medical and 
Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.
(66)Salford Royal Foundation Trust, Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, 
University of Manchester, UK.
(67)Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, The University of 
Manchester, Withington, Manchester, UK.
(68)Regional Neurogenetic Centre, ASPCZ, Lamezia Terme, Italy.
(69)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(70)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(71)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA.
(72)Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic Rochester, Rochester, MN, USA.
(73)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, CA, USA.
(74)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands; 
Department of Medical Genetics, VU University Medical Centre, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.
(75)Department of Neurology, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
(76)Alzheimer Centre and Department of Neurology, VU University Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(77)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Sense Organs of the 
Aldo Moro, University of Bari, Italy.
(78)Department of Molecular Cardiology, IRCCS Fondazione S Maugeri, Pavia, 
Italy.
(79)Cardiovascular Research Unit, IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy; Department of 
Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, Baronissi (SA), Italy.
(80)Neurology Department, IRCCS Multimedica, Milan, Italy.
(81)Department of Clinical Medicine and Surgery, University of Naples Federico 
II, Naples, Italy.
(82)Geriatric Center Frullone-ASL Napoli 1 Centro, Naples, Italy.
(83)UCL Genomics, Institute of Child Health (ICH), UCL, London, UK.
(84)Karolinska Institutet, Department NVS, KI-Alzheimer Disease Research Center, 
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Geriatric Medicine, Genetics Unit, Karolinska 
Universtiy Hospital, Stockholm.
(85)Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.
(86)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, National 
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.
(87)Clinical Research Branch, National Institute on Aging, Baltimore, MD, USA.
(88)Reta Lila Weston Research Laboratories, Department of Molecular 
Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, UK. Electronic address: 
j.hardy@ucl.ac.uk.
(89)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Science Center, Lubbock, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2014 Jul;13(7):643-4.

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is a complex disorder characterised by 
a broad range of clinical manifestations, differential pathological signatures, 
and genetic variability. Mutations in three genes-MAPT, GRN, and C9orf72--have 
been associated with FTD. We sought to identify novel genetic risk loci 
associated with the disorder.
METHODS: We did a two-stage genome-wide association study on clinical FTD, 
analysing samples from 3526 patients with FTD and 9402 healthy controls. To 
reduce genetic heterogeneity, all participants were of European ancestry. In the 
discovery phase (samples from 2154 patients with FTD and 4308 controls), we did 
separate association analyses for each FTD subtype (behavioural variant FTD, 
semantic dementia, progressive non-fluent aphasia, and FTD overlapping with 
motor neuron disease [FTD-MND]), followed by a meta-analysis of the entire 
dataset. We carried forward replication of the novel suggestive loci in an 
independent sample series (samples from 1372 patients and 5094 controls) and 
then did joint phase and brain expression and methylation quantitative trait 
loci analyses for the associated (p<5 × 10(-8)) single-nucleotide polymorphisms.
FINDINGS: We identified novel associations exceeding the genome-wide 
significance threshold (p<5 × 10(-8)). Combined (joint) analyses of discovery 
and replication phases showed genome-wide significant association at 6p21.3, HLA 
locus (immune system), for rs9268877 (p=1·05 × 10(-8); odds ratio=1·204 [95% CI 
1·11-1·30]), rs9268856 (p=5·51 × 10(-9); 0·809 [0·76-0·86]) and rs1980493 (p 
value=1·57 × 10(-8), 0·775 [0·69-0·86]) in the entire cohort. We also identified 
a potential novel locus at 11q14, encompassing RAB38/CTSC (the transcripts of 
which are related to lysosomal biology), for the behavioural FTD subtype for 
which joint analyses showed suggestive association for rs302668 
(p=2·44 × 10(-7); 0·814 [0·71-0·92]). Analysis of expression and methylation 
quantitative trait loci data suggested that these loci might affect expression 
and methylation in cis.
INTERPRETATION: Our findings suggest that immune system processes (link to 
6p21.3) and possibly lysosomal and autophagy pathways (link to 11q14) are 
potentially involved in FTD. Our findings need to be replicated to better define 
the association of the newly identified loci with disease and to shed light on 
the pathomechanisms contributing to FTD.
FUNDING: The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and 
National Institute on Aging, the Wellcome/MRC Centre on Parkinson's disease, 
Alzheimer's Research UK, and Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(14)70065-1
PMCID: PMC4112126
PMID: 24943344 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests RF, DGH, MAN, JDR, AR, 
JBJK, CDS, WSB, GMH, JRH, OP, LB, ET, EH, IH, AR, MB, BB, AP, CC, NJC, LB, GB, 
RG, GF, DG, CF, MS, ES, JC, AL, RB, MLW, KN, CN, IRAM, GYRH, DMAM, JG, CMM, JA, 
TDG, IGM, AJT, PP, EDH, EMW, AB, EJ, MCT, PP, CR, SOC, EA, RP, JDS, PA, AK, IR, 
ER, LP, ER, PStGH, GR, FT, GG, JBR, JCMS, JU, JC, SM, AD, VMVD, MG, JQT, JvdZ, 
WD, TVL, SFC, ILB, DH, VG, MV, AB, BN, SS, SB, IP, JEN, LEH, MR, MM, BI, GG, SP, 
WG, MNR, NCF, JDW, MGS, HRM, PR, PH, JSS, SR, AR, AG, ACB, RM, FF, CC, LB, MA, 
MG, MEC, NS, MB, KAJ, JEP, WWS, AMK, HR, JCvS, EGPD, HS, YALP, PS, GL, RC, VN, 
AAP, MF, AP, GM, PS, MK, HHC, CG, FP, AR, VD, FL, DK, LF, SPB, JH, PM, and ABS 
declare no competing interests.


3470. J Neurol Sci. 2014 Aug 15;343(1-2):36-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.05.003. Epub 
2014 May 11.

Clinical characteristics of Parkinson's disease patients in Greece: a 
multicenter, nation-wide, cross-sectional study.

Konitsiotis S(1), Bostantjopoulou S(2), Chondrogiorgi M(3), Katsarou Z(4), 
Tagaris G(5), Mavromatis I(6), Ntzani EE(7), Mentenopoulos G(8); members of the 
Greek Parkinson Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical School, University of Ioannina, Stavrou 
Niarchou Av., University Campus, P.C. 45110 Ioannina, Greece. Electronic 
address: skonitso@uoi.gr.
(2)3rd Department of Neurology, Medical School, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, P.C. 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(3)Department of Neurology, Medical School, University of Ioannina, Stavrou 
Niarchou Av., University Campus, P.C. 45110 Ioannina, Greece.
(4)Department of Neurology, Hipporkation Hospital, Konstantinoupoleos 49, P.C. 
54642 Thessaloniki Greece.
(5)Department of Neurology, Gennimatas General Hospital, Mesogion Av 154, P.C. 
11527 Athens, Greece.
(6)2nd Department of Neurology, Medical School, Aristotle University of 
Thessaloniki, P.C. 54124 Thessaloniki, Greece.
(7)Department of Hygiene and Epidemiology, Medical School, University of 
Ioannina, Stavrou Niarchou Av., University Campus, P.C. 45110 Ioannina, Greece.
(8)Medical School, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, P.C. 54124 
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disease, with a constantly increasing 
prevalence and a high global financial impact arising from direct and indirect 
costs. Large-scale, observational studies provide data that support the better 
comprehension of disease aspects, constitute a baseline reference for future 
studies and assist comparisons among different patient populations, allowing the 
recognition of distinctive characteristics and special needs. The present study 
is the first to depict the clinical characteristics and their interplay in a 
large sample of Parkinson's disease (PD) patients in Greece. Nine hundred eighty 
six consecutive PD outpatients were recruited from 17 centers around Greece in 
the time period from 8/2007 to 7/2009 and were examined and interviewed by 
movement disorders experts. Multiple clinical characteristics were recorded 
including age at diagnosis, disease severity, patients' self classification of 
PD symptoms and their relevance to physician's global clinical impression, 
smoking, alcohol consumption, presence of family history for PD, dementia, 
depression, hypertension, cancer and other comorbidities. Associations of high 
clinical significance were found between certain clinical characteristics.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2014.05.003
PMID: 24950902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3471. J Neurol. 2014 Sep;261(9):1745-51. doi: 10.1007/s00415-014-7414-8. Epub 2014 Jun 
22.

Subthalamic deep brain stimulation: clinical and neuropsychological outcomes in 
mild cognitive impaired parkinsonian patients.

Merola A(1), Rizzi L, Artusi CA, Zibetti M, Rizzone MG, Romagnolo A, Bernardini 
A, Lanotte M, Lopiano L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Via Cherasco 15, 10124, 
Turin, Italy, aristidemerola@hotmail.com.

This observational study reports the long-term follow-up of 184 Parkinson's 
disease (PD) patients treated with subthalamic deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS), 
retrospectively analyzing the outcomes of subjects with pre-surgical mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) compared to those of patients with normal cognition. 
Patients were divided into PD-MCI or normal cognition groups at baseline, and 
then compared after 1, 3, 5 and >5 years of follow-up. Subjects assessed by 
outpatient clinical follow-up evaluation, not performing a complete clinical and 
neuropsychological follow-up assessment, were separately considered and rated 
according to their functional autonomy in daily living activities. The MCI 
prevalence at baseline was 23 %, increasing to 34 % at 1 year and over 40 % 
after 3 years. Dementia progressively affected more than 30 % of subjects after 
a median time of 6 years in the PD-MCI group and 11 years in the normal 
cognition group (p: 0.028). The mortality risk was slightly higher in PD-MCI 
patients. Outpatient clinical evaluations showed a progressive increase of 
subjects completely dependent in the activities of daily living, which ranged 
from the 11 % at 3 years to 23 % at 5 years and 31 % at >5 years. MCI can be 
frequently observed in PD patients, possibly influencing the outcome of surgical 
therapy. Our findings confirm the sustained long-lasting efficacy of STN-DBS on 
motor functions in both PD-MCI and normal cognition subjects. PD-MCI patients 
showed a more precocious cognitive impairment, as expected by natural history 
studies, but no case of dementia was observed early after surgery.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-014-7414-8
PMID: 24952619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3472. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Nov;35(11):2656.e13-2656.e16. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.05.013. Epub 2014 May 27.

Nonsense mutation in PRNP associated with clinical Alzheimer's disease.

Guerreiro R(1), Brás J(1), Wojtas A(2), Rademakers R(2), Hardy J(3), 
Graff-Radford N(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, England.
(2)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, University 
College London, London, England. Electronic address: j.hardy@ucl.ac.uk.
(4)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA; Department of 
Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

Here, we describe a nonsense haplotype in PRNP associated with clinical 
Alzheimer's disease. The patient presented an early-onset of cognitive decline 
with memory loss as the primary cognitive problem. Whole-exome sequencing 
revealed a nonsense mutation in PRNP (NM_000311, c.C478T; p.Q160*; rs80356711) 
associated with homozygosity for the V allele at position 129 of the protein, 
further highlighting how very similar genotypes in PRNP result in strikingly 
different phenotypes.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.05.013
PMCID: PMC4175176
PMID: 24958194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3473. Semin Neurol. 2014 Apr;34(2):182-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1381741. Epub 2014 Jun 
25.

Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Mayo MC(1), Bordelon Y(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, California.
(2)Movement Disorders Program, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, California.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common diagnosis of dementia 
after Alzheimer disease (AD). The essential pathologic feature is the Lewy body, 
a neuronal inclusion containing α-synuclein, found in brainstem nuclei and the 
neocortex. Clinical features include early fluctuations in attention, 
hallucinations, and parkinsonism, with progression to a combined cortical and 
subcortical dementia. To distinguish it from Parkinson disease dementia, a time 
course of one year from cognitive changes to motor feature onset has been 
established. There is more severe impairment of verbal fluency, executive 
function, and visuospatial abilities in DLB patients. Both rapid eye movement 
sleep behavior disorder and neuroleptic sensitivity are notable in this patient 
group. Treatment is aimed at symptom management. Cholinesterase inhibitors can 
be beneficial for behavioral and cognitive issues, whereas dopaminergic agents 
may help motor symptoms. Survival is equivalent to AD when measured from symptom 
onset, though diagnosis in DLB may be delayed.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1381741
PMID: 24963677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3474. Semin Neurol. 2014 Apr;34(2):189-201. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1381735. Epub 2014 Jun 
25.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration: a clinical approach.

Karageorgiou E(1), Miller BL(1).

Author information:
(1)Memory and Aging Center, Department of Neurology, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco, California.

In this review, the authors outline a clinical approach to frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration (FTLD), a term coined to describe a pathology associated with 
atrophy of the frontal and temporal lobes commonly seen with abnormal protein 
aggregates. It accounts for ∼10% of pathologically confirmed dementias. The 
three clinical syndromes associated with FTLD are jointly classified as 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and include behavioral variant frontotemporal 
dementia (bvFTD), nonfluent-agrammatic primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA), and 
semantic variant PPA (svPPA; left: l-svPPA and right: r-svPPA). All syndromes 
have differential impairment in behavioral (bvFTD; r-svPPA), executive (bvFTD; 
nfvPPA), and language (nfvPPA; svPPA) functions early in the disease course. 
With all three there is relative sparing of short-term memory and visuospatial 
abilities early on, and with the two language syndromes, nfvPPA and svPPA, 
behavior is also intact. Symptoms are associated with specific atrophy patterns, 
lending unique imaging signatures to each syndrome (frontal: bvFTD and nfvPPA; 
temporal: svPPA). Common proteinopathies involve accumulation of tau, 
transactive response DNA binding protein 43, and fusion in sarcoma protein. 
Parkinsonism presents in all syndromes, especially cases with tau pathology and 
MAPT or GRN mutations. nfvPPA often has corticobasal degeneration or progressive 
supranuclear palsy as the underlying neuropathological substrate. bvFTD 
co-occurs with motor neuron disease in ∼15% of cases, and many such cases are 
due to C9Orf72 mutations. Other common genetic mutations in FTLD involve GRN and 
MAPT. Behavioral symptoms are best managed by selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors, while atypical antipsychotics should be used with caution given side 
effects. Promising etiologic treatments include anti-tau antibodies, antisense 
oligonucleotides, and progranulin enhancers.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1381735
PMID: 24963678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3475. Semin Neurol. 2014 Apr;34(2):217-24. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1381738. Epub 2014 Jun 
25.

The neurogenetics of atypical parkinsonian disorders.

Fogel BL(1), Clark MC(1), Geschwind DH(1).

Author information:
(1)Program in Neurogenetics, Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of 
Medicine, University of California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California.

Although classic Parkinson disease is the disorder most commonly associated with 
the clinical feature of parkinsonism, there is in fact a broader spectrum of 
disease represented by a collection of phenotypically similar neurodegenerative 
conditions that mimic many of its core features. These atypical parkinsonian 
disorders most commonly include progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal 
degeneration, disorders both associated with frontotemporal dementia, as well as 
multiple system atrophy and dementia with Lewy bodies. Although the clinical 
distinction of these disorders still remains a challenge to physicians, recent 
advances in genetics are poised to tease apart the differences. Insights into 
the molecular etiologies underlying these conditions will improve diagnosis, 
yield a better understanding of the underlying disease pathology, and ultimately 
lend stimulation to the development of potential treatments. At the same time, 
the wide range of phenotypes observed from mutations in a single gene warrants 
broad testing facilitated by advances in DNA sequencing. These expanding genomic 
approaches, ranging from the use of next-generation sequencing to identify 
causative or risk-associated gene variations to the study of epigenetic 
modification linking human genetics to environmental factors, are poised to lead 
the field into a new age of discovery.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1381738
PMCID: PMC4305275
PMID: 24963681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3476. Med Pregl. 2014 Jan-Feb;67(1-2):28-32.

Deep brain stimulation in psychiatry.

Jesić MP, Zivanović' O, Nikolić I, Radovanović S, Sakić B, Jesić A.

Deep brain stimulation is a stereotactic neurosurgical method used in the 
treatment of Parkinson's disease and some other movement disorders. The 
application of deep brain stimulation in the treatment of certain psychiatric 
disorders has been intensively investigated taking into account the current 
knowledge of neurobiological basis of mood regulation, cognition, and behaviour. 
This paper has been aimed at presenting the available data on experience in the 
application of deep brain stimulation in the treatment of psychiatric disorders. 
It gives an overview of scientific and professional literature, bearing in mind 
all the contemporary approaches in the treatment of certain psychiatric 
disorders. Research results available so far in the treatment of 
treatment-resistant depression, obsessive-compulsive disorder, Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome, addiction and Alzheimer's dementia, are affirmative 
concerning the efficacy of the method and low risk of adverse effects. Deep 
brain stimulation, as a relatively new neurosurgical method in the treatment of 
psychiatric disorders, is being intensively developed, and it is certainly going 
to be one of the treatments of choice, primarily of treatment-resistant 
disorders.

PMID: 24964565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3477. Prog Brain Res. 2014;211:235-54. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00010-6.

The role of dopamine in Huntington's disease.

Cepeda C(1), Murphy KP(2), Parent M(3), Levine MS(4).

Author information:
(1)Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Semel Institute 
for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(2)Huntington's Disease Research Forum, Department of Life, Health and Chemical 
Sciences, The Open University, Milton Keynes, Buckinghamshire, UK.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Neuroscience, Faculty of Medicine, Université 
Laval, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut Universitaire en Santé Mentale de 
Québec, Quebec City, QC, Canada.
(4)Intellectual and Developmental Disabilities Research Center, Semel Institute 
for Neuroscience and Human Behavior, David Geffen School of Medicine, University 
of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA. Electronic address: 
mlevine@mednet.ucla.edu.

Alterations in dopamine (DA) neurotransmission in Parkinson's disease are well 
known and widely studied. Much less is known about DA changes that accompany and 
underlie some of the symptoms of Huntington's disease (HD), a dominant inherited 
neurodegenerative disorder characterized by chorea, cognitive deficits, and 
psychiatric disturbances. The cause is an expansion in CAG (glutamine) repeats 
in the HTT gene. The principal histopathology of HD is the loss of medium-sized 
spiny neurons (MSNs) and, to a lesser degree, neuronal loss in cerebral cortex, 
thalamus, hippocampus, and hypothalamus. Neurochemical, electrophysiological, 
and behavioral studies in HD patients and genetic mouse models suggest biphasic 
changes in DA neurotransmission. In the early stages, DA neurotransmission is 
increased leading to hyperkinetic movements that can be alleviated by depleting 
DA stores. In contrast, in the late stages, DA deficits produce hypokinesia that 
can be treated by increasing DA function. Alterations in DA neurotransmission 
affect glutamate receptor modulation and could contribute to excitotoxicity. The 
mechanisms of DA dysfunction, in particular the increased DA tone in the early 
stages of the disease, are presently unknown but may include initial 
upregulation of DA neuron activity caused by the genetic mutation, reduced 
inhibition resulting from striatal MSN loss, increased excitation from cortical 
inputs, and DA autoreceptor dysfunction. Targeting both DA and glutamate 
receptor dysfunction could be the best strategy to treat HD symptoms.

© 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-63425-2.00010-6
PMCID: PMC4409123
PMID: 24968783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3478. BMC Public Health. 2014 Jun 26;14:653. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-653.

Epidemiology of neurodegenerative diseases in sub-Saharan Africa: a systematic 
review.

Lekoubou A, Echouffo-Tcheugui JB, Kengne AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Cape Town, Cape Town, South Africa. 
andre.kengne@mrc.ac.za.

BACKGROUND: Sub-Saharan African (SSA) countries are experiencing rapid 
transitions with increased life expectancy. As a result the burden of 
age-related conditions such as neurodegenerative diseases might be increasing. 
We conducted a systematic review of published studies on common 
neurodegenerative diseases, and HIV-related neurocognitive impairment in SSA, in 
order to identify research gaps and inform prevention and control solutions.
METHODS: We searched MEDLINE via PubMed, 'Banque de Données de Santé Publique' 
and the database of the 'Institut d'Epidemiologie Neurologique et de Neurologie 
Tropicale' from inception to February 2013 for published original studies from 
SSA on neurodegenerative diseases and HIV-related neurocognitive impairment. 
Screening and data extraction were conducted by two investigators. 
Bibliographies and citations of eligible studies were investigated.
RESULTS: In all 144 publications reporting on dementia (n = 49 publications, 
mainly Alzheimer disease), Parkinsonism (PD, n = 20), HIV-related neurocognitive 
impairment (n = 47), Huntington disease (HD, n = 19), amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS, n = 15), cerebellar degeneration (n = 4) and Lewy body dementia 
(n = 1). Of these studies, largely based on prevalent cases from retrospective 
data on urban populations, half originated from Nigeria and South Africa. The 
prevalence of dementia (Alzheimer disease) varied between <1% and 10.1% (0.7% 
and 5.6%) in population-based studies and from <1% to 47.8% in hospital-based 
studies. Incidence of dementia (Alzheimer disease) ranged from 8.7 to 
21.8/1000/year (9.5 to 11.1), and major risk factors were advanced age and 
female sex. HIV-related neurocognitive impairment's prevalence (all from 
hospital-based studies) ranged from <1% to 80%. Population-based prevalence of 
PD and ALS varied from 10 to 235/100,000, and from 5 to 15/100,000 respectively 
while that for Huntington disease was 3.5/100,000. Equivalent figures for 
hospital based studies were the following: PD (0.41 to 7.2%), ALS (0.2 to 
8.0/1000), and HD (0.2/100,000 to 46.0/100,000).
CONCLUSIONS: The body of literature on neurodegenerative disorders in SSA is 
large with regard to dementia and HIV-related neurocognitive disorders but 
limited for other neurodegenerative disorders. Shortcomings include few 
population-based studies, heterogeneous diagnostic criteria and uneven 
representation of countries on the continent. There are important knowledge gaps 
that need urgent action, in order to prepare the sub-continent for the 
anticipated local surge in neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-14-653
PMCID: PMC4094534
PMID: 24969686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3479. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Dec 1;23(23):6139-46. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu334. Epub 2014 Jun 
27.

Genetic analysis implicates APOE, SNCA and suggests lysosomal dysfunction in the 
etiology of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Bras J(1), Guerreiro R(2), Darwent L(2), Parkkinen L(3), Ansorge O(3), 
Escott-Price V(4), Hernandez DG(5), Nalls MA(5), Clark LN(6), Honig LS(7), 
Marder K(7), Van Der Flier WM(8), Lemstra A(8), Scheltens P(8), Rogaeva E(9), St 
George-Hyslop P(10), Londos E(11), Zetterberg H(12), Ortega-Cubero S(13), Pastor 
P(13), Ferman TJ(14), Graff-Radford NR(15), Ross OA(16), Barber I(17), Braae 
A(17), Brown K(17), Morgan K(17), Maetzler W(18), Berg D(18), Troakes C(19), 
Al-Sarraj S(19), Lashley T(20), Compta Y(21), Revesz T(20), Lees A(20), Cairns 
N(22), Halliday GM(23), Mann D(24), Pickering-Brown S(24), Dickson DW(16), 
Singleton A(5), Hardy J(25).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, j.bras@ucl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Molecular Neuroscience.
(3)Nuffield Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Oxford Parkinson's Disease 
Centre, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.
(4)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, School of Medicine, 
Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.
(5)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institutes on Aging, NIH, Bethesda, 
USA.
(6)Taub Institute for Alzheimer Disease and the Aging Brain, Department of 
Pathology and Cell Biology, and.
(7)Taub Institute for Alzheimer Disease and the Aging Brain, Department of 
Neurology, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.
(8)Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.
(9)Department of Medicine, Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(10)Department of Medicine, Tanz Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative 
Diseases, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada, Cambridge Institute 
for Medical Research, and Cambridge National Institute of Health Research 
Biomedical Research Unit in Dementia, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 
0XY, UK.
(11)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Institute Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund 
University, Sweden.
(12)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, 
Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, Institute of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, the Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, Mölndal, 
Sweden.
(13)Neurogenetics Laboratory, Division of Neurosciences, Center for Applied 
Medical Research, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain, Department of 
Neurology, Clínica Universidad de Navarra, University of Navarra School of 
Medicine, Pamplona, Spain, CIBERNED, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de 
Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid, Spain.
(14)Department of Psychiatry, Department of Psychology.
(15)Department of Neurology and.
(16)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.
(17)Translation Cell Sciences - Human Genetics, School of Life Sciences, Queens 
Medical Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(18)Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain Research, Department of 
Neurodegeneration, Center of Neurology, University of Tuebingen, and DZNE, 
German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases, Tuebingen, Germany.
(19)MRC London Neurodegenerative Diseases Brain Bank, Department of Clinical 
Neuroscience, King's College London, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.
(20)Queen Square Brain Bank, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, and.
(21)Queen Square Brain Bank, Department of Molecular Neuroscience, and 
Parkinson's disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, IDIBAPS, 
CIBERNED, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.
(22)Knight Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and Department of Neurology, 
Washington University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO, USA.
(23)Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney, Australia, School of Medical 
Sciences, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia.
(24)Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health, Faculty of Medical and 
Human Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK and.
(25)Reta Lila Weston Research Laboratories, Department of Molecular 
Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

Clinical and neuropathological similarities between dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB), Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases (PD and AD, respectively) suggest 
that these disorders may share etiology. To test this hypothesis, we have 
performed an association study of 54 genomic regions, previously implicated in 
PD or AD, in a large cohort of DLB cases and controls. The cohort comprised 788 
DLB cases and 2624 controls. To minimize the issue of potential misdiagnosis, we 
have also performed the analysis including only neuropathologically proven DLB 
cases (667 cases). The results show that the APOE is a strong genetic risk 
factor for DLB, confirming previous findings, and that the SNCA and SCARB2 loci 
are also associated after a study-wise Bonferroni correction, although these 
have a different association profile than the associations reported for the same 
loci in PD. We have previously shown that the p.N370S variant in GBA is 
associated with DLB, which, together with the findings at the SCARB2 locus, 
suggests a role for lysosomal dysfunction in this disease. These results 
indicate that DLB has a unique genetic risk profile when compared with the two 
most common neurodegenerative diseases and that the lysosome may play an 
important role in the etiology of this disorder. We make all these data 
available.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddu334
PMCID: PMC4222357
PMID: 24973356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3480. Curr Opin Neurol. 2014 Aug;27(4):398-404. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000107.

Update on SPECT and PET in parkinsonism - part 2: biomarker imaging of cognitive 
impairment in Lewy-body diseases.

Meyer PT(1), Frings L, Hellwig S.

Author information:
(1)aDepartment of Nuclear Medicine bCentre of Geriatrics and Gerontology 
cDepartment of Neurology dDepartment of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
Hospital Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To give an update on recent biomarker imaging studies using 
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) and positron emission 
tomography (PET) on cognitive impairment in Lewy-body diseases (LBD).
RECENT FINDINGS: Imaging studies of regional cerebral glucose metabolism with 
[F]fluorodeoxyglucose(FDG)-PET support the concept that Parkinson's disease (PD) 
with mild cognitive impairment represents a prodromal stage of PD with dementia 
(PDD). Furthermore, [F]FDG-PET may be suited for risk stratification for 
dementia in PD. In line with neuropathological studies, preliminary amyloid-beta 
(Aβ) PET studies suggest that Aβ acts synergistically with Lewy pathology in 
LBD, leading to an earlier manifestation of cognitive impairment in dementia 
with Lewy-bodies compared with PDD and a more rapid cognitive decline in PD 
patients with concomitant Aβ pathology.
SUMMARY: Molecular neuroimaging with SPECT and PET provides unique in-vivo 
insights into neuropathological and pathophysiological changes underlying 
cognitive impairment in LBD. Future prospective studies are needed to confirm 
the prognostic value of [F]FDG-PET and to define the value of amyloid PET and 
upcoming techniques, such as tau imaging, for diagnosis and prognosis in LBD.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0000000000000107
PMID: 24978635 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3481. Hum Brain Mapp. 2014 Nov;35(11):5658-66. doi: 10.1002/hbm.22577. Epub 2014 Jul 
1.

The default mode network is disrupted in Parkinson's disease with visual 
hallucinations.

Yao N(1), Shek-Kwan Chang R, Cheung C, Pang S, Lau KK, Suckling J, Rowe JB, Yu 
K, Ka-Fung Mak H, Chua SE, Ho SL, McAlonan GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, 
Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

BACKGROUND: Visual hallucinations (VH) are one of the most striking nonmotor 
symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD), and predict dementia and mortality. 
Aberrant default mode network (DMN) is associated with other psychoses. Here, we 
tested the hypothesis that DMN dysfunction contributes to VH in PD.
METHODS: Resting state functional data was acquired from individuals with PD 
with VH (PDVH) and without VH (PDnonVH), matched for levodopa drug equivalent 
dose, and a healthy control group (HC). Independent component analysis was used 
to investigate group differences in functional connectivity within the DMN. In 
addition, we investigated whether the functional changes associated with 
hallucinations were accompanied by differences in cortical thickness.
RESULTS: There were no group differences in cortical thickness but functional 
coactivation within components of the DMN was significantly lower in both PDVH 
and PDnonVH groups compared to HC. Functional coactivation within the DMN was 
found to be greater in PDVH group relative to PDnonVH group.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates, for the first time that, within a 
functionally abnormal DMN in PD, relatively higher "connectivity" is associated 
with VH. We postulate that aberrant connectivity in a large scale network 
affects sensory information processing and perception, and contributes to 
"positive" symptom generation in PD.

Copyright © 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.22577
PMCID: PMC4657500
PMID: 24985056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3482. Ann Nucl Med. 2014 Oct;28(8):796-804. doi: 10.1007/s12149-014-0873-2. Epub 2014 
Jul 2.

Comparison of (123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy, brain perfusion SPECT, and 
voxel-based MRI morphometry for distinguishing between dementia with Lewy bodies 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Inui Y(1), Toyama H, Manabe Y, Sarai M, Iwata N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Fujita Health University School of Medicine, 1-98 
Dengakugakubo, Kutsukake, Toyoake, Aichi, 470-1192, Japan, 
yositaka@fujita-hu.ac.jp.

OBJECTIVE: This study aimed to compare the diagnostic value of 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy, 
N-isopropyl-p[(123)I]iodoamphetamine (IMP) brain perfusion single-photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT), and brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) for the differentiation of dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Thirty-five and 34 patients with probable DLB and probable AD, 
respectively, were enrolled. All patients underwent (123)I-MIBG myocardial 
scintigraphy, (123)I-IMP brain perfusion SPECT, and brain MRI. For (123)I-MIBG 
imaging, we calculated early and delayed heart-to-mediastinum (H/M) uptake 
ratios. Three-dimensional stereotactic surface projections (3D-SSP) were used to 
analyze the results of (123)I-IMP SPECT. VBM with statistical parametric mapping 
8 plus diffeomorphic anatomical registration using exponentiated Lie algebra 
(DARTEL) was used to analyze the brain MRI data.
RESULTS: The area under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUC) for 
discriminating DLB and AD was highest (0.882) for the delayed H/M ratio on 
(123)I-MIBG scintigraphy. AUC for z-score measurement in the occipital lobe was 
0.818 and that for the extent of gray matter (GM) atrophy in the whole brain was 
0.788. AUC for the combination of 3D-SSP and VBM analysis was 0.836. The 
respective sensitivities and specificities for distinguishing DLB from AD were 
97.1 and 100 % for the delayed H/M ratio using (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy; 88.6 
and 73.5 % for the occipital lobe z-score using 3D-SSP analysis; 85.7 and 64.7 % 
for the extent of whole brain GM atrophy using voxel-based MRI morphometry; and 
91.4 and 76.5 % for the combination of 3D-SSP analysis and VBM.
CONCLUSIONS: (123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy was superior to brain perfusion 
SPECT and brain MRI using an advanced statistical technique to differentiate DLB 
and AD.

DOI: 10.1007/s12149-014-0873-2
PMID: 24986482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3483. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jul 2;6(243):243ra86. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093.

TREM2 mutations implicated in neurodegeneration impair cell surface transport 
and phagocytosis.

Kleinberger G(1), Yamanishi Y(2), Suárez-Calvet M(3), Czirr E(4), Lohmann E(5), 
Cuyvers E(6), Struyfs H(7), Pettkus N(8), Wenninger-Weinzierl A(9), Mazaheri 
F(9), Tahirovic S(9), Lleó A(10), Alcolea D(10), Fortea J(10), Willem M(8), 
Lammich S(8), Molinuevo JL(11), Sánchez-Valle R(11), Antonell A(11), Ramirez 
A(12), Heneka MT(13), Sleegers K(6), van der Zee J(6), Martin JJ(14), 
Engelborghs S(15), Demirtas-Tatlidede A(16), Zetterberg H(17), Van Broeckhoven 
C(6), Gurvit H(16), Wyss-Coray T(18), Hardy J(19), Colonna M(2), Haass C(20).

Author information:
(1)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), 
80336 Munich, Germany.
(2)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
(3)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. Department of Neurology, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, 08025 Barcelona, Spain. Center for Networked Biomedical 
Research for Neurodegenerative Diseases, CIBERNED, 28031 Madrid, Spain.
(4)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Center for Tissue Regeneration, Repair and 
Restoration, Veterans Administration Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 
94304, USA.
(5)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey. 
Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany. German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Tübingen, 72076 Tübingen, Germany.
(6)Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
VIB, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium. Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Institute Born-Bunge, 
University of Antwerp, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.
(7)Reference Center for Biological Markers of Dementia, Laboratory of 
Neurochemistry and Behavior, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, 2610 
Antwerp, Belgium.
(8)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany.
(9)German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), Munich, 80336 Munich, 
Germany.
(10)Department of Neurology, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques, Hospital de 
la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08025 Barcelona, 
Spain. Center for Networked Biomedical Research for Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
CIBERNED, 28031 Madrid, Spain.
(11)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, 
ICN Hospital Clinic i Universitari, 08036 Barcelona, Spain.
(12)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, 
Germany. Institute of Human Genetics, University of Bonn, 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(13)Universitätsklinikum Bonn, Neurology, 53127 Bonn, Germany. German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 53127 Bonn, Germany.
(14)Antwerp Biobank, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, 2610 Antwerp, 
Belgium.
(15)Reference Center for Biological Markers of Dementia, Laboratory of 
Neurochemistry and Behavior, Institute Born-Bunge, University of Antwerp, 2610 
Antwerp, Belgium. Department of Neurology and Memory Clinic, Hospital Network 
Antwerp (ZNA), Middelheim and Hoge Beuken, 2020 Antwerp, Belgium.
(16)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 34093 Istanbul, Turkey.
(17)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the University of Gothenburg, S-431 
80 Mölndal, Sweden. Reta Lila Weston Laboratories and Department of Molecular 
Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(18)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University 
School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. Center for Tissue Regeneration, 
Repair and Restoration, Veterans Administration Palo Alto Health Care System, 
Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA. Neuroscience IDP Program, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.
(19)Reta Lila Weston Laboratories and Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.
(20)Adolf-Butenandt Institute, Biochemistry, Ludwig-Maximilians University 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. Munich Cluster for Systems Neurology (SyNergy), 
80336 Munich, Germany. German Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE), 
Munich, 80336 Munich, Germany. christian.haass@dzne.lmu.de.

Genetic variants in the triggering receptor expressed on myeloid cells 2 (TREM2) 
have been linked to Nasu-Hakola disease, Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia (FTD), and 
FTD-like syndrome without bone involvement. TREM2 is an innate immune receptor 
preferentially expressed by microglia and is involved in inflammation and 
phagocytosis. Whether and how TREM2 missense mutations affect TREM2 function is 
unclear. We report that missense mutations associated with FTD and FTD-like 
syndrome reduce TREM2 maturation, abolish shedding by ADAM proteases, and impair 
the phagocytic activity of TREM2-expressing cells. As a consequence of reduced 
shedding, TREM2 is virtually absent in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and plasma 
of a patient with FTD-like syndrome. A decrease in soluble TREM2 was also 
observed in the CSF of patients with AD and FTD, further suggesting that reduced 
TREM2 function may contribute to increased risk for two neurodegenerative 
disorders.

Copyright © 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

DOI: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3009093
PMID: 24990881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3484. Shanghai Arch Psychiatry. 2013 Oct;25(5):296-305. doi: 
10.3969/j.issn.1002-0829.2013.05.005.

Using the Montreal Cognitive Assessment Scale to screen for dementia in Chinese 
patients with Parkinson's Disease.

Chen L(1), Yu C(2), Fu X(1), Liu W(2), Hua P(2), Zhang N(2), Kuo S(3).

Author information:
(1)Jiangsu Province Official Hospital, Nanjing, China.
(2)Affiliated Brain Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China.
(3)Columbia University, New York, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dementia is one of the most distressing and burdensome health 
problems associated with Parkinson's Disease (PD). The Montreal Cognitive 
Assessment scale (MoCA) is widely used to screen for dementia in PD patients, 
but the appropriate diagnostic cutoff score when used with Chinese PD patients 
is not known.
AIM: Determine a diagnostic cutoff value of the Chinese version of the MoCA 
(MoCA-C) for Chinese PD patients and describe the characteristics of PD patients 
screened positive for dementia using the MoCA-C.
METHODS: The presence of dementia in 616 PD patients and 85 community controls 
was determined using the Movement Disorder Society Task Force criteria (the gold 
standard diagnosis). We administered the MoCA-C to these individuals and used a 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve to identify the cutoff score of 
the MoCA-C that most efficiently identified dementia in both PD patients and 
community controls. Demographic and clinical characteristics of PD patients who 
were screened positive or negative for dementia using the MoCA-C were compared.
RESULTS: A MoCA-C score of 23 was the optimal cutoff score for dementia in both 
patients and controls. Using this cutoff score, the sensitivity and specificity 
of the MoCA-C in PD patients were 0.70 and 0.77, respectively; the positive and 
negative predictive values were 0.59 and 0.85, respectively; and the overall 
concordance (kappa [95% confidence interval]) was 0.45 (0.39-0.52). The 
corresponding kappa value (concordance) in community controls was only 0.25 
(0.05-0.45). Compared to PD patients who screened negative for dementia, those 
who screened positive for dementia were significantly impaired in all cognitive 
domains, including visuospatial and executive functioning, naming, attention, 
language, abstraction, delayed recall and orientation (all p<0.001). Among the 
PD patients, screening positive for dementia was independently associated with 
old age, low educational attainment, female gender and more severe motor 
impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: The commonly recommended cutoff screening score for dementia of 26 
on the MoCA it too high for PD patients in China; a cutoff score of 23 is more 
appropriate. Potential risk factors for dementia in Chinese PD patients include 
older age, less education, and more severe motor symptoms of PD.

Publisher: 背景: 
痴呆是帕金森氏病(PD)相关的最痛苦和最繁重的健康问题之一。蒙特利尔认知评估量表(MOCA)被广泛用于帕金森氏症患者的痴呆筛查，但是不知道怎样的诊断划界分适用于中国的帕金森病患者。
目的: 确定中国版蒙特利尔认知评估量表(MoCA-C)在中国帕金森氏症患者中的诊断划界分和了解经MoCA-C筛查痴呆阳性的帕金森氏症患者的特征
方法: 采用运动障碍学会工作组标准(金标准诊断)确定616例 
PD患者和85名社区对照中是否存在痴呆。我们对这些人进行了MoCA-C测试，并运用受试者工作特征(ROC)曲线来确定能够最有效地识别帕金森氏症患者和社区对照中痴呆的MoCA-C划界分。比较经MoCA-C筛查为痴呆阳性与阴性的PD患者的人口学和临床特征。
结果: MoCA-C 
23分是诊断帕金森氏患者及对照组痴呆的最佳划界分。使用该划界分，PD患者的MoCA-C敏感性和特异性分别为0.70和0.77，阳性和阴性预测值分别为0.59和0.85，整体一致性(kappa 
[95% 可信区间])为0.45 (0.39-0.52)。社区对照相应的kappa值 (一致性)仅为0.25 
(0.05-0.45)。与筛查为痴呆阴性的PD患者相比，筛查为痴呆阳性的PD患者所有认知功能都有显著受损，包括视觉空间和执行功能，命名，注意力，语言，抽象，延迟回忆和定向 
(均P<0.001)。在帕金森氏症患者中，筛查为痴呆阳性与年老，文化程度低，女性以及严重运动障碍独立相关。
结论: 
通常建议的痴呆划界分26对于中国帕金森病患者来说过高；23分划界分更加合适。中国的帕金森氏症患者发生痴呆的可能危险因素包括年龄，文化程度较低，以及PD严重的运动障碍症状。

DOI: 10.3969/j.issn.1002-0829.2013.05.005
PMCID: PMC4054575
PMID: 24991170

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: The authors declare no 
conflict of interest.


3485. Chronic Dis Inj Can. 2014 Jul;34(2-3):132-44.

A comprehensive profile of the sociodemographic, psychosocial and health 
characteristics of Ontario home care clients with dementia.

[Article in English, French; Abstract available in French from the publisher]

Vu M(1), Hogan DB(2), Patten SB(3), Jetté N(4), Bronskill SE(5), Heckman G(6), 
Kergoat MJ(7), Hirdes JP(6), Chen X(6), Zehr MM(8), Maxwell CJ(9).

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada; School 
of Public Health & Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 
Canada.
(2)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Community Health Sciences and 
Institute for Public Health, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(3)Department of Community Health Sciences and Institute for Public Health, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(4)Department of Community Health Sciences and Institute for Public Health, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences and Hotchkiss Brain Institute, University of Calgary, Calgary, 
Alberta, Canada.
(5)Institute for Clinical Evaluative Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada; 
Institute of Health Policy, Management & Evaluation, University of Toronto, 
Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
(6)School of Public Health & Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
Ontario, Canada.
(7)Centre de recherche, Institut universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal, 
Département de médecine, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada.
(8)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada.
(9)School of Pharmacy, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada; School 
of Public Health & Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, 
Canada; Department of Community Health Sciences and Institute for Public Health, 
University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta, Canada; Institute for Clinical 
Evaluative Sciences, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

INTRODUCTION: This study provides a comprehensive summary of the 
sociodemographic, psychosocial and health characteristics of a large 
population-based cohort of Ontario home care clients (aged 50 years and over) 
with dementia and examines the variation in these characteristics in those with 
co-existing neurological conditions.
METHODS: Clients were assessed with the Resident Assessment Instrument-Home Care 
(RAI-HC) between January 2003 and December 2010. Descriptive analyses examined 
the distribution of these characteristics among clients with dementia relative 
to several comparison groups, as well as clients with other recorded 
neurological conditions.
RESULTS: Approximately 22% of clients (n=104 802) had a diagnosis of dementia 
(average age 83 years, 64% female) and about one in four within this group had a 
co-existing neurological condition (most commonly stroke or Parkinson disease). 
About 43% of those with dementia did not live with their primary caregiver. 
Relative to several comparison groups, clients with dementia showed considerably 
higher levels of cognitive and functional impairment, aggression, anxiety, 
wandering, hallucinations/delusions, caregiver distress and a greater risk for 
institutionalization. Conversely, they showed a lower prevalence of several 
chronic conditions and lower levels of recent health service use. Depressive 
symptoms were relatively common in the dementia and other neurological groups.
CONCLUSION: Clients with co-existing neurological conditions exhibited unique 
clinical profiles illustrating the need for tailored and flexible home care 
services and enhanced caregiver assistance programs.

Publisher: TITRE: Profil complet des caractéristiques sociodémographiques, 
psychosociales et sanitaires des clients des soins à domicile atteints de 
démence en Ontario.
INTRODUCTION: Cette étude fournit une synthèse des caractéristiques 
sociodémographiques, psychosociales et sanitaires d’une vaste cohorte 
représentative des clients des soins à domicile en Ontario (âgés de 50 ans ou 
plus) atteints de démence et elle examine les variations de ces caractéristiques 
chez les clients atteints de maladies neurologiques concomitantes.
MÉTHODOLOGIE: Les clients ont été évalués à l’aide de l’Instrument d’évaluation 
des résidents – Soins à domicile (RAI-HC) entre janvier 2003 et décembre 2010. 
Les analyses descriptives fournissent la répartition de ces caractéristiques en 
comparant les clients atteints de démence et ceux de plusieurs autres groupes 
ainsi que ceux atteints d’autres maladies neurologiques documentées.
RÉSULTATS: Environ 22 % des clients (n = 104 802) avaient reçu un diagnostic de 
démence (âge moyen de 83 ans, 64 % de femmes) et un sur quatre parmi eux était 
atteint d’une maladie neurologique concomitante (AVC ou maladie de Parkinson la 
plupart du temps). Environ 43 % des clients atteints de démence n’habitaient pas 
avec leur principal aidant. Par rapport aux clients des groupes de comparaison, 
les clients atteints de démence présentaient des taux considérablement plus 
élevés de déficit cognitif et fonctionnel, d’agressivité, d’anxiété, d’errance 
et d’hallucinations ou de délire, avaient plus souvent un aidant en détresse et 
couraient un plus grand risque de placement en établissement. Par contre, ils 
étaient moins souvent atteints de diverses maladies chroniques et étaient moins 
nombreux à avoir eu recours à des services de santé récemment. Les symptômes de 
dépression étaient relativement fréquents chez les clients atteints de démence 
et chez ceux atteints d’une autre maladie neurologique.
CONCLUSION: Les clients atteints de maladies neurologiques concomitantes 
présentaient des profils cliniques bien particuliers illustrant la nécessité de 
personnaliser et d’assouplir les services de soins à domicile et d’améliorer les 
programmes de soutien pour les aidants.

PMID: 24991776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3486. Brain Res. 2014 Sep 18;1581:51-63. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.06.030. Epub 
2014 Jun 30.

The processing of lexical ambiguity in healthy ageing and Parkinson׳s disease: 
role of cortico-subcortical networks.

Ketteler S(1), Ketteler D(2), Vohn R(3), Kastrau F(4), Schulz JB(5), Reetz K(6), 
Huber W(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany; Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), Research Centre 
Jülich, Jülich, Germany. Electronic address: simon.ketteler@gmx.de.
(2)Psychiatric Outpatient Practice, Freigutstr. 4, Zürich, Switzerland.
(3)Clinical Neuropsychology at the Department of Neurology, Medical Centre 
Aachen/Bardenberg, Aachen, Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, Medical Centre Aachen/Bardenberg, Aachen, Germany.
(5)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany; JARA BRAIN-Translational Brain Medicine, Jülich and Aachen, 
Germany.
(6)Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30, 52074 
Aachen, Germany; Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), Research Centre 
Jülich, Jülich, Germany; JARA BRAIN-Translational Brain Medicine, Jülich and 
Aachen, Germany.
(7)Section Neurolinguistics at the Department of Neurology, RWTH Aachen 
University, Aachen, Germany.

Previous neuroimaging studies showed that correct resolution of lexical 
ambiguity relies on the integrity of prefrontal and inferior parietal cortices. 
Whereas prefrontal brain areas were associated with executive control over 
semantic selection, inferior parietal areas were linked with access to 
modality-independent representations of semantic memory. Yet insufficiently 
understood is the contribution of subcortical structures in ambiguity 
processing. Patients with disturbed basal ganglia function such as Parkinson׳s 
disease (PD) showed development of discourse comprehension deficits evoked by 
lexical ambiguity. To further investigate the engagement of cortico-subcortical 
networks functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging (fMRI) was monitored during 
ambiguity resolution in eight early PD patients without dementia and 14 age- and 
education-matched controls. Participants were required to relate meanings to a 
lexically ambiguous target (homonym). Each stimulus consisted of two words 
arranged on top of a screen, which had to be attributed to a homonym at the 
bottom. Brain activity was found in bilateral inferior parietal (BA 39), right 
middle temporal (BA 21/22), left middle frontal (BA 10) and bilateral inferior 
frontal areas (BA 45/46). Extent and amplitude of activity in the angular gyrus 
changed depending on semantic association strength that varied between 
conditions. Less activity in the left caudate was associated with semantic 
integration deficits in PD. The results of the present study suggest a 
relationship between subtle language deficits and early stages of basal ganglia 
dysfunction. Uncovering impairments in ambiguity resolution may be of future use 
in the neuropsychological assessment of non-motor deficits in PD.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.06.030
PMID: 24992291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3487. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2014;116(5):359-69.

[A clinical case of progressive supranuclear palsy with long-term frontal 
presentation preceding the onset of gaze palsy].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshiike T, Ueda S, Takahashi M, Suda K, Furuta K, Koyama K.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative disorder with 
diverse clinical phenotypes characterized by supranuclear gaze palsy, 
parkinsonism with postural instability, and frontal dementia. The early and 
accurate diagnosis of PSP remains difficult because of the variable combination 
of symptoms and frequent lack of gaze abnormalities early in the disease course. 
Moreover, a subset of PSP shows behavioral changes as the initial presentation, 
which considerably overlaps with the clinical picture of frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD). Thus, this subgroup possibly needs psychiatric assessments. Here, we 
describe a clinical case of PSP difficult to differentiate from FTD because the 
frontal presentation persisted without gaze palsy until the late stage of the 
clinical course. A 58-year-old man was admitted to our hospital for the 
reconsideration of a diagnosis of FTD. Disinhibited and gambling behaviors 
inconsistent with his previous personality first appeared at around the age of 
45, with gradual progression, followed by memory deficits, executive 
dysfunction, and a slowing of mental processes. Recurrent sexual disinhibition 
led him to undergo psychiatric consultation at the age of 57. Downward gaze 
palsy and postural instability with recurrent falls emerged 8 months after the 
first psychiatric examination, and he was clinically diagnosed with PSP 13 years 
after the initial frontal presentation. PSP should be considered in the 
differential diagnosis of patients presenting with frontal lobe symptoms, even 
in psychiatric practice.

PMID: 24992742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3488. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 2014;116(5):395-400.

[Regional network for patients with dementia--carrying out Kumamoto model for 
dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Ikeda M.

The Japanese government has tried to establish 150 Medical Centers for Dementia 
(MCDs) since 2008 to overcome the dementia medical service shortage. MCDs are 
required to provide special medical services for dementia and connect with other 
community resources in order to contribute to building a comprehensive support 
network for demented patients. The main specific needs are as follows: 1) 
special medical consultation; 2) differential diagnosis and early intervention; 
3) medical treatment for the acute stage of BPSD; 4) corresponding to serious 
physical complications of dementia; 5) education for general physicians (GPs) 
and other community professionals. According to the population rate, two 
dementia medical centers were planned in Kumamoto Prefecture. However, it seemed 
to be too few to cover the vast Kumamoto area. Therefore, the local government 
and I proposed to the Japanese government that we build up networks that consist 
of one core MCD in our university hospital and several regional MCDs in local 
mental hospitals. The local government selected seven (nine at present) centers 
according to the area balance and condition of equipment. The Japanese 
government has recommended and funded such networks between core and regional 
centers since 2010. The main roles of the core centers are as follows: 1) early 
diagnosis such as Mild cognitive impairment, very mild Alzheimer's disease, 
Dementia with Lewy bodies, and Frontotemporal lobar degeneration using 
comprehensive neuropsychological batteries and neuroimagings, such as MRI and 
SPECT scans; 2) education for GPs; 3) training for young consultants. The core 
center opens case conferences at least every one or two months for all staff of 
regional centers to maintain the quality of all centers and give training 
opportunities for standardized international assessment scales. While the main 
roles of the regional centers are differential diagnosis, intervention for BPSD, 
and management of general medical problems using local networks with general 
hospitals and GPs, and organizing local networks for dementia with GPs and care 
staff In short, the regional centers take responsibility for ordinal clinical 
work for dementia. To construct a more extensive network, each regional center 
must hold regional case conferences and lectures on dementia for care staff and 
GPs sharing knowledge and skills acquired from case conferences by the core 
center.

PMID: 24992746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3489. BMJ Open. 2014 Jul 3;4(7):e005158. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005158.

Treatment effect of memantine on survival in dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia: a prospective study.

Stubendorff K(1), Larsson V(2), Ballard C(3), Minthon L(2), Aarsland D(4), 
Londos E(2).

Author information:
(1)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Malmö, Sweden Department of Rheumatology, Skaraborg Central 
Hospital, Skövde, Sweden.
(2)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences, Lund 
University, Malmö, Sweden.
(3)Wolfson Centre for Age Related Diseases, King's College London, London, UK.
(4)Center for Age-Related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway Department of NVS, Neurobiology Ward Sciences and Society, Alzheimer's 
Disease Research Center, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect on survival of treatment with memantine in 
patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease with 
dementia (PDD).
METHODS: 75 patients with DLB and PDD were included in a prospective 
double-blinded randomised placebo-controlled trial (RCT) of memantine, of whom 
long-term follow-up was available for 42. Treatment response was recorded 
24 weeks from baseline and measured by Clinical Global Impression of Change 
(CGIC). The participants were grouped as responders (CGIC 1-3) or non-responders 
(CGIC 4-7). The 24-week RCT was followed by open-label treatment and survival 
was recorded at 36 months.
RESULTS: After 36-month follow-up, patients in the memantine group had a longer 
length of survival compared with patients in the placebo group (log rank 
x²=4.02, p=0.045). Within the active treatment group, survival analysis 
36 months from baseline showed that the memantine responders, based on CGIC, had 
higher rates of survival compared with the non-responders (log rank x²=6.595, 
p=0.010). Similar results were not seen in the placebo group.
CONCLUSIONS: Early treatment with memantine and a positive clinical response to 
memantine predicted longer survival in patients with DLB and PDD. This suggests 
a possible disease-modifying effect and also has implications for health 
economic analysis. However, owing to the small study sample, our results should 
merely be considered as generating a hypothesis which needs to be evaluated in 
larger studies.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ISRCTN89624516.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2014-005158
PMCID: PMC4091277
PMID: 24993765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3490. Neurol Res. 2015 Feb;37(2):112-6. doi: 10.1179/1743132814Y.0000000418. Epub 2014 
Jul 8.

Risk factors for visual hallucinations in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Gama RL, de Bruin VM, de Bruin PF, Távora DG, Lopes EM, Jorge IF, Bittencourt 
LR, Tufik S.

AIM: Parkinson's disease (PD) patients frequently present visual hallucinations 
(VHs) that have been associated with depression, old age, and cognitive 
impairment. Sleep abnormalities are also related to these factors. The aim of 
this study is to evaluate risk factors, particularly sleep alterations, 
associated with VHs in PD.
METHODS: This is a cross-sectional evaluation of consecutive patients from a 
Movement Disorder's clinics. Patients were clinically evaluated, and behavioral 
questionnaires were applied in a face-to-face interview.
RESULTS: Among 100 PD patients (67% male, mean age  =  65.0 ± 10.4), VHs were 
present in 28% of cases; individuals with VHs had worse sleep quality 
(Pittsburgh Sleep Questionnaire Index) and more severe sleep disturbances 
[Parkinson's Disease Sleep Scale (PDSS)]. Logistic regression analysis showed 
that vivid dreams and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) I scores 
(i.e., mentation, behavior, and mood symptoms) are independently associated with 
VHs. Our data show that the presence of vivid dreams is associated with VHs in 
PD and reaffirm that VHs are linked to cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: Investigating vivid dreams may help the identification of VHs in 
PD. Identifying vivid dreams can be hard considering that patients may fail to 
report symptoms for the fear of the stigma associated with psychosis and 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1179/1743132814Y.0000000418
PMID: 25002179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3491. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Sep;71(9):1162-71. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.994.

A 6.4 Mb duplication of the α-synuclein locus causing frontotemporal dementia 
and Parkinsonism: phenotype-genotype correlations.

Kara E(1), Kiely AP(2), Proukakis C(3), Giffin N(4), Love S(5), Hehir J(1), 
Rantell K(6), Pandraud A(1), Hernandez DG(7), Nacheva E(8), Pittman AM(1), Nalls 
MA(9), Singleton AB(9), Revesz T(2), Bhatia KP(10), Quinn N(10), Hardy J(1), 
Holton JL(2), Houlden H(11).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom2The Queen Square Brain Bank, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Department of Neurology, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(5)Department of Neuropathology, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, United Kingdom.
(6)Biomedical Research Centre, UCL, London, United Kingdom7Education Unit, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, London, United Kingdom.
(7)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom8Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(8)Department of Academic Hematology, Royal Free Campus, UCL, London, United 
Kingdom.
(9)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland.
(10)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.
(11)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, UCL Institute of Neurology, London, 
United Kingdom11MRC Centre for Neuromuscular Diseases, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, United Kingdom.

IMPORTANCE: α-Synuclein (SNCA) locus duplications are associated with variable 
clinical features and reduced penetrance but the reasons underlying this 
variability are unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To report a novel family carrying a heterozygous 6.4 Mb duplication 
of the SNCA locus with an atypical clinical presentation strongly reminiscent of 
frontotemporal dementia and late-onset pallidopyramidal syndromes and study 
phenotype-genotype correlations in SNCA locus duplications.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We report the clinical and neuropathologic 
features of a family carrying a 6.4 Mb duplication of the SNCA locus. To 
identify candidate disease modifiers, we completed a genetic analysis of the 
family and conducted statistical analysis on previously published cases carrying 
SNCA locus duplications using regression modeling with robust standard errors to 
account for clustering at the family level.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: We assessed whether length of the SNCA locus 
duplication influences disease penetrance and severity and whether 
extraduplication factors have a disease-modifying role.
RESULTS: We identified a large 6.4 Mb duplication of the SNCA locus in this 
family. Neuropathological analysis showed extensive α-synuclein pathology with 
minimal phospho-tau pathology. Genetic analysis showed an increased burden of 
Parkinson disease-related risk factors and the disease-predisposing H1/H1 
microtubule-associated protein tau haplotype. Statistical analysis of previously 
published cases suggested there is a trend toward increasing disease severity 
and disease penetrance with increasing duplication size. The corresponding odds 
ratios from the univariable analyses were 1.17 (95% CI, 0.81-1.68) and 1.34 (95% 
CI, 0.78-2.31), respectively. Sex was significantly associated with both disease 
risk and severity; men compared with women had increased disease risk and 
severity and the corresponding odds ratios from the univariable analyses were 
8.36 (95% CI, 1.97-35.42) and 5.55 (95% CI, 1.39-22.22), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: These findings further expand the phenotypic spectrum 
of SNCA locus duplications. Increased dosage of genes located within the 
duplicated region probably cannot increase disease risk and disease severity 
without the contribution of additional risk factors. Identification of disease 
modifiers accounting for the substantial phenotypic heterogeneity of patients 
with SNCA locus duplications could provide insight into molecular events 
involved in α-synuclein aggregation.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2014.994
PMCID: PMC4362700
PMID: 25003242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3492. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2015 Mar;28(1):67-79. doi: 
10.1177/0891988714541867. Epub 2014 Jul 9.

Incidence of tardive dyskinesia in older adult patients treated with olanzapine 
or conventional antipsychotics.

Kinon BJ(1), Kollack-Walker S(2), Jeste D(3), Gupta S(4), Chen L(1), Case M(5), 
Chen J(5), Stauffer V(1).

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly and Company, Indianapolis, IN, USA.
(2)Lilly USA, LLC, Indianapolis IN, USA Kollack-Walker_Sara@Lilly.com.
(3)University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
(4)Olean General Hospital, 515 Main Street, Olean, NY, USA.
(5)Lilly USA, LLC, Indianapolis IN, USA.

BACKGROUND: The risk of persistent tardive dyskinesia (TD) was compared in 
patients with acute psychosis or agitation aged 55 years or older who were 
treated with olanzapine (OLZ) or conventional antipsychotic (CNV) drug therapy.
METHODS: Patients without TD were randomized to treatment with OLZ (2.5-20 mg/d; 
n = 150) or CNV (dosed per label; n = 143). Following a 6-week drug 
tapering/initiation period, patients without TD were treated with OLZ or CNV for 
up to 1 year. The a priori defined primary outcome end point was persistent TD 
defined as Abnormal Involuntary Movement Scale (AIMS) scores = 2 on at least 2 
items or ≥3 on at least 1 item (items 1-7) lasting at least for 1 month 
(Criterion A). Post hoc analyses assessed persistent TD meeting the criterion of 
moderate severity defined as AIMS score ≥3 on at least 1 item persisting for 1 
month (Criterion B) and probable TD defined as elevated AIMS scores (Criterion A 
or B) not persisting for 1 month. Treatment groups were compared using 
Kaplan-Meier curve with log-rank exact test.
RESULTS: On average, patients were 78 years of age; the predominant diagnosis 
was dementia (76.7% in the OLZ group and 82.5% in the CNV group). Approximately, 
40.6% of patients in the CNV group received haloperidol. No significant 
difference in time to developing persistent TD was observed during treatment 
with OLZ or CNV (cumulative incidence: OLZ, 2.5% [95% confidence interval [95% 
CI]: 0.5-7.0]; CNV, 5.5% [95% CI: 2.1-11.6], P = .193). The exposure-adjusted 
event rates per 100 person-years were not significantly different between 
treatment groups: OLZ (2.7) and CNV (6.3; ratio: 0.420; 95% CI: 0.068-1.969). 
Post hoc analyses revealed a significantly lower risk of at least moderately 
severe persistent TD persisting for 1 month (P = .012) and probable TD not 
persisting for 1 month (Criterion A, P = .030; Criterion B, P = .048) in 
OLZ-treated patients. For those patients without significant extrapyramidal 
symptoms at baseline, significantly more patients in the CNV treatment group 
developed treatment-emergent parkinsonism than for patients in the OLZ treatment 
group (CNV: 70%, 35 of 50 patients; OLZ 44%, 25 of 57 patients; P = .011). No 
significant difference between the groups was observed for treatment-emergent 
akathisia (CNV: 6%, 7 of 117 patients; OLZ: 10%, 13 of 130 patients; P = .351).
CONCLUSION: The cumulative incidence of persistent TD was low and the risk of 
persistent TD did not differ significantly among predominantly older adult 
patients having dementia with acute psychosis or agitation treated with OLZ or 
CNV.

© The Author(s) 2014.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988714541867
PMID: 25009161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3493. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Sep;20(9):980-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.06.006. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Predictors of dementia in Parkinson's disease; findings from a 5-year 
prospective study using the SCOPA-COG.

Zhu K(1), van Hilten JJ(1), Marinus J(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. Electronic address: j.marinus@lumc.nl.

OBJECTIVE: Aim of this study was to identify risk factors for the development of 
dementia in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD).
METHODS: A broad range of motor and non-motor features was assessed at baseline 
and the following five years in 406 PD patients. Cross-sectional analyses of 
baseline data and longitudinal analyses of follow-up data were performed to 
identify risk factors for dementia.
RESULTS: Thirty-two percent of patients (n = 129) had dementia at baseline, 
while 26% of patients (n = 68) without dementia at baseline developed dementia 
during follow-up. Univariate survival analysis showed that higher age, fewer 
years of education, longer disease duration, higher age-at-onset, higher 
levodopa dose, higher Hoehn & Yahr stage, presence of dyskinesias, excessive 
daytime sleepiness (EDS), presence of hallucinations, and more severe autonomic 
and depressive symptoms were associated with an increased risk of dementia. 
Higher baseline Postural-Instability-and-Gait-Difficulty scores were also 
associated with an increased risk of dementia, whereas no effect of tremor 
severity was found. These findings largely corresponded with the variables that 
were associated with the presence of dementia at baseline. In a stepwise 
regression model, higher age at baseline, fewer years of education, higher daily 
levodopa dose and excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) emerged as independent risk 
factors of future dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large prospective cohort study, we identified a combination 
of potentially interacting risk factors for dementia in PD that are associated 
with higher age and more advanced disease.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.06.006
PMID: 25024059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3494. Ann Fam Med. 2014 Jul;12(4):367-72. doi: 10.1370/afm.1644.

Validating the 8 CPCSSN case definitions for chronic disease surveillance in a 
primary care database of electronic health records.

Williamson T(1), Green ME(2), Birtwhistle R(2), Khan S(3), Garies S(4), Wong 
ST(5), Natarajan N(6), Manca D(7), Drummond N(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada 
Department of Public Health Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, 
Canada tylerw@cpcssn.org.
(2)Department of Family Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada 
Department of Public Health Sciences, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, 
Canada.
(3)Department of Family Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.
(4)Department of Family Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
(5)School of Nursing, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British 
Columbia, Canada.
(6)Department of Family Medicine, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
(7)Department of Family Medicine, University of Alberta, Alberta, Canada.

PURPOSE: The Canadian Primary Care Sentinel Surveillance Network (CPCSSN) is 
Canada's first national chronic disease surveillance system based on electronic 
health record (EHR) data. The purpose of this study was to develop and validate 
case definitions and case-finding algorithms used to identify 8 common chronic 
conditions in primary care: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), 
dementia, depression, diabetes, hypertension, osteoarthritis, parkinsonism, and 
epilepsy.
METHODS: Using a cross-sectional data validation study design, regional and 
local CPCSSN networks from British Columbia, Alberta (2), Ontario, Nova Scotia, 
and Newfoundland participated in validating EHR case-finding algorithms. A 
random sample of EHR charts were reviewed, oversampling for patients older than 
60 years and for those with epilepsy or parkinsonism. Charts were reviewed by 
trained research assistants and residents who were blinded to the algorithmic 
diagnosis. Sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative predictive values 
(PPVs, NPVs) were calculated.
RESULTS: We obtained data from 1,920 charts from 4 different EHR systems (Wolf, 
Med Access, Nightingale, and PS Suite). For the total sample, sensitivity ranged 
from 78% (osteoarthritis) to more than 95% (diabetes, epilepsy, and 
parkinsonism); specificity was greater than 94% for all diseases; PPV ranged 
from 72% (dementia) to 93% (hypertension); NPV ranged from 86% (hypertension) to 
greater than 99% (diabetes, dementia, epilepsy, and parkinsonism).
CONCLUSIONS: The CPCSSN diagnostic algorithms showed excellent sensitivity and 
specificity for hypertension, diabetes, epilepsy, and parkinsonism and 
acceptable values for the other conditions. CPCSSN data are appropriate for use 
in public health surveillance, primary care, and health services research, as 
well as to inform policy for these diseases.

© 2014 Annals of Family Medicine, Inc.

DOI: 10.1370/afm.1644
PMCID: PMC4096475
PMID: 25024246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3495. QJM. 2015 Jan;108(1):39-45. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcu136. Epub 2014 Jul 14.

The association between chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and Parkinson's 
disease: a nationwide population-based retrospective cohort study.

Li CH(1), Chen WC(1), Liao WC(1), Tu CY(2), Lin CL(1), Sung FC(1), Chen CH(3), 
Hsu WH(1).

Author information:
(1)From the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, 
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School of Medicine, China 
Medical University, Department of Life Science, National Chung Hsing University, 
Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, Department 
of Public Health and Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan. From the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, 
China Medical University, Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School 
of Medicine, China Medical University, Department of Life Science, National 
Chung Hsing University, Management Office for Health Data, China Medical 
University Hospital, Department of Public Health and Department of Respiratory 
Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(2)From the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, 
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School of Medicine, China 
Medical University, Department of Life Science, National Chung Hsing University, 
Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, Department 
of Public Health and Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan. From the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, 
China Medical University, Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School 
of Medicine, China Medical University, Department of Life Science, National 
Chung Hsing University, Management Office for Health Data, China Medical 
University Hospital, Department of Public Health and Department of Respiratory 
Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. From the Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, China 
Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Graduate Institute of 
Clinical Medical Science, School of Medicine, China Medical University, 
Department of Life Science, National Chung Hsing University, Management Office 
for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, Department of Public Health 
and Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan.
(3)From the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, 
Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School of Medicine, China 
Medical University, Department of Life Science, National Chung Hsing University, 
Management Office for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, Department 
of Public Health and Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical 
University, Taichung, Taiwan. From the Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care 
Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, 
China Medical University, Graduate Institute of Clinical Medical Science, School 
of Medicine, China Medical University, Department of Life Science, National 
Chung Hsing University, Management Office for Health Data, China Medical 
University Hospital, Department of Public Health and Department of Respiratory 
Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. From the Division of 
Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, China 
Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, Graduate Institute of 
Clinical Medical Science, School of Medicine, China Medical University, 
Department of Life Science, National Chung Hsing University, Management Office 
for Health Data, China Medical University Hospital, Department of Public Health 
and Department of Respiratory Therapy, China Medical University, Taichung, 
Taiwan. d7996@mail.cmuh.org.tw.

OBJECTIVE: Previous research has shown that patients with chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease (COPD) tend to have a higher risk for cognitive impairment and 
dementia, a neurodegenerative disorder. The goal of this study was to examine 
what relationship, if any, exists between COPD and Parkinson's disease (PD), 
which is also a neurodegenerative disorder.
METHOD: Our study analyzed medical data from the population of Taiwan from 1998 
to 2008, with a follow-up period extending to the end of 2010. We identified 
patients with COPD by the Taiwan National Health Insurance Research Database 
(NHIRD). We selected a comparison cohort from the general population that was 
random frequency-matched by age (in 5-year increments), sex and index year, and 
further analyzed the risk of PD using Cox's regression model, including sex, age 
and comorbidities.
RESULTS: The study enrolled 20 728 COPD patients (71.1% male, mean age = 68.2 
years) and 41 147 controls. The risk of developing PD was 1.37 times greater in 
patients with COPD compared with patients without COPD after adjusting for age, 
sex and comorbidities. A significantly increased risk of PD was also found in 
patients with COPD who had any comorbidity other than diabetes.
CONCLUSION: This nationwide retrospective cohort study demonstrates that PD risk 
is significantly increased in patients with COPD compared with those of the 
general population.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the 
Association of Physicians. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/hcu136
PMID: 25024356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3496. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Sep;20(9):1009-14. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.06.018. Epub 2014 Jun 28.

Plaques and tangles as well as Lewy-type alpha synucleinopathy are associated 
with formed visual hallucinations.

Jacobson SA(1), Morshed T(2), Dugger BN(3), Beach TG(3), Hentz JG(4), Adler 
CH(4), Shill HA(2), Sabbagh MN(5), Belden CM(3), Sue LI(3), Caviness JN(4), Hu 
C(6); Arizona Parkinson's Disease Consortium.

Author information:
(1)University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix Campus, Phoenix, AZ, USA; 
Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA. Electronic address: 
Sandra.Jacobson@bannerhealth.com.
(2)University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix Campus, Phoenix, AZ, USA.
(3)Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA.
(4)Mayo Clinic Arizona, Scottsdale, AZ, USA.
(5)University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix Campus, Phoenix, AZ, USA; 
Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ, USA.
(6)University of Arizona Mel and Enid Zuckerman College of Public Health, 
Tucson, AZ, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Previous research has linked complex or formed visual hallucinations 
(VH) to Lewy-type alpha-synucleinopathy (LTS) in neocortical and limbic areas. 
As Alzheimer's disease pathology often co-occurs with LTS, we questioned whether 
this pathology - amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles - might also be 
linked to VH.
METHODS: We performed a semi-quantitative neuropathological study across 
brainstem, limbic, and cortical structures in subjects with a documented 
clinical history of VH and a clinicopathological diagnosis of Parkinson's 
disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 173 
subjects - including 50 with VH and 123 without VH - were selected from the 
Arizona Study of Aging and Neurodegenerative Disorders. Clinical variables 
examined included the Mini-mental State Exam, Hoehn & Yahr stage, and total 
dopaminergic medication dose. Neuropathological variables examined included 
total and regional LTS and plaque and tangle densities.
RESULTS: A significant relationship was found between the density of LTS and the 
presence of VH in PD, AD, and DLB. Plaque and tangle densities also were 
associated with VH in PD (p = .003 for plaque and p = .004 for tangles) but not 
in AD, where densities were high regardless of the presence of hallucinations. 
Furthermore, with DLB cases excluded, comorbidity of PD and AD was significantly 
more prevalent among subjects + VH than subjects -VH (p < .001).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that both AD and PD neuropathology contribute 
to the pathogenesis of VH. Incident VH could be predictive of concomitant AD/PD 
pathology even when criteria are not met for a second diagnosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2014.06.018
PMCID: PMC4143433
PMID: 25027359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3497. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2014 Sep;14(9):475. doi: 10.1007/s11910-014-0475-3.

Using structural and diffusion magnetic resonance imaging to differentiate the 
dementias.

Suri S(1), Topiwala A, Mackay CE, Ebmeier KP, Filippini N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Warneford Hospital, Warneford Lane, University of 
Oxford, Oxford, OX3 7JX, UK.

Dementia is one of the major causes of personal, societal and financial 
dependence in older people and in today's ageing society there is a pressing 
need for early and accurate markers of cognitive decline. There are several 
subtypes of dementia but the four most common are Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body 
dementia, vascular dementia and frontotemporal dementia. These disorders can 
only be diagnosed at autopsy, and ante-mortem assessments of "probable dementia 
(e.g. of Alzheimer type)" are traditionally driven by clinical symptoms of 
cognitive or behavioural deficits. However, owing to the overlapping nature of 
symptoms and age of onset, a significant proportion of dementia cases remain 
incorrectly diagnosed. Misdiagnosis can have an extensive impact, both at the 
level of the individual, who may not be offered the appropriate treatment, and 
on a wider scale, by influencing the entry of patients into relevant clinical 
trials. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may help to improve diagnosis by 
providing non-invasive and detailed disease-specific markers of cognitive 
decline. MRI-derived measurements of grey and white matter structural integrity 
are potential surrogate markers of disease progression, and may also provide 
valuable diagnostic information. This review summarises the latest evidence on 
the use of structural and diffusion MRI in differentiating between the four 
major dementia subtypes.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-014-0475-3
PMID: 25030502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3498. Neurol Sci. 2014 Dec;35(12):1955-62. doi: 10.1007/s10072-014-1870-x. Epub 2014 
Jul 18.

Sleep disturbance and cognitive disorder: epidemiological analysis in a cohort 
of 263 patients.

Pistacchi M(1), Gioulis M, Contin F, Sanson F, Marsala SZ.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Santorso Hospital, Hight Vicentino, Garziere Street 73, 
36014, Santorso, Italy, michele.pistacchi@ulss4.veneto.it.

The aim of this study was to investigate and describe frequency and 
characteristics of sleep disorders in a large cohort of community dwelling 
persons with several degrees and typologies of cognitive disorders. 236 patients 
(78 men and 158 women) were enrolled with different subtypes of dementia: 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), vascular dementia (VaD), mixed dementia, mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), parkinson's disease 
dementia (PDD), and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD), respectively. The 
sleep disturbances evaluated were: insomnia, excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS), 
REM behavior disorder (RBD), restless legs syndrome (RLS), and nightmares. Every 
type of sleep disorder was present in each type of dementia but with significant 
differences. Insomnia is found to be more present and specific for AD; EDS was 
associated with the presence of dementia in the elderly with LBD or PDD; RLS and 
nightmares that were recognized mainly in FTD, LBD, and PDD patients scores; 
patients with MCI had a frequency of sleep disturbances of any type equal to 
that of patients with AD presenting mostly insomnia, nightmares or RLS more 
frequently; nightmares were more frequent among LBD and PDD patients. Frequency 
of RDB was more frequent in FTD, AD, and VaD. Our findings demonstrate that 
sleep disturbance was related to dementia. A careful clinical evaluation of 
sleep disorders should be performed routinely in the clinical setting of persons 
with cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-014-1870-x
PMID: 25034185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3499. J Alzheimers Dis Parkinsonism. 2013 Oct 31;3:128. doi: 
10.4172/2161-0460.1000128.

CSF and Brain Indices of Insulin Resistance, Oxidative Stress and 
Neuro-Inflammation in Early versus Late Alzheimer's Disease.

Lee S(1), Tong M(1), Hang S(2), Deochand C(3), de la Monte S(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School, 
Providence, RI, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Warren Alpert Medical School, Providence, RI, USA.
(3)Departments of Medicine, Rhode Island Hospital, Brown University, Providence, 
RI, USA.
(4)Department of Medicine, Pathology (Neuropathology), Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, Rhode Island Hospital, Warren Alpert Medical School, Brown 
University, Providence, RI, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is characterized by progressive impairments in 
cognitive and behavioral functions with deficits in learning, memory and 
executive reasoning. Growing evidence points toward brain insulin and 
insulin-like growth factor (IGF) resistance-mediated metabolic derangements as 
critical etiologic factors in AD. This suggests that indices of insulin/IGF 
resistance and their consequences, i.e. oxidative stress, neuro-inflammation, 
and reduced neuronal plasticity, should be included in biomarker panels for AD. 
Herein, we examine a range of metabolic, inflammatory, stress, and neuronal 
plasticity related proteins in early AD, late AD, and aged control postmortem 
brain, postmortem ventricular fluid (VF), and clinical cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
samples. In AD brain, VF, and CSF samples the trends with respect to alterations 
in metabolic, neurotrophin, and stress indices were similar, but for 
pro-inflammatory cytokines, the patterns were discordant. With the greater 
severities of dementia and neurodegeneration, the differences from control were 
more pronounced for late AD (VF and brain) than early or moderate AD (brain, VF 
and CSF). The findings suggest that the inclusion of metabolic, neurotrophin, 
stress biomarkers in AβPP-Aβ+pTau CSF-based panels could provide more 
information about the status and progression of neurodegeneration, as well as 
aid in predicting progression from early- to late-stage AD. Furthermore, 
standardized multi-targeted molecular assays of neurodegeneration could help 
streamline postmortem diagnoses, including assessments of AD severity and 
pathology.

DOI: 10.4172/2161-0460.1000128
PMCID: PMC4096626
PMID: 25035815


3500. J Neuroimaging. 2015 Mar-Apr;25(2):269-274. doi: 10.1111/jon.12138. Epub 2014 
Jul 15.

MRS in mild cognitive impairment: early differentiation of dementia with Lewy 
bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Zhang B(1)(2), Ferman TJ(3), Boeve BF(4), Smith GE(5), Maroney-Smith M(1), 
Spychalla AJ(1), Knopman DS(4), Jack CR Jr(1), Petersen RC(4), Kantarci K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(2)Department of Radiology, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing 
University Medical School, Nanjing, China.
(3)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL.
(4)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.
(5)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) precedes both 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) dementia and with Lewy bodies (DLB). We investigated 
proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) characteristics of MCI patients who 
progressed to DLB compared to those who progressed to AD dementia or remained 
stable.
METHODS: Consecutive MCI patients who underwent single voxel MRS at baseline and 
progressed to DLB (n = 10) were identified during a median follow-up period of 
18 months. From the same cohort, we identified age- and sex-matched MCI patients 
who progressed to AD dementia (n = 27) or remained stable (n = 20) during a 
similar follow-up period. This study was approved by the Institutional Review 
Board and informed consent was from every subject.
RESULTS: MCI patients who progressed to AD dementia were characterized by lower 
N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/Cr ratio in the posterior cingulate voxel compared to 
those who progressed to DLB (P = .001). Decreased NAA/Cr in the posterior 
cingulate voxel differentiated MCI patients who progressed to DLB from those who 
progressed to AD with an area under the receiver operating characteristic curve 
of .85 (P < .001) on logistic regression analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: MRS may be useful in differentiating MCI patients with prodromal AD 
dementia from those with prodromal DLB for early disease-specific interventions.

Copyright © 2014 by the American Society of Neuroimaging.

DOI: 10.1111/jon.12138
PMCID: PMC4295004
PMID: 25039916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


