1901. Acta Neurol Scand. 2009 Feb;119(2):131-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2008.01075.x. 
Epub 2008 Jul 13.

Striatal [123I] FP-CIT SPECT demonstrates dopaminergic deficit in a sporadic 
case of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Ragno M(1), Scarcella MG, Cacchi√≤ G, Capellari S, Di Marzio F, Parchi P, Trojano 
L.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, C & G Mazzoni Hospital, Ascoli Piceno, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The frequent occurrence of movement disorders such as myoclonus, 
parkinsonism and dystonia, strongly suggests an involvement of the dopaminergic 
system in sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (sCJD), but this issue has not been 
specifically addressed yet.
METHODS: We report a patient who after a sub-acute focal clinical onset, 
developed the full clinical picture of probable sCJD. Given the early unilateral 
right extrapyramidal rigidity, the patient was assessed by single-photon 
emission computed tomography of the dopamine transporter (DAT) using [123I] 
FP-CIT.
RESULTS: DAT-scan demonstrated reduced values of presynaptic receptorial trace 
in the putamen, particularly on the left side, consistent with functional 
putaminal dopaminergic presynaptic alteration.
CONCLUSIONS: The present observation emphasizes the possible role of DAT imaging 
studies in the investigation of the pathogenesis of movement disorders in CJD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2008.01075.x
PMID: 18638039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1902. Pract Neurol. 2008 Aug;8(4):238-41. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.152579.

When a Parkinson's disease patient starts to hallucinate.

Poewe W(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University of Innsbruck, Anichstrasse 35, 
A-6020 Innsbruck, Austria. werner.poewe@i-med.ac.at

Visual hallucinations are a typical feature of Lewy body parkinsonism and occur 
in some 40% of patients with Parkinson's disease. Age and cognitive decline are 
the most important intrinsic risk factors, but hallucinosis is often triggered 
by comorbid conditions such as infection and dehydration. The single most 
important trigger, however, is exposure to CNS drugs, in particular 
antiparkinsonian agents. While hallucinosis and psychosis can be triggered by 
amantadine and anticholinergics, they are more commonly experienced after 
changes in dopaminergic medication. Dopamine agonists have greater potential to 
induce hallucinosis compared with L-dopa. Attempting to reduce antiparkinsonian 
drugs is an important part in the management of these patients, but atypical 
neuroleptics like clozapine or quetiapine are frequently necessary. Visual 
hallucinations in Parkinson's disease patients with dementia can also be 
improved by treatment with the cholinesterase inhibitor rivastigmine.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.152579
PMID: 18644910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1903. Neurology. 2008 Jul 22;71(4):303; author reply 303-4. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000320511.30222.dd.

Corticobasal syndrome and primary progressive aphasia as manifestations of lrrk2 
gene mutations.

Ross OA, Toft M, Haugarvoll K.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2007 Oct 16;69(16):1580-4.
    Neurology. 2007 Nov 27;69(22):2093-104.
    Neurology. 2007 Oct 30;69(18):1737-44.
    Neurology. 2008 Feb 12;70(7):521-7.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000320511.30222.dd
PMID: 18645174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1904. Neuropathology. 2009 Apr;29(2):125-31. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2008.00955.x. 
Epub 2008 Jul 20.

DJ-1 immunoreactivity in human brain astrocytes is dependent on infarct presence 
and infarct age.

Mullett SJ(1), Hamilton RL, Hinkle DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

DJ-1 is a protein with anti-oxidative stress and anti-apoptotic properties that 
is abundantly expressed in reactive CNS astrocytes in chronic neurodegenerative 
disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD), Alzheimer's disease (AD), and Pick's 
disease. Genetic mutations which eliminate DJ-1 expression in humans are 
sufficient to produce an early-onset form of familial PD, PARK7, suggesting that 
DJ-1 is a critical component of the neuroprotective arsenal of the brain. 
Previous studies in parkinsonism/dementia brain tissues have revealed that 
reactive astrocytes within and surrounding incidentally identified infarcts were 
often robustly immunoreactive for DJ-1, especially if the infarcts showed 
histological features consistent with older age. Given this, we sought to 
evaluate astrocytic DJ-1 expression in human stroke more extensively, and with a 
particular emphasis on determining whether immunohistochemical DJ-1 expression 
in astrocytes correlates with histological infarct age. The studies presented 
here show that DJ-1 is abundantly expressed in reactive infarct region 
astrocytes in both gray and white matter, that subacute and chronic infarct 
region astrocytes are much more robustly DJ-1+ than are acute infarct and 
non-infarct region astrocytes, and that DJ-1 staining intensity in astrocytes 
generally correlates with that of the reactive astrocyte marker GFAP. Confocal 
imaging of DJ-1 and GFAP dual-labelled human brain sections were used to confirm 
the localization to and expression of DJ-1 in astrocytes. Neuronal DJ-1 staining 
was minimal under all infarct and non-infarct conditions. Our data support the 
conclusion that the major cellular DJ-1 response to stroke in the human brain is 
astrocytic, and that there is a temporal correlation between DJ-1 expression in 
these cells and advanced infarct age.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2008.00955.x
PMID: 18647263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1905. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Oct 15;273(1-2):34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2008.06.008. Epub 
2008 Jul 23.

Age and apoE associations with complex pathologic features in Alzheimer's 
disease.

Jicha GA(1), Parisi JE, Dickson DW, Cha RH, Johnson KA, Smith GE, Boeve BF, 
Petersen RC, Knopman DS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, Jacksonville, FL, United 
States.

The risk for Alzheimer's disease (AD) is influenced by both age and ApoE status. 
The present study addresses the associations of age and ApoE status on complex 
pathologic features in AD (n=81) including coexistent cerebrovascular disease 
(CVD), argyrophilic grain disease (AGD), and Lewy body disease (LBD). The 
frequency of coexistent cerebrovascular disease increased with increasing age. 
Age and ApoE status were differentially associated with atherosclerosis, lacunar 
infarctions, and microvascular pathology. Coexistent Lewy body pathology was 
negatively associated with age, dropping off abruptly after age 90. The presence 
of an ApoE epsilon4 allele was associated with an increased frequency of 
coexistent LBD. Logistic regression analyses demonstrated both dependent and 
independent effects of age and ApoE status on the presence of coexistent Lewy 
body pathology in AD. While the decreasing frequency of LBD in AD after age 90 
could be partly accounted for by a lower probability of an ApoE epsilon4 allele, 
the independent association with age suggests either 1) a survival effect, 2) 
decreased incidence with advancing age, or 3) both.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2008.06.008
PMCID: PMC2569823
PMID: 18653200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1906. Drugs Aging. 2008;25(8):665-82. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200825080-00004.

Pathophysiology and treatment of psychosis in Parkinson's disease: a review.

Zahodne LB(1), Fernandez HH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Health Psychology, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, Florida, USA.

Psychotic symptoms in Parkinson's disease (PD) are relatively common and, in 
addition to creating a disturbance in patients' daily lives, have consistently 
been shown to be associated with poor outcome. Our understanding of the 
pathophysiology of psychosis in PD has expanded dramatically over the past 15 
years, from an initial interpretation of symptoms as dopaminergic drug adverse 
effects to the current view of a complex interplay of extrinsic and 
disease-related factors.PD psychosis has unique clinical features, namely that 
it arises within a context of a clear sensorium and retained insight, there is 
relative prominence of visual hallucinations and progression occurs over time. 
PD psychosis tends to emerge later in the disease course, and disease duration 
represents one risk factor for its development. The use of anti-PD medications 
(particularly dopamine receptor agonists) has been the most widely identified 
risk factor for PD psychosis. Other risk factors discussed in the literature 
include older age, disease severity, sleep disturbance, cognitive impairment, 
dementia and/or depression.Recent efforts have aimed to explore the complex 
pathophysiology of PD psychosis, which is now known to involve an interaction 
between extrinsic, drug-related and intrinsic, disease-related components. The 
most important extrinsic factor is use of dopaminergic medication, which plays a 
prominent role in PD psychosis. Intrinsic factors include visual processing 
deficits (e.g. lower visual acuity, colour and contrast recognition deficits, 
ocular pathology and functional brain abnormalities identified amongst 
hallucinating PD patients); sleep dysregulation (e.g. sleep fragmentation and 
altered dream phenomena); neurochemical (dopamine, serotonin, acetylcholine, 
etc.) and structural abnormalities involving site-specific Lewy body deposition; 
and genetics (e.g. apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele and tau H1H1 genotype). 
Preliminary reports have also shown a potential relationship between deep brain 
stimulation surgery and PD psychosis.When reduction in anti-PD medications to 
the lowest tolerated dose does not improve psychosis, further intervention may 
be warranted. Several atypical antipsychotic agents (i.e. clozapine, olanzapine) 
have been shown to be efficacious in reducing psychotic symptoms in PD; however, 
use of clozapine requires cumbersome monitoring and olanzapine leads to motor 
worsening. Studies of ziprasidone and aripiprazole are limited to open-label 
trials and case reports and are highly variable; however, it appears that while 
each may be effective in some patients, both are associated with adverse 
effects. While quetiapine has not been determined efficacious in two randomized 
controlled trials, it is a common first-line treatment for PD psychosis because 
of its tolerability, ease of use and demonstrated utility in numerous open-label 
reports. Cholinesterase inhibitors currently represent the most promising 
pharmacological alternative to antipsychotics. Tacrine is rarely tried because 
of hepatic toxicity, and controlled trials with donepezil have not shown 
significant reductions in psychotic symptoms, due perhaps to methodological 
limitations. However, results from an open-label study and a double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trial involving 188 hallucinating PD patients support the 
efficacy of rivastigmine. With regard to non-pharmacological interventions, case 
reports suggest that electroconvulsive therapy has the potential to reduce 
psychotic symptoms and may be considered in cases involving concurrent 
depression and/or medication-refractory psychosis. Limited case reports also 
suggest that specific antidepressants (i.e. clomipramine and citalopram) may 
improve psychosis in depressed patients. Finally, studies in the schizophrenia 
literature indicate that psychological approaches are effective in psychosis 
management but, to date, this strategy has been supported only qualitatively in 
PD, and further studies are warranted.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200825080-00004
PMCID: PMC3045853
PMID: 18665659 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1907. Med Pregl. 2007 Nov-Dec;60(11-12):629-35.

[Neurology today].

[Article in Serbian]

Slankamenac P(1), Stefanoviƒá D, Zikiƒá M.

Author information:
(1)Institut za neurologiju, Klinicki centar Vojvodine, Novi Sad.

INTRODUCTION: Neurological disorders are common worldwide, regardless of race, 
nationality, age, sex, education or social status. They are a major cause of 
human suffering and mortality. The burden of neurological disorders in the 
community usually correlates with the proportion of the population aged 65 years 
and over. According to the latest reports of the World Health Organization 
(WHO), one billion of the world's population (one in six people) suffer from, 
and about 6.8 million (one in a thousand people) die annually from neurological 
disorders. In Europe, the economic cost of neurological diseases was estimated 
at about 139 billion euros in 2004.
STROKE: Stroke is the most frequent neurological disorder, and the most common 
cause of severe disability compared to other diseases. Research into the 
genetics of stroke has shown advances in prevention, treatment and 
neuroprotection of the brain parenchyma. The rapid advances in the field of 
diagnostics are especially useful, particularly MRI, CT angiography and 
ultrasonography, providing early detection of changes in the blood vessels and 
the brain.
MULTIPLE SCLEROSIS: The diagnosis of multiple sclerosis (MS) is usually based on 
clearly defined McDonald criteria. In the management of MS, early diagnosis of 
clinically definite MA as well as of clinically isolated syndrome, allow early 
initiation of immunomodulatory therapy.
DEMENTIA: The prevalence of dementia is age-dependent, and it is higher in 
subjects aged 60 and over, but it doubles with every five years of age. The 
population over 65 years and the incidence of age-dependent diseases, are ever 
increasing. According to reports published in December 2005, the annual 
incidence of dementia ranges from 5.4-9.4%. PARKINSON'S DISEASE: As the 
population is growing older, more and more people are vulnerable to Parkinson's 
disease (PD). It is a neurodegenerative disease which occurs in 10-13 per 
100,000 people annually, while its prevalence in Europe ranges from 60-187 per 
100,000 people. The diagnosis is primarily based on clinical findings, while 
neuroimaging techniques, such as brain CT and MRI, are used in the differential 
diagnosis.

PMID: 18666609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1908. Mov Disord. 2008;23 Suppl 2:S431-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.21849.

The clinical spectrum of freezing of gait in atypical parkinsonism.

Factor SA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia 30329, USA. sfactor@emory.edu

Erratum in
    Mov Disord. 2008 Aug 15;23(11):1639-40.

Freezing of gait (FOG), commonly seen in advanced Parkinson's disease (PD), has 
been classified as its fifth cardinal feature. However, its presence frequently 
leads to a misdiagnosis of PD. FOG is actually more common in atypical 
parkinsonism (AP): including vascular Parkinsonism (VP), progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP), multiple system atrophy (MSA), corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and higher level gait 
disorders (HLGDs). VP is the result of multiple small vessel infarcts (lacunar 
state or Binswanger's disease), particularly involving the frontal, parietal, 
and basal ganglia regions. Approximately 50% have FOG (often referred to as 
lower body parkinsonism). FOG is also common in neurodegenerative forms of AP, 
present in 45-57%. Of these, FOG is present in 53% of PSP, 54% MSA, 54% DLB, 25% 
CBD, and 40% HLGD. It is generally seen in the late stages. There are two 
syndromes closely associated with AP that are dominated by FOG; pure akinesia 
(PA) and primary progressive freezing gait (PPFG). PA is characterized by 
akinesia of gait (including FOG), writing, and speech. Tremor, rigidity, 
dementia, and response to levodopa are notably absent. PPFG is defined by early 
FOG (often the initial feature) that progresses to include postural instability. 
It is accompanied by bradykinesia, rigidity, postural tremor, dementia, and 
levodopa unresponsiveness. Both syndromes are heterogeneous but PSP seems to be 
the most common cause. CBD and DLB can also present as PPFG. FOG is a common 
feature of AP and although typically occurring late in disease may also be an 
early symptom.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21849
PMID: 18668624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1909. Rev Med Liege. 2008 May-Jun;63(5-6):293-8.

[Preserve brain function...through physical exercice?].

[Article in French]

Garraux G(1).

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, CHU Sart Tilman, Li√®ge, Belgique.

Over the last few years, there has been an increasing interest in the 
relationship between brain function and physical exercise. Preliminary evidence 
from observational and interventional studies in humans suggests a positive and 
robust effect of chronic aerobic exercise on several brain functions across the 
entire lifespan. Physical activity and exercise might also serve to reduce the 
risk of age-associated neurological disorders such as Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's diseases. The mechanisms underlying these beneficial effects remain 
poorly understood. More scientific work is needed before disseminating more 
specific recommendations to the general population.

PMID: 18669195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1910. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;26(2):147-52. doi: 10.1159/000149585. Epub 2008 
Aug 4.

Early-onset dementia is associated with higher mortality.

Koedam EL(1), Pijnenburg YA, Deeg DJ, Baak MM, van der Vlies AE, Scheltens P, 
van der Flier WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Alzheimer Center, VU University Medical Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. elge.koedam@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Our objective was to compare the mortality risks of patients 
with early- and late-onset dementia with non-demented controls of the same age 
range and to analyse the mortality risks in subtypes of dementia.
METHODS: We included 1,203 subjects from our memory clinic. Patients with 
dementia were subdivided into 2 groups, with early- (<65 years) or late-onset 
dementia (>or=65 years), and compared with non-demented controls of the same age 
range. We used Cox proportional hazard models to estimate mortality risks.
RESULTS: When compared to non-demented controls of the same age range, the 
patients with early-onset dementia had a strongly elevated mortality risk 
[hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) = 43.3 (3.1-600.4)], while those with 
late-onset dementia had a moderately increased mortality risk compared to older 
controls [hazard ratio (95% confidence interval) = 3.4 (1.8-6.2)]. An additional 
analysis showed that, adjusted for age, Alzheimer's disease seemed to have the 
most benign course, with a fourfold increased mortality risk. Dementia with Lewy 
bodies and vascular dementia (frequently seen at older age) and frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration and 'other dementias' (often found at younger age) had a six- 
to eightfold increased mortality risk.
CONCLUSION: Dementia is a risk factor for death. Especially in young patients 
the impact of dementia on mortality is high.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000149585
PMID: 18679029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1911. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 Aug;14(4):423-9. doi: 10.3233/jad-2008-14410.

Is tau aggregation toxic or protective: a sensible question in the absence of 
sensitive methods?

G√∂tz J(1), Ittner LM, F√§ndrich M, Schonrock N.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, Australia. 
j.goetz@med.usyd.edu.au

In Alzheimer's disease brain, the microtubule-associated protein tau detaches 
from the microtubules, pathologically interacts with cellular proteins, and 
eventually forms insoluble aggregates that also bind and trap a myriad of 
proteins. As these proteins are depleted from the cellular pool, they are 
unavailable for physiological functions. Thus elevated tau levels are 
pathogenic, even in the absence of tau aggregation. Whereas it is reasonable to 
assume that tau aggregation is toxic during late stages of disease, the question 
arises whether early in disease it may be protective. This question can be 
addressed in tau transgenic animal models in which tau aggregation has been 
correlated with behavioral impairment. We discuss ways of how tau aggregation is 
monitored in these mice and what the detection limits are of these methods. We 
conclude that new tools are needed to measure the different stages of tau 
aggregation.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2008-14410
PMID: 18688093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1912. Acad Radiol. 2008 Sep;15(9):1089-98. doi: 10.1016/j.acra.2008.04.008.

Utility of different MR modalities in mild cognitive impairment and its use as a 
predictor of conversion to probable dementia.

Fayed N(1), D√°vila J, Oliveros A, Castillo J, Medrano JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Diagnostic Radiology, Quir√≥n Hospital, Paseo Mariano Renovales 
s/n. 50006 Zaragoza, Spain. nicola33fr@yahoo.es

Comment in
    Acad Radiol. 2008 Sep;15(9):1087-8.

RATIONALE AND OBJECTIVES: Mild cognitive impairment has been regarded as a 
pre-Alzheimer condition, but some patients do not develop dementia. The authors' 
objective was to determine whether findings from a combined use of H1 magnetic 
resonance spectroscopy (MRS), perfusion imaging (PI), and diffusion-weighted 
imaging (DWI) would predict conversion from amnesic mild cognitive impairment to 
dementia and to compare the diagnostic accuracy in discriminating patients with 
probable Alzheimer disease (AD), mixed dementia (MD), Lewy body dementia (LBD), 
pre-Alzheimer disease mild cognitive impairment (MCI), vascular MCI (VaMCI), and 
anxious or depression patients with cognitive impairment (DeMCI).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A longitudinal cohort of 119 consecutive and incident 
subjects (73 women, 46 men; age 70+/-9.5 years) who fulfilled the criteria of 
amnesic MCI was followed for a mean period of 29 months. At baseline, a 
neuropsychological examination and standard blood test were performed, and 
different areas were examined by proton MRS, PI, and DWI. Among the group of 
patients considered to have AD, we also included patients with MD because these 
patients have a neurodegenerative component.
RESULTS: After the follow-up period, 54 patients were considered as converted to 
dementia (49 with AD; 5 with LBD), 28 patients as MCI, 22 patients as DeMCI, and 
15 patients as VaMCI. We found that N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/creatine (Cr) ratios 
in posterior cingulated gyri (PCG) predict the conversion to probable AD with a 
sensitivity of 82% and specificity of 72%, and NAA/Cr ratios in the left 
occipital cortex (LOC) had a sensitivity of 78% and specificity of 69%. When we 
used spectroscopy in the PCG and LOC to differentiate the types of MCI and 
dementias, we found significance differences in NAA/Cr, NAA/myoinositol (mI), 
NAA/choline (Cho), mI/NAA, and Cho/Cr ratios. The apparent diffusion coefficient 
(ADC) values in the right hippocampus showed differences in patients with LBD 
and DeMCI (P=.003), LBD with MCI (P=0.48), and LBD and VaMCI (P=.009).
CONCLUSIONS: NAA/Cr ratios in PCG and LOC can predict the conversion from MCI to 
dementia with high sensitivity and specificity. MRS can differentiate AD from 
MCI, but cannot differentiate the types of MCI. DWI in the right hippocampus 
presents higher values of ADC in LBD and allows differentiating it from MCI.

DOI: 10.1016/j.acra.2008.04.008
PMID: 18692749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1913. Neurology. 2008 Aug 12;71(7):499-504. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000324864.81179.6a.

Physical frailty in older persons is associated with Alzheimer disease 
pathology.

Buchman AS(1), Schneider JA, Leurgans S, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Armour 
Academic Facility, Suite 1038, 600 S Paulina St, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. 
aron_s_buchman@rush.edu

OBJECTIVE: We examined the extent to which physical frailty in older persons is 
associated with common age-related brain pathology, including cerebral infarcts, 
Lewy body pathology, and Alzheimer disease (AD) pathology.
METHODS: We studied brain autopsies from 165 deceased participants from the Rush 
Memory and Aging Project, a longitudinal clinical-pathologic study of aging. 
Physical frailty, based on four components, including grip strength, time to 
walk 8 feet, body composition, and fatigue, was assessed at annual clinical 
evaluations. Multiple regression analyses were used to examine the relation of 
postmortem neuropathologic findings to frailty proximate to death, controlling 
for age, sex, and education.
RESULTS: The mean age at death was 88.1 years (SD = 5.7 years). The level of AD 
pathology was associated with frailty proximate to death ( = 0.252, SE = 0.077, 
p = 0.001), accounting for 4% of the variance of physical frailty. Neither 
cerebral infarcts ( = -0.121, SE = 0.115, p = 0.294) nor Lewy body disease 
pathology ( = 0.07, SE = 0.156, p = 0.678) was associated with frailty. These 
associations were unchanged after controlling for the time interval from last 
clinical evaluation to autopsy. The association of AD pathology with frailty did 
not differ by the presence of dementia, and this association was unchanged even 
after considering potential confounders, including physical activity; 
parkinsonian signs; pulmonary function; or history of chronic diseases, 
including vascular risk factors, vascular disease burden, falls, joint pain, or 
use of antipsychotic or antihypertensive medications.
CONCLUSION: Physical frailty in old age is associated with Alzheimer disease 
pathology in older persons with and without dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000324864.81179.6a
PMCID: PMC2676981
PMID: 18695161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1914. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2008 May;3(2):123-31. doi: 10.2174/157488408784293723.

Amyloid beta protein and tau in cerebrospinal fluid and plasma as biomarkers for 
dementia: a review of recent literature.

Frankfort SV(1), Tulner LR, van Campen JP, Verbeek MM, Jansen RW, Beijnen JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Slotervaart Hospital, Louwesweg 6, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

This review addresses recent developments in amyloid beta (Abeta), total tau 
(t-tau), and phosporylated tau (p-tau) protein analysis, in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) and plasma as biomarkers for dementia. Recent research focused on the 
protection of patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) into dementia and 
the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's Disease (AD). A combination of Abeta42 
and t-tau in CSF can discriminate between patients with stable MCI and patients 
with progressive MCI into AD or other types of dementia with a sufficient 
sensitivity and specificity. Regression analyses demonstrated that pathological 
CSF (with decreased Abeta42 and and increased tau levels) is a very strong 
predictor for the progression of MCI into AD. Furthermore, CSF measurements of 
p-tau and Abeta42 can assist in diagnosing vascular dementia or frontotemporal 
dementia in the differential diagnosis of AD indicated by a reasonable 
sensitivity and specificity. Whether tau in combination with Abeta42 or in 
combination with the Abeta37/Abeta42 or Abeta38/Abeta42 ratio aids in the 
discrimination between AD and Lewy Body dementia remains to be elucidated. 
Cross-sectional research could not demonstrate significant differences for 
Abeta40 and Abeta42 in plasma between AD and controls. However, a recently 
published longitudinal study showed high baseline Abeta40 levels, especially 
when combined with low baseline Abeta 42 levels, are a strong risk factor for 
the development of dementia. This emphasizes the importance of performing 
longitudinal studies in addition to cross-sectional ones. The origin of plasma 
Abeta and its transport between CSF and plasma, however, needs further 
clarification. In conclusion, progress has been made regarding Abeta and tau as 
biomarkers for dementia, both for differentiation between stable MCI and 
progressive MCI patients and for the differential diagnosis of AD. Future 
research should aim to validate these recently published results, preferably in 
pathologically confirmed AD patients. In addition, it is important to 
standardise research in terms of study design (longitudinal, minimal follow-up 
period of 5 years), type of researched parameters ( total or p-tau, type of 
Abeta peptides), type of matrix (CSF and plasma) and data analysis 
(establishment of predefined cut-off values, type of ratio, type of marker 
combination).

DOI: 10.2174/157488408784293723
PMID: 18700307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1915. Immun Ageing. 2008 Aug 13;5:7. doi: 10.1186/1742-4933-5-7.

Alzheimer's disease: new diagnostic and therapeutic tools.

Racchi M(1), Uberti D, Govoni S, Memo M, Lanni C, Vasto S, Candore G, Caruso C, 
Romeo L, Scapagnini G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental and Applied Pharmacology, University of Pavia, 
Italy. marco.racchi@unipv.it

On March 19, 2008 a Symposium on Pathophysiology of Ageing and Age-Related 
diseases was held in Palermo, Italy. Here, the lectures of M. Racchi on History 
and future perspectives of Alzheimer Biomarkers and of G. Scapagnini on Cellular 
Stress Response and Brain Ageing are summarized. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a 
heterogeneous and progressive neurodegenerative disease, which in Western 
society mainly accounts for clinica dementia. AD prevention is an important goal 
of ongoing research. Two objectives must be accomplished to make prevention 
feasible: i) individuals at high risk of AD need to be identified before the 
earliest symptoms become evident, by which time extensive neurodegeneration has 
already occurred and intervention to prevent the disease is likely to be less 
successful and ii) safe and effective interventions need to be developed that 
lead to a decrease in expression of this pathology. On the whole, data here 
reviewed strongly suggest that the measurement of conformationally altered p53 
in blood cells has a high ability to discriminate AD cases from normal ageing, 
Parkinson's disease and other dementias. On the other hand, available data on 
the involvement of curcumin in restoring cellular homeostasis and rebalancing 
redox equilibrium, suggest that curcumin might be a useful adjunct in the 
treatment of neurodegenerative illnesses characterized by inflammation, such as 
AD.

DOI: 10.1186/1742-4933-5-7
PMCID: PMC2531076
PMID: 18700965


1916. Ageing Res Rev. 2009 Jan;8(1):1-17. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2008.07.003. Epub 2008 
Jul 18.

Proteomics in animal models of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Sowell RA(1), Owen JB, Butterfield DA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40506-0055, 
USA.

The risk of developing neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) increases with age. AD and PD are the two most 
common neurodegenerative diseases that currently affect millions of persons 
within the United States population. While many clues about the mechanisms of 
these disorders have been uncovered, to date, the molecular mechanisms 
associated with the cause of these diseases are not completely understood. 
Furthermore, there are no available cures or preventive treatments for either 
disorder. Animal models of AD and PD, though not perfect, offer a means to gain 
knowledge of the basic biochemistry associated with these disorders and with 
drug efficacy. The field of proteomics which focuses on identifying the dynamic 
nature of the protein content expressed within a particular cell, tissue, or 
organism, has provided many insights into these disturbing disorders. Proteomic 
studies have revealed many pathways that are associated with disease 
pathogenesis and that may lead to the development of potential therapeutic 
targets. This review provides a discussion of key findings from AD and PD 
proteomics-based studies in various animal models of disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arr.2008.07.003
PMCID: PMC2630427
PMID: 18703168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1917. Mov Disord. 2008 Oct 15;23(13):1889-96. doi: 10.1002/mds.22246.

Prevalence and correlates of neuropsychiatric symptoms in Parkinson's disease 
without dementia.

Kulisevsky J(1), Pagonabarraga J, Pascual-Sedano B, Garc√≠a-S√°nchez C, Gironell 
A; Trapecio Group Study.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Autonomous University of Barcelona, 
Spain. jkulisevsky@santpau.es

A cross-sectional study of the profile of psychiatric symptoms and their 
relationships to medications, executive performance, and excessive daytime 
somnolence (EDS) was conducted on 1351 consecutive Parkinson's disease patients 
without dementia (PD-ND). Ratings were: neuropsychiatric inventory (NPI); 
hospital anxiety and depression scale (HADS); executive performance (semantic, 
phonemic, and alternating verbal fluencies); and the Epworth sleepiness scale 
(ESS). Eighty-seven percent of the subjects reported at least one psychiatric 
symptom. The most common were depression (70%), anxiety (69%), apathy (48%), and 
irritability (47%). Fifty percent of the patients had HADS-depression scores 
ranging from possible (8-10; 22%) to probable (>or=11; 28%) depression. 
Executive impairment was found in 41% and EDS in 26% of subjects. All considered 
variables were significantly more common with longer duration and more severe 
disease. Only depression appeared to be influenced by type of medication, being 
less prevalent among patients treated with DAs. Five NPI clusters were 
identified among patients scoring >or=1 on the NPI (87.3%): patients exhibiting 
predominantly apathy (12.7%), psychosis (3%), depression (13%), anxiety (15.6%), 
and "low-total NPI" (43.2%). Neuropsychiatric symptoms are common in nondemented 
PD patients suggesting that they are an integral part of PD from the beginning 
of the disease and appears more related to disease progression than to the type 
of antiparkinsonian medication. Apathy emerged as an independent construct in 
PD-ND, indicating the need to address specific therapeutical approaches targeted 
toward this particular symptom.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22246
PMID: 18709682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1918. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2008 Sep;8(5):377-83. doi: 10.1007/s11910-008-0059-1.

Driving and neurodegenerative diseases.

Uc EY(1), Rizzo M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, 200 
Hawkins Drive-2RCP, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. ergun-uc@uiowa.edu

The proportion of elderly people in the general population is rising, resulting 
in greater numbers of drivers with neurodegenerative disorders such as 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. These neurodegenerative disorders 
impair cognition, visual perception, and motor function, leading to reduced 
driver fitness and greater crash risk. Yet neither medical diagnosis nor age 
alone is reliable enough to predict driver safety or crashes or to revoke the 
driving privileges of these individuals. Driving research utilizes tools such as 
questionnaires about driving habits and history, driving simulators, 
standardized road tests utilizing instrumented vehicles, and state driving 
records. Research challenges include outlining the evolution of driving safety, 
understanding the mechanisms of driving impairment, and developing a reliable 
and efficient standardized test battery for prediction of driver safety in 
neurodegenerative disorders. This information will enable healthcare providers 
to advise their patients with neurodegenerative disorders with more certainty, 
affect policy, and help develop rehabilitative measures for driving.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-008-0059-1
PMCID: PMC3097428
PMID: 18713573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1919. Menopause Int. 2008 Sep;14(3):96. doi: 10.1258/mi.2008.008017.

Premature ovarian failure.

Gebbie AE.

Comment on
    Menopause Int. 2008 Sep;14(3):111-6.

DOI: 10.1258/mi.2008.008017
PMID: 18714073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1920. Menopause Int. 2008 Sep;14(3):111-6. doi: 10.1258/mi.2008.008016.

Prophylactic oophorectomy in premenopausal women and long-term health.

Shuster LT(1), Gostout BS, Grossardt BR, Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Women's Health Clinic, Mayo Clinic, 200 
First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. lshuster@mayo.edu

Comment in
    Menopause Int. 2008 Sep;14(3):96.

OBJECTIVE: To review the data on long-term outcomes in women who underwent 
prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy, a common surgical procedure that has more 
than doubled in frequency since the 1960s.
STUDY DESIGN: Literature review of the published data on the consequences of 
prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy. Special emphasis was given to the Mayo 
Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging. Main outcome measures Overall 
mortality, cardiovascular disease, cognitive impairment and dementia, 
parkinsonism, osteoporosis, psychological wellbeing and sexual function.
RESULTS: There is a growing body of evidence suggesting that the premature loss 
of ovarian function caused by bilateral oophorectomy performed before natural 
menopause is associated with several negative outcomes. In particular, studies 
have revealed an increased risk of premature death, cardiovascular disease, 
cognitive impairment or dementia, parkinsonism, osteoporosis and bone fractures, 
decline in psychological wellbeing and decline in sexual function. The effects 
involve different organs (e.g. heart, bone, or brain), and different functions 
within organs (e.g. cognitive, motor, or emotional brain functions). Estrogen 
treatment may prevent some but not all of these negative outcomes.
CONCLUSION: The potential adverse effects of prophylactic bilateral oophorectomy 
on heart health, neurological health, bone health and quality of life should be 
carefully weighed against its potential benefits for cancer risk reduction in 
women at average risk of ovarian cancer.

DOI: 10.1258/mi.2008.008016
PMCID: PMC2585770
PMID: 18714076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1921. Cell Transplant. 2008;17(5):535-42. doi: 10.3727/096368908785096006.

A rat embryo staging scale for the generation of donor tissue for neural 
transplantation.

Torres EM(1), Weyrauch UM, Sutcliffe R, Dunnett SB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, Cardiff University, Cardif, UK. torresem@cf.ac.uk

In rat models of Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases, embryonic neural cells 
obtained from embryos of specified ages can be implanted into the brain to 
partially restore both physiology and function. However, in litters produced 
using overnight mating protocols (often from commercial suppliers), the 
embryonic age can be difficult to determine precisely. As a result, embryonic 
size based on crown to rump length (CRL) is usually a more reliable method of 
embryo staging than the day of mating. This approach is not without difficulty. 
There are a number of rat staging scales in the literature, none of which deal 
with donor ages younger than E13, and there are discrepancies between scales at 
some donor ages. In the present article, we have devised a short mating-period 
protocol to produce precisely aged embryos. We show that CRL is a highly 
accurate, reproducible index of donor age and we present an updated embryonic 
staging scale for Sprague-Dawley (CD) rats that includes donor ages younger than 
those previously reported.

DOI: 10.3727/096368908785096006
PMID: 18714672 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1922. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Jul;1792(7):730-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.07.006. Epub 2008 Aug 5.

A critical evaluation of current staging of alpha-synuclein pathology in Lewy 
body disorders.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology Kenyongasse 18, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

The two most frequent synucleinopathies, Parkinson disease (PD) or brainstem 
predominant type of Lewy body disease, and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), are 
neurodegenerative multisystem disorders with widespread occurrence of 
alpha-synuclein containing deposits in the central, peripheral, and autonomic 
systems. For both Lewy body-related disorders staging/classification systems 
based on semiquantitative assessment of the distribution and progression pattern 
of alpha-synuclein pathology are used that are considered to be linked to 
clinical dysfunctions. In PD a six-stage system is suggested to indicate a 
predictable sequence of lesions with ascending progression from medullary and 
olfactory nuclei to the cortex, the first two presymptomatic stages related to 
incidental Lewy body disease, stages 3 and 4 presenting with motor symptoms and 
the last two (cortical) stages frequently associated with cognitive impairment. 
DLB, according to consensus pathologic guidelines, by semiquantitative scoring 
of alpha-synuclein pathology (Lewy body density and distribution) in specific 
brain regions, is distinguished into three phenotypes (brainstem, 
transitory/limbic and diffuse cortical), also considering concomitant 
Alzheimer-related pathology. Recent retrospective clinico-pathologic studies, 
although largely confirming the staging system, particularly for younger onset 
PD with long duration, have shown that between 6.3 and 43% of cases did not 
follow the proposed caudo-rostral progression pattern of alpha-synuclein 
pathology. In 7 to 8.3% of clinically manifested PD cases with synuclein 
inclusions in midbrain and cortex corresponding to LB stages 4-5 the medullary 
nuclei were spared, whereas mild parkinsonian symptoms were already observed in 
stages 2 and 3. There is considerable clinical and pathologic overlap between PD 
(with or without dementia) and DLB, corresponding to Braak LB stages 5 and 6, 
both frequently associated with variable Alzheimer-type pathology. Dementia 
often does not correlate with progressed stages of Lewy body pathology, but is 
related to concomitant Alzheimer lesions or mixed pathologies. There is no 
relationship between Braak LB stages and clinical severity of PD. Therefore, the 
predictive validity of this concept is doubtful, since in large unselected 
autopsy series 30 to 55% of elderly subjects with widespread alpha-synuclein 
pathology (Braak stages 5-6) revealed no definite neuropsychiatric symptoms or 
were not classifiable, indicating compensatory mechanisms of the brain. The 
causes and molecular basis of rather frequent deviations from the proposed 
caudo-rostral progression of alpha-synuclein pathology in PD, its relation to 
the onset of classical parkinsonian symptoms, the causes for the lack of 
definite clinical symptoms despite widespread alpha-synuclein pathology in the 
nervous system, their relations to Alzheimer-type lesions, and the 
pathophysiologic impact of both pathologies remain to be further elucidated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2008.07.006
PMID: 18718530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1923. Subcell Biochem. 2008;49:241-68. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4020-8831-5_9.

Altered lipid metabolism in brain injury and disorders.

Adibhatla RM(1), Hatcher JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Cardiovascular Research Center, 
Neuroscience Training Program, University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and 
Public Health, Madison, WI., William S. Middleton Veterans Affairs Hospital, 
Madison, WI 53792, USA.

Deregulated lipid metabolism may be of particular importance for CNS injuries 
and disorders, as this organ has the highest lipid concentration next to adipose 
tissue. Atherosclerosis (a risk factor for ischemic stroke) results from 
accumulation of LDL-derived lipids in the arterial wall. Pro-inflammatory 
cytokines (TNF-alpha and IL-1), secretory phospholipase A2 IIA and 
lipoprotein-PLA2 are implicated in vascular inflammation. These inflammatory 
responses promote atherosclerotic plaques, formation and release of the blood 
clot that can induce ischemic stroke. TNF-alpha and IL-1 alter lipid metabolism 
and stimulate production of eicosanoids, ceramide, and reactive oxygen species 
that potentiate CNS injuries and certain neurological disorders. Cholesterol is 
an important regulator of lipid organization and the precursor for neurosteroid 
biosynthesis. Low levels of neurosteroids were related to poor outcome in many 
brain pathologies. Apolipoprotein E is the principal cholesterol carrier protein 
in the brain, and the gene encoding the variant Apolipoprotein E4 is a 
significant risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. Parkinson's disease is to some 
degree caused by lipid peroxidation due to phospholipases activation. 
Niemann-Pick diseases A and B are due to acidic sphingomyelinase deficiency, 
resulting in sphingomyelin accumulation, while Niemann-Pick disease C is due to 
mutations in either the NPC1 or NPC2 genes, resulting in defective cholesterol 
transport and cholesterol accumulation. Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune 
inflammatory demyelinating condition of the CNS. Inhibiting phospholipase A2 
attenuated the onset and progression of experimental autoimmune 
encephalomyelitis. The endocannabinoid system is hypoactive in Huntington's 
disease. Ethyl-eicosapetaenoate showed promise in clinical trials. Amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis causes loss of motorneurons. Cyclooxygenase-2 inhibition 
reduced spinal neurodegeneration in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis transgenic 
mice. Eicosapentaenoic acid supplementation provided improvement in 
schizophrenia patients, while the combination of (eicosapentaenoic acid + 
docosahexaenoic acid) provided benefit in bipolar disorders. The ketogenic diet 
where >90% of calories are derived from fat is an effective treatment for 
epilepsy. Understanding cytokine-induced changes in lipid metabolism will 
promote novel concepts and steer towards bench-to-bedside transition for 
therapies.

DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4020-8831-5_9
PMCID: PMC2293298
PMID: 18751914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1924. BMC Neurol. 2008 Aug 29;8:32. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-8-32.

Pedigree with frontotemporal lobar degeneration--motor neuron disease and Tar 
DNA binding protein-43 positive neuropathology: genetic linkage to chromosome 9.

Luty AA(1), Kwok JB, Thompson EM, Blumbergs P, Brooks WS, Loy CT, Dobson-Stone 
C, Panegyres PK, Hecker J, Nicholson GA, Halliday GM, Schofield PR.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Sydney, NSW, Australia. 
a.luty@powmri.edu.au

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) represents a clinically, 
pathologically and genetically heterogenous neurodegenerative disorder, often 
complicated by neurological signs such as motor neuron-related limb weakness, 
spasticity and paralysis, parkinsonism and gait disturbances. Linkage to 
chromosome 9p had been reported for pedigrees with the neurodegenerative 
disorder, frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and motor neuron disease 
(MND). The objective in this study is to identify the genetic locus in a 
multi-generational Australian family with FTLD-MND.
METHODS: Clinical review and standard neuropathological analysis of brain 
sections from affected pedigree members. Genome-wide scan using microsatellite 
markers and single nucleotide polymorphism fine mapping. Examination of 
candidate genes by direct DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Neuropathological examination revealed cytoplasmic deposition of the 
TDP-43 protein in three affected individuals. Moreover, we identify a family 
member with clinical Alzheimer's disease, and FTLD-Ubiquitin neuropathology. 
Genetic linkage and haplotype analyses, defined a critical region between 
markers D9S169 and D9S1845 on chromosome 9p21. Screening of all candidate genes 
within this region did not reveal any novel genetic alterations that 
co-segregate with disease haplotype, suggesting that one individual carrying a 
meiotic recombination may represent a phenocopy. Re-analysis of linkage data 
using the new affection status revealed a maximal two-point LOD score of 3.24 
and a multipoint LOD score of 3.41 at marker D9S1817. This provides the highest 
reported LOD scores from a single FTLD-MND pedigree.
CONCLUSION: Our reported increase in the minimal disease region should inform 
other researchers that the chromosome 9 locus may be more telomeric than 
predicted by published recombination boundaries. Moreover, the existence of a 
family member with clinical Alzheimer's disease, and who shares the disease 
haplotype, highlights the possibility that late-onset AD patients in the other 
linked pedigrees may be mis-classified as sporadic dementia cases.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-8-32
PMCID: PMC2553097
PMID: 18755042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1925. Mov Disord. 2008 Oct 30;23(14):1973-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.22244.

Deep brain stimulation and the ethics of protection and caring for the patient 
with Parkinson's dementia.

Farris S(1), Ford P, DeMarco J, Giroux ML.

Author information:
(1)Evergreen Healthcare, Booth Gardner Parkinson's Care Center, Kirkland, 
Washington, USA. sierrafarris@gmail.com

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an effective neurosurgical treatment for 
patients with advanced Parkinson's disease (PD) suffering from motor 
complications that are refractory to further medication management. DBS requires 
an invasive procedure of implanting brain electrodes while awake, followed by 
implantation of neurostimulators under general anesthesia. The neurostimulator 
requires battery monitoring and replacement approximately every 3 to 5 years. 
These two elements of the technology provide numerous decision points about 
continuing therapies that can involve ethical choices. Although motor function 
can be improved with subthalamic nucleus (STN) DBS, the long-term risks of 
living with implanted hardware should be carefully evaluated for patients with 
diminishing cognitive capacity. We describe two cases where ethical dilemmas 
occurred postoperatively as a result of cognitive decline and describe salient 
ethical dimensions that illustrate the need for a proactive postoperative plan 
for supervision as a prerequisite for surgery to include neuropsychological 
testing to predict the likelihood of net benefit to the patient and family 
beyond just motor improvement.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22244
PMID: 18759331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1926. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2008 Aug-Sep;164(8-9):669-82. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2008.07.003. Epub 2008 Aug 28.

[The neuropathology of sleep in human neurodegenerative diseases].

[Article in French]

Hauw JJ(1), Hausser-Hauw C, Hasboun D, Seilhean D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de neuropathologie Raymond-Escourolle, groupe hospitalier 
Piti√©-Salp√™tri√®re, AP-HP, universit√© Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, Paris cedex 13, 
France. jean-jacques.hauw@psl.aphp.fr

The neuropathology of human sleep remains an ill-defined issue. The data 
concerning the main structures of human brain areas involved, or supposed to be 
implicated, in sleep organisation are reviewed. Five levels of organisation can 
be schematically recognized: (i) the ascending arousal system, (ii) the non REM 
and REM systems (iii) regulated by hypothalamic areas, (iv) and the biological 
clock, (v) modulated by a number of "allostatic" influences. These are briefly 
described, with emphasis on the location of structures involved in humans, and 
on the recently revised concepts. Current knowledge on the topography of lesions 
associated with the main sleep disorders in degenerative diseases is recalled, 
including REM sleep behavior disorders, restless legs syndrome and periodic leg 
movements, sleep apneas, insomnia, excessive daily sleepiness, secondary 
narcolepsy and disturbed sleep-wake rhythms. The lesions of sleep related 
structures observed in early and late stages of four degenerative diseases are 
then reviewed. Two synucleinopathies (Lewy lesions associated disorders, 
including Parkinson's disease and Dementia with Lewy bodies, and Multiple System 
Atrophy) and two tauopathies (Progressive Supranuclear Palsy and Alzheimer's 
disease) are dealt with. The distribution of lesions usually found in affected 
patients fit with that expected from the prevalence of different sleep disorders 
in these diseases. This confirms the current opinion that these disorders depend 
on the distribution of lesions rather than on their biochemical nature. Further 
studies might throw insight on the mechanism of normal and pathological sleep in 
humans, counterpart of the increasing knowledge provided by animal models. 
Specially designed prospective clinicopathological studies including peculiar 
attention to sleep are urgently needed.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2008.07.003
PMID: 18760429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1927. J Periodontol. 2008 Aug;79(8 Suppl):1535-43. doi: 10.1902/jop.2008.080171.

The inflammatory response in Alzheimer's disease.

Rogers J(1).

Author information:
(1)Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, AZ 85372, USA. 
joseph.rogers@sunhealth.org

Over the last 2 decades, numerous innate inflammatory mediators have been 
reported to be upregulated in pathologically vulnerable regions of the brain in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). These data have led to a reexamination of the dogma of 
brain immunologic privilege and to new studies that examine the role of the 
innate inflammatory response in a number of other neurologic disorders, 
particularly Parkinson's disease and human immunodeficiency virus dementia. In 
addition, basic science discoveries about neuroinflammation are now beginning to 
move to the clinic. More than 20 epidemiologic surveys have consistently 
demonstrated that common non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs may protect 
against the development of AD. By contrast, anti-inflammatory treatment trials 
for existing AD have typically shown little to no effect on halting or reversing 
the disorder, although the agents tested have often been at odds with those 
suggested by the epidemiologic and basic science results. The extensive 
literature on innate inflammation and neurologic disease notwithstanding, three 
fundamental questions still remain to be answered fully. First, are innate 
inflammatory responses a cause of neurologic disease or merely a more 
sophisticated means than previously imagined for removing the detritus left by 
more primary pathogenic mechanisms? Second, can anti-inflammatory agents 
effectively treat existing neurologic disease, or is a protective strategy in 
high-risk patients the only reasonable option? Third, whether for protection or 
treatment, what is the best choice of anti-inflammatory agent given the basic 
science mechanisms and epidemiologic results that have been reported?

DOI: 10.1902/jop.2008.080171
PMID: 18673008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1928. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2008 Aug;63(8):867-72. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/63.8.867.

The association of race, gender, and comorbidity with mortality and function 
after hip fracture.

Penrod JD(1), Litke A, Hawkes WG, Magaziner J, Doucette JT, Koval KJ, 
Silberzweig SB, Egol KA, Siu AL.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Eeducation, and Clinical Center, James J. Peters VA 
Medical Center, 130 Kingsbridge Road, Bronx, NY 10468, USA. joan.penrod@mssm.edu

BACKGROUND: Few studies of hip fracture have large enough samples of men, 
minorities, and persons with specific comorbidities to examine differences in 
their mortality and functional outcomes. To address this problem, we combined 
three cohorts of hip fracture patients to produce a sample of 2692 patients 
followed for 6 months.
METHOD: Data on mortality, mobility, and other activities of daily living (ADLs) 
were available from all three cohorts. We used multiple regression to examine 
the association of race, gender, and comorbidity with 6-month survival and 
function, controlling for prefracture mobility and ADLs, age, fracture type, 
cohort, and admission year.
RESULTS: The mortality rate at 6 months was 12%: 9% for women and 19% for men. 
Whites and women were more likely than were nonwhites and men to survive to 6 
months, after adjusting for age, comorbidities, and prefracture mobility and 
function. Whites were more likely than were nonwhites to walk independently or 
with help at 6 months compared to not walking, after adjusting for age, 
comorbidities, and prefracture mobility and function. Dementia had a negative 
impact on survival, mobility, and ADLs at 6 months. The odds of survival to 6 
months were significantly lower for people with chronic obstructive pulmonary 
disease (COPD), congestive heart failure (CHF), and/or cancer. Parkinson's 
disease and stroke had negative impacts on mobility and ADLs, respectively, 
among survivors at 6 months.
CONCLUSIONS: The finding of higher mortality and worse mobility for nonwhite 
patients with hip fractures highlights the need for more research on 
race/ethnicity disparities in hip fracture care.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/63.8.867
PMCID: PMC3807236
PMID: 18772476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1929. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;26(3):218-25. doi: 10.1159/000153432. Epub 2008 
Sep 9.

A volumetric magnetic resonance imaging study of entorhinal cortex volume in 
dementia with lewy bodies. A comparison with Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease with and without dementia.

Kenny ER(1), Burton EJ, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Wolfson Research 
Centre, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
e.r.kenny@ncl.ac.uk

AIMS: To investigate whether subjects with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) have 
reduced entorhinal cortex (EC) volumes compared to controls and cognitively 
intact Parkinson's disease (PD) subjects.
METHODS: Volumes of the EC were measured on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
scans of 144 individuals (aged over 65 years): 20 with DLB, 26 with AD, 30 with 
PDD, 31 with PD and 37 normal age-matched controls.
RESULTS: Total normalised EC volumes were significantly smaller in DLB, AD and 
PDD patients compared to controls, and in DLB and AD patients compared to PD 
patients (p < 0.001). The percentage volume reduction in EC volume in the 
dementia groups relative to controls was 19.9% in DLB, 21.9% in AD and 14.7% in 
PDD.
CONCLUSIONS: MRI measurements of the EC have shown that volumes are smaller in 
dementia subjects compared to controls and patients with non-dementia disorders. 
Further research is required to recognise those at risk of dementia and to 
differentiate between the dementias.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000153432
PMID: 18781072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1930. Ann Readapt Med Phys. 2008 Nov;51(8):692-700. doi: 10.1016/j.annrmp.2008.08.001. 
Epub 2008 Aug 27.

[Gait and dementias].

[Article in French]

Manckoundia P(1), Mourey F, Pfitzenmeyer P.

Author information:
(1)Service de m√©decine interne g√©riatrie, h√¥pital de Champmaillot, CHU de Dijon, 
Inserm/U887 motricit√©-plasticit√©: facult√© des sciences du sport, universit√© de 
Bourgogne, Dijon, France. patrick.manckoundia@chu-dijon.fr

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this paper was to describe gait disorders and their 
consequences in primary dementias, and to prove the positive impact of their 
prevention and rehabilitation.
METHOD: The most relevant articles on gait and dementias available on Medline 
were analyzed.
RESULTS: The prevalence of gait and balance disorders is between 9 and 52% in 
Alzheimer-type dementia in which frontal gait and apraxic gait are described. 
Gait disorders, appearing with a prevalence of over 71% in vascular dementia, 
seem to be an early indicator of this dementia in which hemiparetic gait, 
frontal gait and unsteady gait are commonly described. As clinical practice 
shows, gait disorders appear to be frequent in dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Parkinson's dementia, both being characterized by Parkinsonian gait; however, 
there are very few prevalence studies concerning gait disturbances in these two 
dementias. The balance and gait assessment in demented subjects is based on the 
analysis of sit-to-stand/back-to-sit and one-leg balance, the measurement of 
gait speed, the Timed-Up-and-Go and the dual task tests. Although there are few 
studies on the topic, the benefit of the motor rehabilitation on functional 
independency in demented subjects is now recognized. The programs used for motor 
rehabilitation of demented people must be individual with targeted objectives, 
and associate strength and balance exercises, attentional tasks, immediate and 
working memories and praxis, in the context of multidisciplinary intervention. 
However, there is no consensus on a standard rehabilitation program of demented 
subjects.
CONCLUSION: Future studies have to analyse gait disorders in demented subjects 
in order to clarify their pathophysiology. Besides, they may confirm the benefit 
of rehabilitation and suggest consensual programs.

DOI: 10.1016/j.annrmp.2008.08.001
PMID: 18789549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1931. Neurology. 2008 Sep 16;71(12):903-10. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000326146.60732.d6.

Imaging amyloid deposition in Lewy body diseases.

Gomperts SN(1), Rentz DM, Moran E, Becker JA, Locascio JJ, Klunk WE, Mathis CA, 
Elmaleh DR, Shoup T, Fischman AJ, Hyman BT, Growdon JH, Johnson KA.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.

BACKGROUND: Extrapyramidal motor symptoms precede dementia in Parkinson disease 
(PDD) by many years, whereas dementia occurs early in dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB). Despite this clinical distinction, the neuropsychological and 
neuropathologic features of these conditions overlap. In addition to widespread 
distribution of Lewy bodies, both diseases have variable burdens of neuritic 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles characteristic of Alzheimer disease (AD).
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether amyloid deposition, as assessed by PET imaging 
with the beta-amyloid-binding compound Pittsburgh Compound B (PiB), can 
distinguish DLB from PDD, and to assess whether regional patterns of amyloid 
deposition correlate with specific motor or cognitive features.
METHODS: Eight DLB, 7 PDD, 11 Parkinson disease (PD), 15 AD, and 37 normal 
control (NC) subjects underwent PiB-PET imaging and neuropsychological 
assessment. Amyloid burden was quantified using the PiB distribution volume 
ratio.
RESULTS: Cortical amyloid burden was higher in the DLB group than in the PDD 
group, comparable to the AD group. Amyloid deposition in the PDD group was low, 
comparable to the PD and NC groups. Relative to global cortical retention, 
occipital PiB retention was lower in the AD group than in the other groups. For 
the DLB, PDD, and PD groups, amyloid deposition in the parietal (lateral and 
precuneus)/posterior cingulate region was related to visuospatial impairment. 
Striatal PiB retention in the DLB and PDD groups was associated with less 
impaired motor function.
CONCLUSIONS: Global cortical amyloid burden is high in dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) but low in Parkinson disease dementia. These data suggest that 
beta-amyloid may contribute selectively to the cognitive impairment of DLB and 
may contribute to the timing of dementia relative to the motor signs of 
parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000326146.60732.d6
PMCID: PMC2637553
PMID: 18794492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1932. Neurology. 2008 Sep 16;71(12):955; author reply 955-6. doi: 
10.1212/01.wnl.0000327854.15357.eb.

REM sleep behavior disorder predicts cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease 
without dementia.

Benninger D, Waldvogel D, Bassetti CL.

Comment on
    Neurology. 2007 Nov 6;69(19):1843-9.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000327854.15357.eb
PMID: 18794502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1933. Zh Nevrol Psikhiatr Im S S Korsakova. 2008;108(6):91-7.

[Diagnostics and treatment of dementia in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Russian]

Levin OS, Batukaeva LA, Smolentseva IG.

PMID: 18800422 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1934. Metabolism. 2008 Oct;57 Suppl 2:S44-9. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2008.07.011.

Do early-life insults contribute to the late-life development of Parkinson and 
Alzheimer diseases?

Miller DB(1), O'Callaghan JP.

Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health, Morgantown, WV 26505, USA. dum6@cdc.gov

How early-life events "set the stage" for adult disease has emerged as a 
research focus. Historically, the epidemiology of disease risk factors has 
centered on adult life, with little scrutiny of early-life events. Here we 
review the concept that events in early life may contribute to late-life 
neurodegenerative disease development, with a focus on Parkinson disease (PD) 
and Alzheimer disease (AD). Suspect events in early life include infections, 
stress, poor nutrition, and environmental factors such as chemical and pesticide 
exposure. Adiposity appears to contribute to both PD and AD; and because 
early-life events contribute to the development of obesity, linkages may exist 
between early determinants of obesity and the subsequent development of these 
neurologic diseases. Many now suggest a life-course approach for determining the 
relative contributions of genetic and environmental factors in any chronic 
disease. This requires determining when during the life course that a given 
exposure has its greatest effect and how exposures may accumulate over the life 
span. The data for PD and AD suggest that a number of insults occurring early in 
life may lead or contribute to these diseases. More definitive knowledge of the 
key risk factors involved will be needed to implement intervention and 
preventative strategies early in life to dampen or prevent any adverse late-life 
outcomes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.metabol.2008.07.011
PMID: 18803966 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1935. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2008 Aug-Sep;164(8-9):683-91. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurol.2007.10.008. Epub 2008 Jul 2.

[REM sleep behavior disorders and their characteristics in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in French]

Cochen De Cock V(1), Arnulf I.

Author information:
(1)F√©d√©ration des pathologies du sommeil et f√©d√©ration de neurologie, institut 
f√©d√©ratif de recherche en neurosciences Piti√©-Salp√™tri√®re, Paris cedex, France. 
valerie.decock@free.fr

REM sleep behavior disorders (RBD) are vigorous, complex movements corresponding 
to enacted dreams. They may disturb sleep, and injure the patients or their bed 
partner. RBD are frequently associated with neurodegenerative diseases, 
especially synucleopathies. They can precede parkinsonism or dementia by five to 
10 years. These presymptomatic RBDs are frequently associated with EEG slowing, 
reduced olfaction, mild visuospatial cognitive impairment, and decreased 
dopamine transport in functional brain imaging. In Parkinson's disease, 15 to 
60% patients speak, laugh, shout, kick, punch or fight invisible enemies during 
REM sleep. In contrast to sleepwalkers, patients with RBD rarely stand up or 
walk, but can fall out of bed. Sleep monitoring indicates an imperfect abolition 
of muscle tone during REM sleep in these patients. RBD are probably caused by 
nondopaminergic pontine lesions in the REM sleep atonia system. This condition 
may also expose patients with Parkinson's disease to a higher risk of daytime 
and nighttime hallucinations, and to more frequent cognitive impairment. 
Interestingly, several spouses reported that they observed a sharp contrast 
between the slow, limited movements, and poorly intelligible, low voice of their 
affected spouse when awake, and the fast, vigorous movements with loud voice 
that the very same patient exhibited during enacted dreams. We recently 
demonstrated that parkinsonism indeed disappears during RBD, in a large study 
combining the interview of 100 couples and the sleep and video monitoring of 50 
patients. The mechanism of this improvement is now being explored.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2007.10.008
PMID: 18805302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1936. Sheng Li Ke Xue Jin Zhan. 2008 Jul;39(3):214-20.

[COX plays a pivotal role in the progressive neuronal loss in neurodegenerative 
diseases].

[Article in Chinese]

Gao JP(1), Sun S, Li WW, Zhao H, Cai DF.

Author information:
(1)Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China.

Cyclooxygenase (COX) is the major target of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs). Since its discovery in the early 1990s, COX has been identified 
as a major player in inflammatory reactions. "neuroinflammation" is triggered 
and sustained by activation of resident cells, particularly microglia. Intensive 
researches have been made in the last decade concerning the COX pathway and its 
effect on microglial activation as well as other processes involved in 
neurondegeneration. This article reviewed new data in this area, focusing on 
three major neurodegenerative diseases, Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). By highlighting current 
knowledge in this field, it may reveal novel insight into disease mechanisms and 
help to design better therapies for these disorders.

PMID: 18819488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1937. J Neurol. 2008 Sep;255(9):1324-31. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0885-8. Epub 2008 Sep 
24.

Hippocampal head atrophy predominance in Parkinson's disease with hallucinations 
and with dementia.

Ibarretxe-Bilbao N(1), Ram√≠rez-Ruiz B, Tolosa E, Mart√≠ MJ, Valldeoriola F, 
Bargall√≥ N, Junqu√© C.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Psychiatry and Clinical, Psychobiology, University of Barcelona, 
IDIBAPS, Casanova 143, 08036, Barcelona, Spain.

We studied regional gray matter density in the hippocampus in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) patients. We obtained magnetic resonance scans in 44 PD patients 
(PD patients with dementia (PDD) = 9, non-demented PD patients with visual 
hallucinations (PD + VH) = 16, and PD patients without dementia and without 
visual hallucinations (PD - VH) = 19) and 56 controls matched for age and years 
of education. A region of interest (ROI) of the hippocampus following 
voxel-based morphometry (VBM) procedures was used to perform group comparisons, 
single-case individual analysis and correlations with learning scores. Group 
comparisons showed that PDD patients and PD+VH patients had significant 
hippocampal gray matter loss compared to controls. In PDD patients, hippocampal 
gray matter loss involved the entire hippocampus and in PD+VH this reduction was 
mainly confined to the hippocampal head. 78 % of PDD patients, 31 % of PD+VH 
patients and 26 % of PD-VH patients had hippocampal head gray matter loss when 
compared to controls. These results suggest that in PD the neurodegenerative 
process in the hippocampus starts in the head of this structure and later 
spreads to the tail and that, in addition, memory impairment assessed by Rey's 
Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) correlates with hippocampal head gray 
matter loss.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-008-0885-8
PMID: 18821043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1938. Mov Disord. 2008 Nov 15;23(15):2248-50. doi: 10.1002/mds.22322.

Effects of dopaminergic medications on psychosis and motor function in dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Goldman JG(1), Goetz CG, Brandabur M, Sanfilippo M, Stebbins GT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois 60612, USA. Jennifer_G_Goldman@rush.edu

Dopaminergic treatment in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) requires balancing 
risk of worsened psychosis and potential motor benefit. We assessed the effects 
of increased dopaminergic medication on psychosis and motor function in DLB. We 
studied 19 subjects fulfilling probable DLB Consensus criteria before and after 
increased dopaminergic medications. Standard clinical measures included: Thought 
Disorder score from the Unified Parkinson's disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) Part I, 
total motor score (UPDRS Part III), and Hoehn-Yahr (H&Y) stage. Motor benefit 
defined as >10% improvement over baseline UPDRS Part III score, occurred in only 
one-third of subjects. In this group, worsened hallucinations or psychosis 
developed in one-third. Considering motor benefit without exacerbation of 
psychosis as our aim, only 4 DLB subjects (22%) achieved this goal. Our results 
suggest that dopaminergic medications have limited benefit in DLB because of the 
low likelihood of motor improvement and the risk of psychosis exacerbation.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22322
PMID: 18823039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1939. Dement Neuropsychol. 2008 Oct-Dec;2(4):256-260. doi: 
10.1590/S1980-57642009DN20400004.

Mild behavioral impairment: A prodromal stage of dementia.

Taragano FE(1), Allegri RF(1), Lyketsos C(2).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neuropsicolog√≠a (SIREN), y Unidad de Investigaci√≥n "Ren√© Bar√≥n" 
del Instituto Universitario CEMIC, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
(2)Division of Geriatric Psychiatry and Neuropsychiatry, Johns Hopkins 
University and Hospital, Baltimore, USA.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) was defined by Petersen et al. (1999) as 
progressive memory loss, a prodrome of Alzheimer's disease. MCI is a 
well-established entity that can be both a diagnosis in medical practice and a 
valid target of Alzheimer's prevention therapy. More recently MCI has expanded 
to include other cognitive domains with other potential causes: amnestic MCI, 
multiple domains MCI, and single domain non-amnestic MCI. Behavioral symptoms in 
MCI are associated with a higher risk of dementia, but their association with 
dementia risk in patients without MCI is unknown. The objective of our paper was 
to address the question of whether aging patients with behavioral symptoms with 
or without cognitive impairment represent a population at risk for dementia. 
Mild Behavioral Impairment (MBI) defines a late life syndrome with prominent 
psychiatric and related behavioral symptoms in the absence of major cognitive 
symptoms. MBI also appears to be a transitional state between normal aging and 
dementia. MBI may carry a higher risk for dementia than MCI. A subgroup of MBI 
patients is likely to exhibit symptoms of a frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
prodrome. We proposed 4 subtypes of patients at risk for dementia: amnestic MCI 
(which is said to progress preferentially to Alzheimer's disease), multiple 
domain MCI (which may represent normal aging or may progress to vascular 
cognitive impairment or a neurodegenerative disorder), single domain 
non-amnestic MCI, and MBI (which may progress to frontotemporal dementia, Lewy 
Body dementia or Alzheimer's disease). We concluded that MBI is a counterpart of 
MCI as a transitional state between normal aging and dementia. These findings 
have implications for early detection, prevention, and treatment of patients 
with late-life dementia.

Publisher: Comprometimento cognitivo leve (CCL) foi definido por Petersen et al. 
(1999) como uma perda progressiva da mem√≥ria, pr√≥dromo da doen√ßa de Alzheimer. 
CCL √© uma entidade bem estabelecida que tanto pode ser um diagn√≥stico na pr√°tica 
cl√≠nica como um alvo v√°lido para terapias preventivas da doen√ßa de Alzheimer. 
Recentemente, o CCL expandiu-se para incorporar outros dom√≠nios cognitivos com 
outras causas potenciais: CCL amn√©sico, de m√∫ltiplos dom√≠nios e de um √∫nico 
dom√≠nio n√£o-amn√©stico. Sintomas comportamentais no CCL s√£o associados com risco 
mais elevado de dem√™ncia, mas sua associa√ß√£o com o risco de dem√™ncia na aus√™ncia 
de comprometimento cognitivo n√£o √© conhecida. O objetivo deste artigo foi o de 
verificar se pacientes idosos com sintomas comportamentais constituem popula√ß√£o 
de risco para dem√™ncia. Comprometimento comportamental leve caracteriza-se como 
uma s√≠ndrome que se manifesta em idosos constitu√≠da por sintomas psiqui√°tricos e 
sintomas comportamentais relacionados na aus√™ncia de sintomas cognitivos mais 
evidentes. O comprometimento comportamental leve parece ser um estado de 
transi√ß√£o entre o envelhecimento normal e dem√™ncia e pode conferir um risco 
maior para dem√™ncia do que o CCL. Um subgrupo de pacientes com comprometimento 
comportamental leve provavelmente est√° na fase prodr√¥mica de dem√™ncia 
frontotemporal (DFT). N√≥s propomos que se considerem quatro grupos de pacientes 
com risco de dem√™ncia: CCL amn√©stico (que segundo se admite evolui 
preferencialmente para doen√ßa de Alzheimer), CCL de m√∫ltiplos dom√≠nios (que pode 
representar envelhecimento normal ou pode evoluir para comprometimento cognitivo 
vascular ou para doen√ßa neurodegenerativa), CCL de √∫nico dom√≠nio n√£o-amn√©stico e 
Comprometimento Comportamental Leve (que pode evoluir para DFT, dem√™ncia com 
corp√∫sculos de Lewy ou doen√ßa de Alzheimer). Conclu√≠mos que o Comprometimento 
Comportamental Leve √© uma complementa√ß√£o ao CCL como um estado de transi√ß√£o 
entre o envelhecimento normal e dem√™ncia. Estes achados t√™m implica√ß√µes para a 
detec√ß√£o precoce, preven√ß√£o e tratamento de dem√™ncia de instala√ß√£o tardia.

DOI: 10.1590/S1980-57642009DN20400004
PMCID: PMC5619076
PMID: 29213581


1940. Nervenarzt. 2008 Nov;79 Suppl 3:129-36; quiz 137. doi: 
10.1007/s00115-008-2497-z.

[Novel neuroimaging perspectives in the diagnosis of dementia].

[Article in German]

Jessen F(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik f√ºr Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, 
Universit√§tsklinikum Bonn, Sigmund-Freud-Strasse 28, 53105, Bonn. 
frank.jessen@ukb.uni-bonn.de

Neuroimaging is an essential part of the etiological diagnosis of dementia. In 
this review, techniques that enhance the information extracted from routine 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) are presented. In addition, novel techniques of 
MR acquisition and analyses are reported that may become part of routine 
diagnostics in the future. These include automated analysis of structural MRI, 
proton MR spectroscopy, diffusion tensor imaging, perfusion MRI, and functional 
MRI. From nuclear medicine, the key techniques of fluorodeoxyglucose positron 
emission tomography (FDG-PET) and dopamine transporter single photon emission 
computed tomography (SPECT) for early and differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
dementia and Lewy body dementia and the innovation of amyloid PET are presented.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-008-2497-z
PMID: 18830576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1941. Neurogenetics. 2009 Feb;10(1):19-25. doi: 10.1007/s10048-008-0151-3. Epub 2008 
Oct 2.

Assessment of Alzheimer's disease case-control associations using family-based 
methods.

Schjeide BM(1), McQueen MB, Mullin K, DiVito J, Hogan MF, Parkinson M, Hooli B, 
Lange C, Blacker D, Tanzi RE, Bertram L.

Author information:
(1)MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative Disease (MIND), Department of 
Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

The genetics of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is heterogeneous and remains only 
ill-defined. We have recently created a freely available and continuously 
updated online database (AlzGene; http://www.alzgene.org ) for which we collect 
all published genetic association studies in AD and perform systematic 
meta-analyses on all polymorphisms with sufficient genotype data. In this study, 
we tested 27 genes (ACE, BDNF, CH25H, CHRNB2, CST3, CTSD, DAPK1, GALP, 
hCG2039140, IL1B, LMNA, LOC439999, LOC651924, MAPT, MTHFR, MYH13, PCK1, PGBD1, 
PRNP, PSEN1, SORCS1, SORL1, TF, TFAM, TNK1, GWA_14q32.13, and GWA_7p15.2), all 
showing significant association with AD risk in the AlzGene meta-analyses, in a 
large collection of family-based samples comprised of 4,180 subjects from over 
1,300 pedigrees. Overall, we observe significant association with risk for AD 
and polymorphisms in ACE, CHRNB2, TF, and an as yet uncharacterized locus on 
chromosome 7p15.2 [rs1859849]. For all four loci, the association was observed 
with the same alleles as in the AlzGene meta-analyses. The convergence of 
case-control and family-based findings suggests that these loci currently 
represent the most promising AD gene candidates. Further fine-mapping and 
functional analyses are warranted to elucidate the potential biochemical 
mechanisms and epidemiological relevance of these genes.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-008-0151-3
PMCID: PMC2841132
PMID: 18830724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1942. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Oct 14;105(41):15997-6002. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.0808084105. Epub 2008 Oct 2.

Parkinsonism and impaired axonal transport in a mouse model of frontotemporal 
dementia.

Ittner LM(1), Fath T, Ke YD, Bi M, van Eersel J, Li KM, Gunning P, G√∂tz J.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Laboratory, Brain and Mind Research 
Institute, University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia. 
littner@med.usyd.edu.au

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is characterized by cognitive and behavioral 
changes and, in a significant subset of patients, Parkinsonism. 
Histopathologically, FTD frequently presents with tau-containing lesions, which 
in familial cases result from mutations in the MAPT gene encoding tau. Here we 
present a novel transgenic mouse strain (K3) that expresses human tau carrying 
the FTD mutation K369I. K3 mice develop a progressive histopathology that is 
reminiscent of that in human FTD with the K369I mutation. In addition, K3 mice 
show early-onset memory impairment and amyotrophy in the absence of overt 
neurodegeneration. Different from our previously generated tau transgenic 
strains, the K3 mice express the transgene in the substantia nigra (SN) and show 
an early-onset motor phenotype that reproduces Parkinsonism with tremor, 
bradykinesia, abnormal gait, and postural instability. Interestingly, motor 
performance of young, but not old, K3 mice improves upon L-dopa treatment, which 
bears similarities to Parkinsonism in FTD. The early-onset symptoms in the K3 
mice are mechanistically related to selectively impaired anterograde axonal 
transport of distinct cargos, which precedes the loss of dopaminergic SN neurons 
that occurs in aged mice. The impaired axonal transport in SN neurons affects, 
among others, vesicles containing the dopamine-synthesizing enzyme tyrosine 
hydroxylase. Distinct modes of transport are also impaired in sciatic nerves, 
which may explain amyotrophy. Together, the K3 mice are a unique model of 
FTD-associated Parkinsonism, with pathomechanistic implications for the human 
pathologic process.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.0808084105
PMCID: PMC2572931
PMID: 18832465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


1943. Rev Neurol Dis. 2008 Summer;5(3):125-33.

Neuroimaging of nonmotor features of Parkinson's disease.

Deblieck C(1), Wu AD.

Author information:
(1)Ahmanson-Lovelace Brain Mapping Center, University of California, Los 
Angeles, CA, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by motor 
symptoms that respond to dopaminergic therapy. However, there is increasing 
interest in nonmotor PD features such as hyposmia, sleep disorders, dementia, 
depression, and psychoses. We review neuroimaging studies in nonmotor symptoms 
of PD and the use of dopaminergic imaging to support screening of nonmotor 
symptoms for early PD. Neuroimaging data document nonmotor pathophysiologic 
involvement of systems beyond the nigrostriatal dopaminergic pathway. These 
neuroimaging studies support a broader view of PD with early involvement in time 
and wider involvement of monoamine and cortical systems that may provide targets 
for novel therapies for nonmotor symptoms.

PMID: 18838952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1944. Semin Neurol. 2008 Sep;28(4):435-45. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1083690. Epub 2008 Oct 
8.

The role of structural and functional imaging in parkinsonian states with a 
description of PET technology.

Brooks DJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neuroscience and Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences 
Centre, Imperial College, Hammersmith Hospital, Du Cane Road, London, United 
Kingdom. david.brooks@csc.mrc.ac.uk

In this article, after providing a description of the technique of brain 
positron emission tomography (PET), the review focuses on the application of PET 
and other recent advances of neuroimaging in understanding the structural, 
pathophysiological, and pharmacological changes associated with Parkinson's 
disease (PD). In early cases of PD, demonstration of the presence of nigral 
structural abnormalities with transcranial sonography and striatal dopaminergic 
dysfunction with functional imaging provides a rationale for the use of 
dopaminergic medications. The presence of altered striatal signal with 
diffusion-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (DWI) or reduced lentiform nucleus 
glucose metabolism with fluorodeoxyglucose PET suggests the presence of an 
atypical PD variant. Finally, the value of functional imaging as a biomarker for 
following the progression of PD and for understanding mechanisms of dementia 
when present is debated.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0028-1083690
PMID: 18843572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1945. Semin Neurol. 2008 Sep;28(4):467-83. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1083695. Epub 2008 Oct 
8.

Neuroimaging in dementia.

Vitali P(1), Migliaccio R, Agosta F, Rosen HJ, Geschwind MD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UCSF Memory and Aging Center, University of 
California-San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

Although dementia is a clinical diagnosis, neuroimaging often is crucial for 
proper assessment. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and computed tomography (CT) 
may identify nondegenerative and potentially treatable causes of dementia. 
Recent neuroimaging advances, such as the Pittsburgh Compound-B (PIB) ligand for 
positron emission tomography imaging in Alzheimer's disease, will improve our 
ability to differentiate among the neurodegenerative dementias. High-resolution 
volumetric MRI has increased the capacity to identify the various forms of the 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration spectrum and some forms of parkinsonism or 
cerebellar neurodegenerative disorders, such as corticobasal degeneration, 
progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system atrophy, and spinocerebellar 
ataxias. In many cases, the specific pattern of cortical and subcortical 
abnormalities on MRI has diagnostic utility. Finally, among the new MRI methods, 
diffusion-weighted MRI can help in the early diagnosis of Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease. Although only clinical assessment can lead to a diagnosis of dementia, 
neuroimaging is clearly an invaluable tool for the clinician in the differential 
diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0028-1083695
PMCID: PMC2647854
PMID: 18843575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1946. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2008 Apr 29;88(17):1185-8.

[Association between estrogen receptor beta gene polymorphisms and Parkinson 
disease].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen RJ(1), Zhang BS, Wang SM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, General Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin 300052, China. sue904crj@sohu.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the association between two estrogen receptor (ER) 
beta gene polymorphisms and Parkinson disease (PD) as well as Parkinson disease 
with dementia (PDD) in Chinese people.
METHODS: Peripheral blood samples were collected from 115 PD patients (including 
26 PDD cases), 56 males and 55 females, aged 64 +/- 10, and 116 sex and 
age-matched healthy controls. Polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment 
length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method was used to analyze the polymorphism of 
the fifth exon RsaI and the eighth exon AluI of ERbeta gene. Te relationship 
between each genotype or allele frequencies and PD/PDD was analyzed using 
chi-square test.
RESULTS: There was no difference in the polymorphism of ERbeta genes AluI and 
Rsa I between the PD group and control group and between the PDD group and 
control group (all P > 0.05).
CONCLUSION: Genetic variations from AluI and RsaI digestion in ERbeta gene do 
not affect the risk of PD and PDD.

PMID: 18844113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1947. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2008 Sep 25;128(18):2072-6.

[Neuropsychiatric and cognitive symptoms in Parkinson disease].

[Article in Norwegian]

Aarsland D(1), Pedersen KF, Ehrt U, Bronnick K, Gjerstad MD, Larsen JP.

Author information:
(1)Nasjonalt kompetansesenter for bevegelsesforstyrrelser, Stavanger 
universitetssjukehus, 4068 Stavanger. daa@sus.no

BACKGROUND: A variety of neuropsychiatric symptoms commonly occur in Parkinson's 
disease. Extensive research the last 10 years has provided new knowledge in the 
field.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: This review is based on literature retrieved from a 
Medline search and own research and clinical experience.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Neuropsychiatric symptoms occur in the majority of 
patients with Parkinson's disease, and are associated with impaired quality of 
life for patients and relatives, additional deterioration of function and 
increased use of health resources. Medical and surgical therapies can induce or 
worsen such symptoms. Cognitive impairment and dementia are among the most 
common and severe complications to Parkinson's disease. No disease-modifying 
treatment is available, but rivastigmine was effective in one large randomised 
trial. Visual hallucinations are common and often persistent, but can be treated 
with klozapin if reducing the number and dose of antiparkinson agents are not 
helpful. Depression occurs frequently, usually mild, but there is little 
evidence of treatment efficacy. Apathy, anxiety and sleep disturbances are 
additional commonly occurring neuropsychiatric symptoms. Neuropsychiatric 
symptoms are so frequent in Parkinson's disease that they should be considered 
an integral part of the disease; it is important that clinicians are aware of 
these symptoms.

PMID: 18846124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1948. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2008 Sep 25;128(18):2077-80.

[Atypical parkinsonism].

[Article in Norwegian]

Tysnes OB(1), Vilming ST.

Author information:
(1)Nevrologisk avdeling, Haukeland Universitetssykehus, 5021 Bergen. 
obty@haukeland.no

BACKGROUND: The dopamine deficiency syndrome Parkinson's disease (PD) is 
characterized by tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and reduced postural reflexes. 
Conditions with similar symptoms but other causes than PD (about 1/3 of cases) 
are called atypical parkinsonism. From a neuropathological perspective, PD is 
associated with loss of nigro-striatal dopaminergic neurons (related to motor 
symptoms) and accumulation of alpha-synuclein-containing Lewy bodies in the 
mid-brain. Nigro-striatal pathways may also be involved in atypical 
parkinsonism, but lesions in other parts of the brain/basal ganglions dominate. 
Parkinsonism may also be related to chronic cerebrovascular disease or use of 
drugs with extrapyramidal side effects.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Articles retrieved from PubMed were reviewed to examine 
current knowledge on diseases other than PD that can induce parkinsonism.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Diseases with atypical parkinsonism usually start 
more symmetric than PD and tremor is either not present or differs from the 
typical rest tremor seen in PD. An exception is corticobasal degeneration with 
very asymmetric symptoms. Other (plus-) symptoms in atypical parkinsonism are 
(early) falling tendency, dizziness upon change of position, coordination 
difficulties or early cognitive decline. The article describes the clinical 
characteristics of atypical parkinsonism, possibilities of improved diagnostics 
with supplementary examinations and alternative treatment strategies.

PMID: 18846125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1949. Nurs Older People. 2008 Oct 13;20(7):23. doi: 10.7748/nop.20.7.23.s26.

Antipsychotic drugs increase the risk of stroke for people with dementia.

[No authors listed]

Behavioural and psychological symptoms, including agitation, psychosis, 
depression and aggression, occur in up to half of those with dementia in the 
community and in an even higher proportion of those in residential care. 
Antipsychotic drugs have been widely prescribed for these symptoms but have 
deleterious side effects such as extrapyramidal symptoms (uncontrolled 
movements) sedation, metabolic disturbance, increased cognitive impairment, and 
severe sensitivity reactions in those who have dementia with Lewy bodies. In 
2004, it emerged that the risk of stroke was three times higher in people with 
dementia who were treated with the atypical antipsychotics olanzapine and 
risperidone.

DOI: 10.7748/nop.20.7.23.s26
PMID: 27741716


1950. Nature. 2008 Oct 30;455(7217):1255-8. doi: 10.1038/nature07394. Epub 2008 Oct 
15.

Crystal structure of a stable dimer reveals the molecular basis of serpin 
polymerization.

Yamasaki M(1), Li W, Johnson DJ, Huntington JA.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge, Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for 
Medical Research, Wellcome Trust/MRC Building, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 0XY, 
UK.

Comment in
    Nature. 2008 Oct 30;455(7217):1189-90.

Repeating intermolecular protein association by means of beta-sheet expansion is 
the mechanism underlying a multitude of diseases including Alzheimer's, 
Huntington's and Parkinson's and the prion encephalopathies. A family of 
proteins, known as the serpins, also forms large stable multimers by ordered 
beta-sheet linkages leading to intracellular accretion and disease. These 
'serpinopathies' include early-onset dementia caused by mutations in 
neuroserpin, liver cirrhosis and emphysema caused by mutations in 
alpha(1)-antitrypsin (alpha(1)AT), and thrombosis caused by mutations in 
antithrombin. Serpin structure and function are quite well understood, and the 
family has therefore become a model system for understanding the beta-sheet 
expansion disorders collectively known as the conformational diseases. To 
develop strategies to prevent and reverse these disorders, it is necessary to 
determine the structural basis of the intermolecular linkage and of the 
pathogenic monomeric state. Here we report the crystallographic structure of a 
stable serpin dimer which reveals a domain swap of more than 50 residues, 
including two long antiparallel beta-strands inserting in the centre of the 
principal beta-sheet of the neighbouring monomer. This structure explains the 
extreme stability of serpin polymers, the molecular basis of their rapid 
propagation, and provides critical new insights into the structural changes 
which initiate irreversible beta-sheet expansion.

DOI: 10.1038/nature07394
PMID: 18923394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1951. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2008 Aug;20(4):364-73. doi: 10.1080/09540260802095123.

Cognitive and behavioural impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Merims D(1), Freedman M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology and Rotman Research Institute, Baycrest, Toronto.

Although Parkinson's disease (PD) has been considered to primarily affect motor 
abilities, increasing emphasis is being placed on cognitive and behavioural 
impairment in this disorder. Depression, dementia, psychosis and impulse control 
disorders have a major impact on quality of life for both patients and families. 
This article reviews cognitive and behavioural disturbances in PD and their 
relation to affective and motor symptoms, treatment of dementia associated with 
PD, and treatment approaches to psychosis in PD. We also discuss similarities 
between the dementia of PD and dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1080/09540260802095123
PMID: 18925485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1952. Protein Eng Des Sel. 2009 Mar;22(3):199-208. doi: 10.1093/protein/gzn052. Epub 
2008 Oct 16.

Engineered antibody intervention strategies for Alzheimer's disease and related 
dementias by targeting amyloid and toxic oligomers.

Robert R(1), Dolezal O, Waddington L, Hattarki MK, Cappai R, Masters CL, Hudson 
PJ, Wark KL.

Author information:
(1)CSIRO Molecular and Health Technologies, University of Melbourne, Australia. 
remy.robert@csiro.au

Most neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's (AD), Parkinson's, 
Huntington's and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, are characterised by the 
accumulation of insoluble filamentous aggregates known as amyloid. These 
pathologies share common pathways involving protein aggregation which can lead 
to fibril formation and amyloid plaques. The 4 kDa Abeta peptide (39-43 amino 
acids) derived from the proteolysis of the amyloid precursor protein is 
currently a validated target for therapy in AD. Both active and passive 
immunisation studies against Abeta are being trialled as potential AD 
therapeutic approaches. In this study, we have characterised engineered antibody 
fragments derived from the monoclonal antibody, WO-2 which recognises an epitope 
in the N-terminal region of Abeta (amino acids 2-8 of Abeta). A chimeric 
recombinant Fab (rFab) and single chain fragments (scFvs) of WO-2 were 
constructed and expressed in Escherichia coli. Rationally designed mutants to 
improve the stability of antibody fragments were also constructed. All antibody 
formats retained high affinity (K(D) approximately 8 x 10(-9) M) for the Abeta 
peptide, comparable with the intact parental IgG as measured by surface plasmon 
resonance. Likewise, all engineered fragments were able to: (i) prevent amyloid 
fibrillisation, (ii) disaggregate preformed Abeta(1-42) fibrils and (iii) 
inhibit Abeta(1-42) oligomer-mediated neurotoxicity in vitro as efficiently as 
the whole IgG molecule. These data indicate that the WO-2 antibody and its 
fragments have immunotherapeutic potential. The perceived advantages of using 
small Fab and scFv engineered antibody formats which lack the effector function 
include more efficient passage across the blood-brain barrier and minimising the 
risk of triggering inflammatory side reactions. Hence, these recombinant 
antibody fragments represent attractive candidates and safer formulations of 
passive immunotherapy for AD.

DOI: 10.1093/protein/gzn052
PMID: 18927231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1953. Autophagy. 2008 Nov;4(8):1097-100. doi: 10.4161/auto.7142. Epub 2008 Nov 6.

Role for nanomaterial-autophagy interaction in neurodegenerative disease.

Stern ST(1), Johnson DN.

Author information:
(1)Nanotechnology Characterization Laboratory, Advanced Technology Program, 
SAIC-Frederick, Inc., NCI-Frederick, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA. 
sternstephan@mail.nih.gov

Nanotechnology is the control and manipulation of materials in the size range of 
1-100 nm. Due to increasing research into the potential beneficial applications 
of nanotechnology, there is an urgent need for the study of possible health 
risks. Several researchers, including those in our laboratory, have demonstrated 
elevated levels of autophagic vacuoles upon exposure of cells to certain 
nanomaterials, including carbon- and metal-based nanoparticles. While this 
apparent increase in autophagic activity may be an appropriate cellular response 
toward nanomaterial clearance, often the interaction between nanomaterials and 
the autophagy pathway is disruptive, resulting in severe morphological changes 
and coincident cell death. Interestingly, epidemiological studies have 
identified an association between exposure to combustion-derived ambient 
particles (which are predominantly nanoscale) and neurological conditions with 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease-like pathologies. Becuse impaired autophagy 
may play an important role in the pathogenesis of these and other diseases, it 
is intriguing to speculate about the plausible involvement of nanoscale 
particulates in this process. The interaction of nanomaterials with the 
autophagy pathway, and the potential negative consequences of resulting 
autophagy dysfunction, should be explored further.

DOI: 10.4161/auto.7142
PMID: 18927490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1954. Neurosci Lett. 2008 Dec 19;448(1):20-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.10.018. Epub 
2008 Oct 10.

Lack of association of APOE and tau polymorphisms with dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Ezquerra M(1), Campdelacreu J, Gaig C, Compta Y, Mu√±oz E, Mart√≠ MJ, Valldeoriola 
F, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Institut 
Cl√≠nic de Neuroci√®ncies, Hospital Cl√≠nic de Barcelona, Department of Medicine, 
Universitat de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, CIBERNED, Barcelona, Spain.

Some APOE or tau gene polymorphisms have been associated with Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Parkinson's disease (PD). 
The reports of a possible association between the APOE 4 allele and dementia in 
PD are controversial, and some studies suggest that the tau H1/H1 genotype may 
increase the risk of dementia in PD. Here we analysed these APOE and tau 
polymorphisms in 86 clinically diagnosed PD patients with dementia (PDD), in 138 
clinically diagnosed non-demented PD (PDND) patients, and in 91 healthy 
controls. Genomic DNA isolated from blood was used for PCR and subsequent RFLP 
analysis. We examined the possible genetic association of these polymorphisms 
with dementia in PD, but found no differences in genotypic distributions between 
the PDND, PDD, and control groups. The effects of tau and APOE polymorphisms on 
the age at dementia onset were studied using Kaplan-Meier survival analysis but 
no significant association were found. The lack of association between the APOE 
4 allele and PDD suggests that the pathological process involved in the 
development of dementia in PD is different from the one that occurs in AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.10.018
PMID: 18930114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1955. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Feb;80(2):145-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.150011. Epub 2008 Oct 17.

Camptocormia in Parkinson disease: an epidemiological and clinical study.

Tiple D(1), Fabbrini G, Colosimo C, Ottaviani D, Camerota F, Defazio G, 
Berardelli A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Sapienza University of Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Camptocormia is an abnormal flexion of the thoracolumbar spine 
during standing and walking that abates in the recumbent position.
METHODS: In a single-centre epidemiological and clinical study, the prevalence 
of camptocormia in Parkinson disease (PD) and its relationship with the clinical 
features of PD were investigated. A total of 275 consecutive outpatients were 
systematically screened for camptocormia with a clinical evaluation. Patients 
who screened positive for camptocormia were subsequently reassessed by formal 
goniometric analysis. The demographic and clinical features of the patients with 
and without camptocormia were then compared.
RESULTS: A 6.9% (19/275, 95% CI, 4.2 to 10.6) prevalence of camptocormia was 
found. Camptocormia was found in patients with more severe PD, as clinically 
assessed by the Hoehn-Yahr (HY) staging and the motor Unified Parkinson Disease 
Rating Scale (UPDRS) part III, longer l-dopa treatment duration and greater 
l-dopa daily dose and presence of DSM-IV dementia. Camptocormia was reported to 
develop after the clinical onset of PD. No correlation was found between the 
degree of trunk flexion and age, duration of PD, UPDRS motor score, HY staging, 
and l-dopa treatment duration and dose. As a risk factor, the study identified 
previous vertebral surgery.
CONCLUSIONS: Camptocormia, a relatively common sign in PD seems to be related to 
the clinical severity of PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.150011
PMID: 18931011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1956. Neurobiol Dis. 2009 Aug;35(2):157-64. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.09.004. Epub 2008 
Sep 26.

Biomarker discovery in neurodegenerative diseases: a proteomic approach.

Shi M(1), Caudle WM, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, HMC Box 
359635, 325 9th Avenue, Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

Biomarkers for neurodegenerative disorders are essential to facilitate disease 
diagnosis, ideally at early stages, monitor disease progression, and assess 
response to existing and future treatments. Application of proteomics to the 
human brain, cerebrospinal fluid and plasma has greatly hastened the unbiased 
and high-throughput searches for novel biomarkers. There are many steps critical 
to biomarker discovery, whether for neurodegenerative or other diseases, 
including sample preparation, protein/peptide separation and identification, as 
well as independent confirmation and validation. In this review we have 
summarized current proteomics technologies involved in discovery of biomarkers 
for neurodegenerative diseases, practical considerations and limitations of 
several major aspects, as well as the current status of candidate biomarkers 
revealed by proteomics for Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2008.09.004
PMCID: PMC2939006
PMID: 18938247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1957. Rev Med Brux. 2008 Sep;29(4):238-47.

[1231-FP-CIT (DaTSCAN) scintigraphy in the differential diagnosis of movement 
disorders].

[Article in French]

Dethy S(1), Hambye AS.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, C.H.U. Tivoli, La Louvi√®re. sophie.dethy@chu-tivoli.be

The diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) remains mostly clinical. 
Nevertheless, differentiating IPD from essential tremor or other parkinsonian 
syndromes solely by clinical examination can be challenging in some cases, 
especially in the early stage of the disease. The introduction of new isotopic 
functional imaging techniques, and more specifically the labelling of dopamine 
transporter derivatives, has improved the understanding and early detection of 
some diseases affecting the basal ganglia. Iodine-123-FP-CIT (DaTSCAN), a 
(presynaptic) dopamine transporter analogue for nuclear medicine imaging, has 
recently been introduced for the non-invasive differential diagnosis between IPD 
and essential tremor or secondary (e.g. drug-related) parkinsonian syndromes. 
DaTSCAN scintigraphy has also demonstrated some usefulness in the evaluation of 
other neurodegenerative parkinsonian syndromes such as Lewy-body dementia or 
multiple system atrophy. For this latter however, the DaTSCAN has to be combined 
with a second scintigraphy, imaging the post-synaptic dopaminergic receptors, 
such as the D2-ligand 123I-iodobenzamide. Combining DaTSCAN scintigraphy to a 
functional study of the brain cortical activity using a brain perfusion 
scintigraphy or to the evaluation of the cardiac adrenergic system by means of a 
myocardial MIBG scintigraphy (a norepinephrine storage analogue) can also be 
helpful to refine the diagnosis. Our experience shows that a good collaboration 
between the neurologist specialized in movement disorders and the nuclear 
medicine physician is useful, if not mandatory, to optimize the diagnostic 
performances of DaTSCAN scintigraphy.

PMID: 18949971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1958. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2008 Sep-Oct;66(5):531-5. doi: 10.1684/abc.2008.0265.

[Interest of CSF beta-amyloid1-42 and t-tau protein level determinations for the 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in French]

Smach MA(1), Charfeddine B, Lammouchi T, Dridi H, Ben Othman L, Bennamou S, 
Limem K.

Author information:
(1)D√©partement de biochimie, Facult√© de m√©decine de Sousse, Tunisie. 
dalifms@yahoo.fr

Early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease remains a tactful poser. In order to 
clarify the importance of beta amyloid protein dosage (Abeta1-42) and protein 
tau (t-tau) in such pathology, we have rigorously studied three well recruited 
populations that match in age: healthy controls (n = 32), Alzheimer patients (n 
= 87) and non Alzheimer dementia (n = 31) patients. The combination of Abeta1-42 
and t-tau at baseline yielded a sensitivity of 85.29 % for detection of 
Alzheimer's disease and the specificity was by 96.77 % to differentiate 
controls. So the combination of these tow markers helps in the diagnosis of 
Alzheimer because of the high specificity and sensibility of this method.

DOI: 10.1684/abc.2008.0265
PMID: 18957342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1959. Neurology. 2008 Nov 25;71(22):1796-803. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000335941.68602.39. 
Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Tau forms in CSF as a reliable biomarker for progressive supranuclear palsy.

Borroni B(1), Malinverno M, Gardoni F, Alberici A, Parnetti L, Premi E, 
Bonuccelli U, Grassi M, Perani D, Calabresi P, Di Luca M, Padovani A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Aging Brain and Dementia, Department of Neurology, University of 
Brescia, Italy.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2008 Nov 25;71(22):1754-5.

OBJECTIVE: In CSF, extended (55 kDa) and truncated (33 kDa) tau forms have been 
previously recognized, and the tau 33 kDa/55 kDa ratio has been found 
significantly reduced in progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) vs in other 
neurodegenerative disorders. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
diagnostic value of the CSF tau form ratio as a biomarker of PSP and to 
correlate the structural anatomic changes as measured by means of voxel-based 
morphometry (VBM) to CSF tau form ratio decrease.
METHODS: A total of 166 subjects were included in the study (21 PSP, 20 
corticobasal degeneration syndrome, 44 frontotemporal dementia, 29 Alzheimer 
disease, 10 Parkinson disease, 15 dementia with Lewy bodies, and 27 individuals 
without any neurodegenerative disorder). Each patient underwent a standardized 
clinical and neuropsychological evaluation. In CSF, a semiquantitative 
immunoprecipitation was developed to evaluate CSF tau 33 kDa/55 kDa ratio. MRI 
assessment and VBM analysis was carried out.
RESULTS: Tau form ratio was significantly reduced in patients with PSP (0.504 
+/- 0.284) when compared to age-matched controls (0.989 +/- 0.343), and to 
patients with other neurodegenerative conditions (range = 0.899-1.215). The area 
under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic analysis in PSP 
vs other subgroups ranged from 0.863 to 0.937 (PSP vs others, AUC = 0.897, p < 
0.0001). VBM study showed that CSF tau form ratio decrease correlated 
significantly with brainstem atrophy.
CONCLUSIONS: Truncated tau production, which selectively affects brainstem 
neuron susceptibility, can be considered a specific and reliable marker for PSP. 
Tau form ratio was the lowest in progressive supranuclear palsy with no overlap 
with any other neurodegenerative illness.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000335941.68602.39
PMID: 18971445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1960. Mov Disord. 2008 Dec 15;23(16):2307-11. doi: 10.1002/mds.22090.

Applause sign in Parkinsonian disorders and Huntington's disease.

Wu LJ(1), Sitburana O, Davidson A, Jankovic J.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Center, Department of Neurology, Baylor College of 
Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The applause sign has been previously reported to be indicative of 
neurodegenerative disorders, such as progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). In 
order to determine the sensitivity, specificity, and positive predictive value, 
we tested it in patients with PSP, Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple system 
atrophy (MSA), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and Huntington's disease (HD). 
Subjects were asked to clap three times after demonstration by the examiner. The 
performance was scored as follows: 3 = claps only three times; 2 = claps four 
times; 1 = claps 5 to 10 times; 0 = claps >10 times. The clap test was 
videotaped and rated. Patients with CBD, MSA, and PSP showed significant 
differences in clap scores compared with normal controls. The test 
differentiated patients with CBD from those with PD (P < 0.005) and HD (P < 
0.005), but failed to discriminate patients with PSP from other parkinsonian 
groups. The specificity of the applause sign is 100% in distinguishing 
parkinsonian patients from normal subjects with the highest sensitivity in CBD 
patients. We concluded that the applause sign is highly specific for 
parkinsonian disorders but it is not a specific sign for PSP; it appears to be 
most sensitive for CBD.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22090
PMID: 18972544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1961. Mov Disord. 2009 Jan 30;24(2):268-73. doi: 10.1002/mds.22361.

Odor identification test as an indicator of idiopathic REM sleep behavior 
disorder.

Miyamoto T(1), Miyamoto M, Iwanami M, Suzuki K, Inoue Y, Hirata K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center of Sleep Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University 
School of Medicine, Tochigi, Japan. miyatomo@dokkyomed.ac.jp

Reduction of olfactory function in idiopathic rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep 
behavior disorder (iRBD) is of the same magnitude as that found in patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). We assessed 
olfactory function using the Odor Stick Identification Test for Japanese 
(OSIT-J) in 48 Japanese patients with iRBD, 21 with PD, and 34 with obstructive 
sleep apnea syndrome (OSAS). Possible score of the OSIT-J ranges from 0 to 12. 
OSIT-J scores were 4.9 +/- 2.8 in patients with iRBD, 4.8 +/- 2.8 in patients 
with PD, and 9.9 +/- 1.4 in OSAS patients. An OSIT-J score of 8.5 was associated 
with a sensitivity of 88.2 and 85.3%, respectively, and specificity of 83.3 and 
85.7%, respectively, in differentiating iRBD or PD patients from OSAS patients. 
Odor identification is impaired in Japanese patients with iRBD and PD. The 
results suggest that OSIT-J, which is a short and simple nonlexical olfactory 
identification test, can be useful as a clinical indicator for iRBD with Lewy 
body formation and is appropriate in the Japanese elderly population.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22361
PMID: 18972547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1962. Clin Calcium. 2008 Nov;18(11):1588-93.

[Falls in patients with dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamaguchi K(1).

Author information:
(1)The University of Tokyo Hospital, Department of Geriatric medicine.

People with cognitive impairment are at about 2 to 3 times higher risk of 
falling compared with cognitively intact elderly. Incidence of falls among 
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) is high, nevertheless the clinical 
feature common in patients with mild to moderate AD is the absence of motor 
impairment. Recent studies suggest that the divided attention markedly impairs 
the ability of patients with AD to regulate the gait. Falls are particularly 
common in Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) patients and may aid diagnosis, and 
the falls are associated with parkinsonism and other unclear factors. Treatment 
studies evaluating fall reduction strategies in dementia patients are a 
priority.

PMID: 18974447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1963. Mol Neurodegener. 2008 Nov 1;3:19. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-3-19.

In vivo silencing of alpha-synuclein using naked siRNA.

Lewis J(1), Melrose H, Bumcrot D, Hope A, Zehr C, Lincoln S, Braithwaite A, He 
Z, Ogholikhan S, Hinkle K, Kent C, Toudjarska I, Charisse K, Braich R, Pandey 
RK, Heckman M, Maraganore DM, Crook J, Farrer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, 
FL 32224, USA. lewis.jada@mayo.edu.

BACKGROUND: Overexpression of alpha-synuclein (SNCA) in families with 
multiplication mutations causes parkinsonism and subsequent dementia, 
characterized by diffuse Lewy Body disease post-mortem. Genetic variability in 
SNCA contributes to risk of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), possibly as a 
result of overexpression. SNCA downregulation is therefore a valid therapeutic 
target for PD.
RESULTS: We have identified human and murine-specific siRNA molecules which 
reduce SNCA in vitro. As a proof of concept, we demonstrate that direct infusion 
of chemically modified (naked), murine-specific siRNA into the hippocampus 
significantly reduces SNCA levels. Reduction of SNCA in the hippocampus and 
cortex persists for a minimum of 1 week post-infusion with recovery nearing 
control levels by 3 weeks post-infusion.
CONCLUSION: We have developed naked gene-specific siRNAs that silence expression 
of SNCA in vivo. This approach may prove beneficial toward our understanding of 
the endogenous functional equilibrium of SNCA, its role in disease, and 
eventually as a therapeutic strategy for alpha-synucleinopathies resulting from 
SNCA overexpression.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-3-19
PMCID: PMC2612658
PMID: 18976489


1964. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Nov;83(5):623-32. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.008. Epub 
2008 Oct 30.

Genome-wide association analysis reveals putative Alzheimer's disease 
susceptibility loci in addition to APOE.

Bertram L(1), Lange C, Mullin K, Parkinson M, Hsiao M, Hogan MF, Schjeide BM, 
Hooli B, Divito J, Ionita I, Jiang H, Laird N, Moscarillo T, Ohlsen KL, Elliott 
K, Wang X, Hu-Lince D, Ryder M, Murphy A, Wagner SL, Blacker D, Becker KD, Tanzi 
RE.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, Mass General Institute for 
Neurodegenerative Disease (MIND), Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a genetically complex and heterogeneous disorder. To 
date four genes have been established to either cause early-onset 
autosomal-dominant AD (APP, PSEN1, and PSEN2(1-4)) or to increase susceptibility 
for late-onset AD (APOE5). However, the heritability of late-onset AD is as high 
as 80%, (6) and much of the phenotypic variance remains unexplained to date. We 
performed a genome-wide association (GWA) analysis using 484,522 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on a large (1,376 samples from 410 
families) sample of AD families of self-reported European descent. We identified 
five SNPs showing either significant or marginally significant genome-wide 
association with a multivariate phenotype combining affection status and onset 
age. One of these signals (p = 5.7 x 10(-14)) was elicited by SNP rs4420638 and 
probably reflects APOE-epsilon4, which maps 11 kb proximal (r2 = 0.78). The 
other four signals were tested in three additional independent AD family samples 
composed of nearly 2700 individuals from almost 900 families. Two of these SNPs 
showed significant association in the replication samples (combined p values 
0.007 and 0.00002). The SNP (rs11159647, on chromosome 14q31) with the strongest 
association signal also showed evidence of association with the same allele in 
GWA data generated in an independent sample of approximately 1,400 AD cases and 
controls (p = 0.04). Although the precise identity of the underlying locus(i) 
remains elusive, our study provides compelling evidence for the existence of at 
least one previously undescribed AD gene that, like APOE-epsilon4, primarily 
acts as a modifier of onset age.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.10.008
PMCID: PMC2668052
PMID: 18976728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1965. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2009 Apr;80(4):366-70. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2008.155481. Epub 2008 Oct 31.

Incidence and survival of dementia in a general population of Japanese elderly: 
the Hisayama study.

Matsui Y(1), Tanizaki Y, Arima H, Yonemoto K, Doi Y, Ninomiya T, Sasaki K, Iida 
M, Iwaki T, Kanba S, Kiyohara Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka City, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the incidence and survival rates of total and cause 
specific dementia in a general Japanese population.
METHODS: A total of 828 subjects without dementia, aged 65 years or over, were 
followed-up prospectively for 17 years. Dementia was subdivided into cause 
specific subtypes: namely, Alzheimer's disease (AD), vascular dementia (VD), 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), combined dementia and other types of dementia. 
During the follow-up, 275 subjects developed dementia; of these, 251 (91.2%) 
were evaluated morphologically, with 164 subjected to brain autopsy examination 
and the remaining 87 to neuroimaging.
RESULTS: The incidences of total dementia, AD, VD, DLB, combined dementia and 
other types of dementia were 32.3 (n = 275), 14.6 (124), 9.5 (81), 1.4 (12), 3.8 
(33), and 3.1 (16) per 1000 person years, respectively. The incidences of AD, 
combined dementia and other types of dementia rose with increasing age, 
particularly after the age of 85 years, but this tendency was not observed for 
VD or DLB. The survival curve of dementia cases aged 65-89 years was 
significantly lower than that of age and sex matched controls (10 year survival 
rate, 13.6% vs 29.3%; hazard ratio 1.67; 95% confidence interval 1.31 to 2.13). 
The 10 year survival rates were not significantly different among dementia 
subtypes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that the Japanese elderly population has a 
high risk for the development of dementia, specifically AD and VD, and once 
dementia is established, the risk of death is considerable.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2008.155481
PMID: 18977814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1966. Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Feb;117(2):169-74. doi: 10.1007/s00401-008-0450-7. Epub 
2008 Nov 4.

Olfactory bulb alpha-synucleinopathy has high specificity and sensitivity for 
Lewy body disorders.

Beach TG(1), White CL 3rd, Hladik CL, Sabbagh MN, Connor DJ, Shill HA, Sue LI, 
Sasse J, Bachalakuri J, Henry-Watson J, Akiyama H, Adler CH; Arizona Parkinson's 
Disease Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, 
USA. thomas.beach@bannerhealth.org

Comment in
    Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Feb;117(2):215-6; author reply 217-8.
    Acta Neuropathol. 2009 Feb;117(2):213-4; author reply 217-8.

Involvement of the olfactory bulb by Lewy-type alpha-synucleinopathy (LTS) is 
known to occur at an early stage of Parkinson's disease (PD) and Lewy body 
disorders and is therefore of potential usefulness diagnostically. An accurate 
estimate of the specificity and sensitivity of this change has not previously 
been available. We performed immunohistochemical alpha-synuclein staining of the 
olfactory bulb in 328 deceased individuals. All cases had received an initial 
neuropathological examination that included alpha-synuclein immunohistochemical 
staining on sections from brainstem, limbic and neocortical regions, but 
excluded olfactory bulb. These cases had been classified based on their clinical 
characteristics and brain regional distribution and density of LTS, as PD, 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Alzheimer's disease with LTS (ADLS), 
Alzheimer's disease without LTS (ADNLS), incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) and 
elderly control subjects. The numbers of cases found to be positive and 
negative, respectively, for olfactory bulb LTS were: PD 55/3; DLB 34/1; ADLS 
37/5; ADNLS 19/84; ILBD 14/7; elderly control subjects 5/64. The sensitivities 
and specificities were, respectively: 95 and 91% for PD versus elderly control; 
97 and 91% for DLB versus elderly control; 88 and 91% for ADLS versus elderly 
control; 88 and 81% for ADLS versus ADNLS; 67 and 91% for ILBD versus elderly 
control. Olfactory bulb synucleinopathy density scores correlated significantly 
with synucleinopathy scores in all other brain regions (Spearman R values 
between 0.46 and 0.78) as well as with scores on the Mini-Mental State 
Examination and Part 3 of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (Spearman 
R -0.27, 0.35, respectively). It is concluded that olfactory bulb LTS accurately 
predicts the presence of LTS in other brain regions. It is suggested that 
olfactory bulb biopsy be considered to confirm the diagnosis in PD subjects 
being assessed for surgical therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-008-0450-7
PMCID: PMC2631085
PMID: 18982334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1967. Neurology. 2009 Jan 13;72(2):110-6. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000327098.86861.d4. 
Epub 2008 Nov 5.

A multidisciplinary study of patients with early-onset PD with and without 
parkin mutations.

Lohmann E(1), Thobois S, Lesage S, Broussolle E, du Montcel ST, Ribeiro MJ, Remy 
P, Pelissolo A, Dubois B, Mallet L, Pollak P, Agid Y, Brice A; French 
Parkinson's Disease Genetics Study Group.

Collaborators: Agid Y, Bonnet AM, Borg M, Brice A, Broussolle E, Damier P, 
Dest√©e A, D√ºrr A, Durif F, Lohmann E, Martinez M, Penet C, Pollak P, Rascol O, 
Tison F, Tranchant C, V√©rin M, Viallet F, Vidailhet M, Warter JM.

Author information:
(1)INSERM UMR S_679, H√¥pital Piti√©-Salp√™tri√®re, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Jan 13;72(2):106-7.

OBJECTIVE: To establish phenotype-genotype correlations in early-onset Parkinson 
disease (EOPD), we performed neurologic, neuropsychological, and psychiatric 
evaluations in a series of patients with and without parkin mutations.
BACKGROUND: Parkin (PARK2) gene mutations are the major cause of autosomal 
recessive parkinsonism. The usual clinical features are early-onset typical PD 
with a slow clinical course, an excellent response to low doses of levodopa, 
frequent treatment-induced dyskinesias, and the absence of dementia.
METHODS: A total of 44 patients with EOPD (21 with and 23 without parkin 
mutations) and 9 unaffected single heterozygous carriers of parkin mutations 
underwent extensive clinical, neuropsychological, and psychiatric examinations.
RESULTS: The neurologic, neuropsychological, and psychiatric features were 
similar in all patients, except for significantly lower daily doses of 
dopaminergic treatment and greater delay in the development of levodopa-related 
fluctuations (p < 0.05) in parkin mutation carriers compared to noncarriers. 
There was no major difference between the two groups in terms of general 
cognitive efficiency. Psychiatric manifestations (depression) were more frequent 
in patients than in healthy single heterozygous parkin carriers but did not 
differ between the two groups of patients.
CONCLUSION: Carriers of parkin mutations are clinically indistinguishable from 
other patients with young-onset Parkinson disease (PD) on an individual basis. 
Severe generalized loss of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta in these patients is associated with an excellent response to low doses 
of dopa-equivalent and delayed fluctuations, but cognitive impairment and 
special behavioral or psychiatric symptoms were not more severe than in other 
patients with early-onset PD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000327098.86861.d4
PMCID: PMC2677494
PMID: 18987353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1968. Curr Opin Neurol. 2008 Dec;21(6):676-82. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283168df0.

Dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Aarsland D(1), Beyer MK, Kurz MW.

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavenger University Hospital, 
Stavenger.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Cognitive impairment and dementia are among the most common 
nonmotor changes in Parkinson's disease. The purpose of this review is to 
present recent findings of clinical and neurobiological aspects of dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.
RECENT FINDINGS: New consensus criteria for a clinical diagnosis of dementia in 
Parkinson's disease have been proposed. A very high cumulative prevalence of 
dementia in Parkinson's disease has been shown in two independent long-term 
cohorts. Mild cognitive impairment occurs even in early Parkinson's disease and 
is associated with a shorter time to dementia. Emerging evidence from pathology, 
as well as in-vivo studies using novel techniques within genetics, imaging, and 
cerebrospinal fluid research, indicates that alpha-synuclein aggregation and 
disturbances of other candidate proteins are associated with dementia in 
Parkinson's disease. Clinical, pathological, and electrophysiological studies 
support the hypothesis of different subtypes of dementia in Parkinson's disease, 
potentially related to different underlying brain changes.
SUMMARY: Increased understanding of underlying mechanisms of cognitive decline 
and dementia in Parkinson's disease has been achieved. This will hopefully lead 
to novel treatment with the potential of preventing or delaying the onset of 
dementia by influencing these mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283168df0
PMID: 18989112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1969. J Neurovirol. 2008 Oct;14(5):362-7. doi: 10.1080/13550280802216494. Epub 2008 
Nov 12.

Aging exacerbates extrapyramidal motor signs in the era of highly active 
antiretroviral therapy.

Valcour V(1), Watters MR, Williams AE, Sacktor N, McMurtray A, Shikuma C.

Author information:
(1)Hawaii AIDS Clinical Research Program, John A. Burns School of Medicine, 
University of Hawaii, Honolulu, Hawaii, USA. Vvalcour@hawaii.edu

The phenotype of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated neurocognitive 
disorders (HAND) in the developed world has changed with the broad institution 
of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) and with aging of the HIV+ 
population. Extrapyramidal motor signs were a prominent feature of HAND as 
defined in the early stages of the epidemic but has not been reevaluated in the 
era of HAART. Moreover, the contribution of aging to extrapyramidal motor signs 
in the context of HIV remains undefined. We examined these questions among the 
229 HIV+ participants in the Hawaii Aging with HIV Cohort compared to age-, 
gender-, and ethnicity-matched HIV-negative controls. Extrapyramidal motor signs 
were quantified using the motor exam of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale (UPDRSmotor) and compared to concurrent neuropsychological and clinical 
cognitive diagnostic categorization. The mean UPDRSmotor score increased with 
older age (1.68 versus 3.35; P<.001) and with HIV status (1.18 versus 3.56; 
P<.001). Age group (P=.024), HIV status (P<.001), and the interaction between 
age and HIV (P=.026) were significantly associated with UPDRSmotor score. Among 
HIV+ patients, the mean UPDRSmotor score increased with worsening cognitive 
diagnostic category (P<.001) where it was 2.06 (2.31) in normal cognition 
(n=110), 3.21 (3.48) in minor cognitive motor disorder (MCMD) (n=84), and 5.72 
(5.01) in HIV-associated dementia (HAD) (n=37). We conclude that extrapyramidal 
motor signs are increased in HIV in the era of HAART and that the impact of HIV 
on extrapyramidal motor signs is exacerbated by aging. These results highlight 
the importance of a careful neurological examination in the evaluation of HIV 
patients.

DOI: 10.1080/13550280802216494
PMCID: PMC2765397
PMID: 18989814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1970. Am J Epidemiol. 2009 Jan 15;169(2):167-75. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwn297. Epub 2008 
Nov 5.

Residence near power lines and mortality from neurodegenerative diseases: 
longitudinal study of the Swiss population.

Huss A(1), Spoerri A, Egger M, R√∂√∂sli M; Swiss National Cohort Study.

Collaborators: Gutzwiller F, Bopp M, Egger M, Spoerri A, Sturdy M, Zwahlen M, 
Braun-Fahrl√§nder C, Paccaud F, Rougemont A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Social and Preventive Medicine, University of Bern, Bern, 
Switzerland. ahuss@ispm.unibe.ch

The relation between residential magnetic field exposure from power lines and 
mortality from neurodegenerative conditions was analyzed among 4.7 million 
persons of the Swiss National Cohort (linking mortality and census data), 
covering the period 2000-2005. Cox proportional hazard models were used to 
analyze the relation of living in the proximity of 220-380 kV power lines and 
the risk of death from neurodegenerative diseases, with adjustment for a range 
of potential confounders. Overall, the adjusted hazard ratio for Alzheimer's 
disease in persons living within 50 m of a 220-380 kV power line was 1.24 (95% 
confidence interval (CI): 0.80, 1.92) compared with persons who lived at a 
distance of 600 m or more. There was a dose-response relation with respect to 
years of residence in the immediate vicinity of power lines and Alzheimer's 
disease: Persons living at least 5 years within 50 m had an adjusted hazard 
ratio of 1.51 (95% CI: 0.91, 2.51), increasing to 1.78 (95% CI: 1.07, 2.96) with 
at least 10 years and to 2.00 (95% CI: 1.21, 3.33) with at least 15 years. The 
pattern was similar for senile dementia. There was little evidence for an 
increased risk of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, or 
multiple sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwn297
PMID: 18990717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1971. J Neurosurg. 2009 May;110(5):837-51. doi: 10.3171/2007.9.17572.

Noninvasive biomarkers in normal pressure hydrocephalus: evidence for the role 
of neuroimaging.

Tarnaris A(1), Kitchen ND, Watkins LD.

Author information:
(1)Victor Horsley Department of Neurosurgery, National Hospital for Neurology 
and Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom. andrewtarnaris@gmail.com

OBJECT: Normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) represents a treatable form of 
dementia. Recent estimates of the incidence of this condition are in the region 
of 5% of patients with dementia. The symptoms of NPH can vary among individuals 
and may be confused with those of patients with multi-infarct dementia, dementia 
of the Alzheimer type, or even Parkinson disease. Traditionally the diagnosis of 
NPH could only be confirmed postoperatively by a favorable outcome to surgical 
diversion of CSF. The object of this literature review was to examine the role 
of structural and functional imaging in providing biomarkers of favorable 
surgical outcome.
METHODS: A Medline search was undertaken for the years 1980-2006, using the 
following terms: normal pressure hydrocephalus, adult hydrocephalus, chronic 
hydrocephalus, imaging, neuroimaging, imaging studies, outcomes, surgical 
outcomes, prognosis, prognostic value, sensitivity, specificity, positive 
predictive value, negative predictive value, and accuracy.
RESULTS: The query revealed 16 studies that correlated imaging with surgical 
outcomes offering accuracy results. Three studies fulfilled the statistical 
criteria of a biomarker. A dementia Alzheimer-type pattern on SPECT in patients 
with idiopathic NPH, the presence of CSF flow void on MR imaging, and the 
N-acetylaspartate/choline ratio in patients with the secondary form are able to 
predict surgical outcomes with high accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS: There is at present Level A evidence for using MR spectroscopy in 
patients with secondary NPH, and Level B evidence for using SPECT and 
phase-contrast MR imaging to select patients with idiopathic NPH for shunt 
placement. The studies, however, need to be repeated by other groups. The 
current work should act as a platform to design further studies with larger 
sample sizes.

DOI: 10.3171/2007.9.17572
PMID: 18991499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1972. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2008 Nov;9(9):670-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2008.07.001. Epub 
2008 Sep 25.

The effects of withdrawal of dopaminergic medication in nursing home patients 
with advanced parkinsonism.

Tse W(1), Frisina PG, H√§lbig TD, Gracies JM, Liang L, Tarshish C, Lesser G, 
Neufeld R, Koller WC, Libow LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of dopaminergic medication withdrawal in an 
elderly, demented and minimally ambulatory nursing home population with 
parkinsonism in New York City.
METHODS: In our double-blind, randomized study, 11 patients (7 males, 4 females) 
were randomized into 2 groups: one group underwent levodopa medication 
withdrawal (experimental group) and the other group continued on their levodopa 
(control group). Patients were evaluated weekly over the course of a month with 
a neurologic examination and a series of assessment tools, including the motor 
UPDRS (Unified Parkinson's disease rating scale), Hoehn and Yahr staging scale, 
the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Nursing Assistant Behavioral 
Detection Form.
SETTING: An academic nursing home in New York City.
RESULTS: The patients had a mean age of 82.00 +/- 10.14 years, with a mean MMSE 
score of 9.50 +/- 6.60 out of 30.00 maximum. The control and experimental groups 
did not differ significantly with respect to age (P = .52), dementia severity (P 
= .35), nor severity of PD symptoms as measured by the UPDRS (P = .22) and Hoehn 
and Yahr staging (P = .65). Overall, no significant changes were observed 
between the control and experimental groups in cognitive, behavioral, and motor 
function across each time period. Of interest, 2 of the drug withdrawal patients 
showed modest improvements in cognitive function as measured by the MMSE.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that in patients with advanced parkinsonism and 
dementia, dopaminergic medication withdrawal may be a feasible way to reduce 
polypharmacy and potential medication-related side effects, with a minimal risk 
of worsening motor deterioration. Therefore, our findings may have potential 
implications for a medication intervention that could prevent potential 
deleterious side effects and improve health-related quality of life in this 
frail population.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2008.07.001
PMID: 18992700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1973. J Alzheimers Dis. 2008 Nov;15(3):473-93. doi: 10.3233/jad-2008-15314.

Antioxidants in central nervous system diseases: preclinical promise and 
translational challenges.

Kamat CD(1), Gadal S, Mhatre M, Williamson KS, Pye QN, Hensley K.

Author information:
(1)Free Radical Biology and Aging Research Program, Oklahoma Medical Research 
Foundation, Oklahoma City, OK 73104, USA.

Comment in
    J Alzheimers Dis. 2010;19(4):1141-2.

Oxidative damage is strongly implicated in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative 
diseases including Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease and stroke (brain ischemia/reperfusion 
injury). The availability of transgenic and toxin-inducible models of these 
conditions has facilitated the preclinical evaluation of putative antioxidant 
agents ranging from prototypic natural antioxidants such as vitamin E 
(alpha-tocopherol) to sophisticated synthetic free radical traps and catalytic 
oxidants. Literature review shows that antioxidant therapies have enjoyed 
general success in preclinical studies across disparate animal models, but 
little benefit in human intervention studies or clinical trials. Recent 
high-profile failures of vitamin E trials in Parkinson's disease, and nitrone 
therapies in stroke, have diminished enthusiasm to pursue antioxidant 
neuroprotectants in the clinic. The translational disappointment of antioxidants 
likely arises from a combination of factors including failure to understand the 
drug candidate's mechanism of action in relationship to human disease, and 
failure to conduct preclinical studies using concentration and time parameters 
relevant to the clinical setting. This review discusses the rationale for using 
antioxidants in the prophylaxis or mitigation of human neurodiseases, with a 
critical discussion regarding ways in which future preclinical studies may be 
adjusted to offer more predictive value in selecting agents for translation into 
human trials.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2008-15314
PMCID: PMC2669703
PMID: 18997301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1974. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2008 Dec;25(6):361-6. doi: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e31818f50de.

Comparison of quantitative EEGs between Parkinson disease and age-adjusted 
normal controls.

Serizawa K(1), Kamei S, Morita A, Hara M, Mizutani T, Yoshihashi H, Yamaguchi M, 
Takeshita J, Hirayanagi K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Nihon University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Quantitative EEG (qEEG) findings in Parkinson disease (PD) have been reported in 
only five previous studies. In these studies, the sample size was small and the 
distribution of qEEG changes was not estimated. This is the first qEEG 
evaluation not only employing multiple logistic regression analysis but also 
estimating the distribution of qEEG changes. The subjects comprised 45 PD 
patients without remarkable dementia and 40 age-adjusted normal controls. The 
lack of ischemic lesions in all subjects was confirmed by MRI. Absolute power 
values were measured for four frequency bands from delta to beta. The electrodes 
were divided into six, viz. frontal pole, frontal, central, parietal, temporal, 
and occipital locations. We calculated the spectral ratio, i.e., the sum of the 
power values in the alpha and beta waves divided by the sum of the values in the 
slow waves. The dependent variable was either PD or normal control; the 
independent variables were the spectral ratios, age, sex, and Mini-Mental State 
Examination score. The significant predictive variables in PD were the spectral 
ratios at all electrode locations except for the frontal pole (frontal location: 
P = 0.025, other locations: P < 0.01). PD presented diffuse slowing in the qEEG 
when compared with age-adjusted normal controls.

DOI: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e31818f50de
PMID: 18997624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1975. Neuropsychology. 2008 Nov;22(6):729-37. doi: 10.1037/a0012949.

Visuospatial deficits predict rate of cognitive decline in autopsy-verified 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Hamilton JM(1), Salmon DP, Galasko D, Raman R, Emond J, Hansen LA, Masliah E, 
Thal LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, USA. 
jmhamilton@ucsd.edu

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is often characterized by pronounced impairment 
in visuospatial skills, attention, and executive functions. However, the 
strength of the phenotypic expression of DLB varies and may be weaker in 
patients with extensive concomitant Alzheimer's disease (AD). To determine 
whether strength of the DLB clinical phenotype impacts cognitive decline, 
visuospatial and language tests were retrospectively used to predict 2-year rate 
of global cognitive decline in 22 autopsy-confirmed DLB patients (21 with 
concomitant AD) and 44 autopsy-confirmed "pure" AD patients. Generalized 
estimating equations (GEE) revealed a significant interaction such that poor 
baseline performances on tests of visuospatial skills were strongly associated 
with a rapid rate of cognitive decline in DLB but not AD (p < .001). No effect 
of confrontation naming was found. DLB patients with poor visuospatial skills 
had fewer neurofibrillary tangles and were more likely to experience visual 
hallucinations than those with better visuospatial skills. These results suggest 
that the severity of visuospatial deficits in DLB may identify those facing a 
particularly malignant disease course and may designate individuals whose 
clinical syndrome is impacted more by Lewy body formation than AD pathology.

DOI: 10.1037/a0012949
PMCID: PMC2587484
PMID: 18999346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1976. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2009 Feb-Mar;24(1):40-5. doi: 
10.1177/1533317508324272. Epub 2008 Nov 10.

Clinical picture of a patient with a novel PSEN1 mutation (L424V).

Robles A(1), Sobrido MJ, Garc√≠a-Murias M, Prieto JM, Lema M, Santos D, Paramo M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Santiago, 
Santiago de Compostela, Spain. alfredoroblesbayon@gmail.com

Young onset dementia raises concern about familial and non degenerative 
dementias. We describe a patient with early dementia. At the age of 26, a woman 
developed symptoms of anorexia nervosa, at 30 a memory and attention deficit, 
and at 34 abnormal behavior with impulsivity, aggression, and dysexecutive 
disorder. At 36 she showed aphasia, stereotyped behavior, hyperreflexia, 
grasping reflex, urinary incontinence, myoclonus, and seizures. Blood and 
cerebrospinal fluid were normal. Brain computed tomography and single photon 
emission computed tomography showed diffuse cortico-subcortical atrophy and 
frontotemporoparietal hypoperfusion. A Leu424Val mutation was present in PSEN1 
gene. PSEN1 mutations can produce Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal dementia, 
and dementia with Lewy bodies phenotypes, or a combination of them. It has been 
proposed that the mutation type and location may influence the molecular 
pathogenesis and thus PSEN1 would represent a molecular connexion between these 
entities. This case shows a novel PSEN1 mutation with outstanding amnesic and 
frontal symptoms.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317508324272
PMCID: PMC10846114
PMID: 19001354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1977. Mov Disord. 2009 Feb 15;24(3):392-400. doi: 10.1002/mds.22357.

BuChE-K and APOE epsilon4 allele frequencies in Lewy body dementias, and 
influence of genotype and hyperhomocysteinemia on cognitive decline.

Lane R(1), He Y, Morris C, Leverenz JB, Emre M, Ballard C.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Pharmaceuticals Corporation, East Hanover, New Jersey 07936-1080, 
USA. roger.lane@novartis.com

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon4 and butyrylcholinesterase-K (BuChE-K) are 
associated with an increased risk for Alzheimer's disease. The primary objective 
was to evaluate frequencies of these alleles in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). A secondary objective was to evaluate 
influences on rate of cognitive decline. This analysis used data from 
participants consenting to pharmacogenetic testing in placebo-controlled 
rivastigmine studies. Allele frequencies in DLB and PDD were compared using 
logistic regression. Within the PDD placebo sample, associations with cognitive 
decline were evaluated (the DLB sample was too small for these evaluations). 
Fifty-seven DLB and 323 PDD subjects provided APOE and BuChE data. Allelic 
frequencies were higher in DLB, relative to PDD subjects, for BuChE-K (P = 
0.06), APOE epsilon4 (P < 0.001), or both alleles together (P < 0.001). More 
rapid cognitive decline was seen in PDD patients carrying both alleles, compared 
with other genotypes. Subjects with hyperhomocysteinemia were associated with 
more rapid decline in the presence of BuChE-K, with or without APOE epsilon4. 
These results suggest that genetic and biochemical risk factors for AD and PDD 
pathology may be important in dementia onset and progression in these Lewy body 
disorders.

(c) 2008 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.22357
PMID: 19006190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1978. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2007;13 Suppl 3:S229-32. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(08)70007-5.

Clinical genetics of Parkinson's disease and related disorders.

Wider C(1), Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

Our knowledge regarding the genetics of Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
parkinsonism has evolved dramatically during the past decade, with the discovery 
of numerous loci and genes. The LRRK2 gene has emerged as the most commonly 
involved in both familial and sporadic PD. Several variants in LRRK2 and SNCA 
have been associated with an increased risk of sporadic PD. PRKN, PINK1 and DJ1 
mutations cause early-onset recessively inherited PD. Autosomal dominant 
dementia and parkinsonism is caused by mutations in the MAPT gene, and in the 
most recently discovered PGRN gene.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(08)70007-5
PMID: 18267241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1979. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2008 Nov;56(11):2061-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01992.x.

Ethnic differences in Singapore's dementia prevalence: the stroke, Parkinson's 
disease, epilepsy, and dementia in Singapore study.

Sahadevan S(1), Saw SM, Gao W, Tan LC, Chin JJ, Hong CY, Venketasubramanian N.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Medicine, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore. 
suresh_sahadevan@ttsh.com.sg

OBJECTIVES: To study the prevalence of dementia in Singapore among Chinese, 
Malays, and Indians.
DESIGN: A two-phase, cross-sectional study of randomly selected population from 
central Singapore with disproportionate race stratification.
SETTING: Community-based study. Subjects screened to have cognitive impairment 
at phase 1 in their homes were evaluated clinically for dementia at phase 2 in 
nearby community centers.
PARTICIPANTS: Fourteen thousand eight hundred seventeen subjects aged 50 and 
older (67% participation rate).
MEASUREMENTS: The locally validated Abbreviated Mental Test was used to screen 
for cognitive impairment at phase 1. Dementia was diagnosed at phase 2 as per 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition criteria. 
Possible Alzheimer's disease (AD) and possible vascular dementia (VD) were 
diagnosed along the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative 
Disorders-Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association and National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke-Association Internationale pour 
la Recherche et l'Enseignement en Neuroscienes criteria, respectively.
RESULTS: The overall age- and race-standardized dementia prevalence was 1.26% 
(95% confidence interval (CI)=1.10-1.45). Prevalence (in 5-year age bands) was 
0.08% (50-54), 0.08% (55-59), 0.44% (60-64), 1.16% (65-69), 1.84% (70-74), 3.26% 
(75-79), 8.35% (80-84), and 16.42% (>/=85). From age 50 to 69, 65% of dementia 
cases were VD; at older ages, 60% were AD. Logistic regression (adjusted for 
age, sex, education) showed that Malays had twice the risk for AD as Chinese, 
and Indians had more than twice the risk for AD and VD than Chinese.
CONCLUSION: Singapore's dementia prevalence, primarily influenced by its Chinese 
majority, is lower than seen in the West. The striking interethnic differences 
suggest a need for a dementia incidence study and further investigation of 
underlying genetic and cultural differences between the three ethnic groups in 
relation to dementia risk.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2008.01992.x
PMID: 19016940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1980. Biochem Soc Trans. 2008 Dec;36(Pt 6):1293-8. doi: 10.1042/BST0361293.

Metal-dependent generation of reactive oxygen species from amyloid proteins 
implicated in neurodegenerative disease.

Allsop D(1), Mayes J, Moore S, Masad A, Tabner BJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical and Life Sciences, School of Health and Medicine, 
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. d.allsop@lancaster.ac.uk

Using a method based on ESR spectroscopy and spin-trapping, we have shown that 
Abeta (amyloid beta-peptide) (implicated in Alzheimer's disease), 
alpha-synuclein (implicated in Parkinson's disease), ABri (British dementia 
peptide) (responsible for familial British dementia), certain toxic fragments of 
the prion protein (implicated in the transmissible spongiform encephalopathies) 
and the amylin peptide (found in the pancreas in Type 2 diabetes mellitus) all 
have the common ability to generate H(2)O(2) in vitro. Numerous controls 
(reverse, scrambled and non-toxic peptides) lacked this property. We have also 
noted a positive correlation between the ability of the various proteins tested 
to generate H(2)O(2) and their toxic effects on cultured cells. In the case of 
Abeta and ABri, we have shown that H(2)O(2) is generated as a short burst during 
the early stages of aggregation and is associated with the presence of 
protofibrils or oligomers, rather than mature fibrils. H(2)O(2) is readily 
converted into the aggressive hydroxyl radical by Fenton chemistry, and this 
extremely reactive radical could be responsible for much of the oxidative damage 
seen in all of the above disorders. We suggest that the formation of a 
redox-active complex involving the relevant amyloidogenic protein and certain 
transition-metal ions could play an important role in the pathogenesis of 
several different protein misfolding disorders.

DOI: 10.1042/BST0361293
PMID: 19021543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1981. FEBS J. 2008 Dec;275(23):5767-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06709.x.

Emerging pathways in genetic Parkinson's disease: Potential role of ceramide 
metabolism in Lewy body disease.

Bras J(1), Singleton A, Cookson MR, Hardy J.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Genetics Unit, National Institutes on Aging, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations at the glucosecerebrosidase locus have 
recently been shown to be a potent risk factor for Lewy body disease. Based on 
this observation, we have re-evaluated the likelihood that the different PARK 
loci (defined using clinical criteria for disease) may be misleading attempts to 
find common pathways to pathogenesis. Rather, we suggest, grouping the different 
loci which lead to different Lewy body disease may be more revealing. Doing 
this, we suggest that several of the genes involved in disparate Lewy body 
diseases impinge on ceramide metabolism and we suggest that this may be a common 
theme for pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2008.06709.x
PMCID: PMC2646080
PMID: 19021754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1982. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Feb 6;450(3):332-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.11.015. Epub 
2008 Nov 12.

Cerebrospinal fluid alpha-synuclein in neurodegenerative disorders-a marker of 
synapse loss?

Ohrfelt A(1), Grognet P, Andreasen N, Wallin A, Vanmechelen E, Blennow K, 
Zetterberg H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurochemistry, The Sahlgrenska Academy at University of Gothenburg, M√∂lndal, 
Sweden.

The association of alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) neuropathology with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and several related disorders has led to an intense research effort 
to develop cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)- or blood-based alpha-syn biomarkers for 
these types of diseases. Recent studies show that alpha-syn is present in CSF 
and possible to measure using enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA). Here, 
we describe a novel ELISA that allows for quantification of alpha-syn in CSF 
down to 50pg/mL. The diagnostic value of the test was assessed using CSF samples 
from 66 Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, 15PD patients, 15 patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 55 cognitively normal controls. PD and DLB 
patients and controls displayed similar CSF alpha-syn levels. AD patients had 
significantly lower alpha-syn levels than controls (median [inter-quartile 
range] 296 [234-372] and 395 [298-452], respectively, p<0.001). Moreover, AD 
patients with mini-mental state examination (MMSE) scores below 20 had 
significantly lower alpha-syn than AD patients with MMSE scores of 20 or higher 
(p=0.02). There was also a tendency towards a negative correlation between 
alpha-syn levels and disease duration in the AD group (r=-0.247, p=0.06). 
Altogether, our results speak against CSF alpha-syn as a reliable biomarker for 
PD and DLB. The lower alpha-syn levels in AD, as well as the association of 
alpha-syn reduction with AD severity, approximated by MMSE, suggests that it may 
be a general marker of synapse loss, a hypothesis that warrants further 
investigation.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.11.015
PMID: 19022350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1983. Neurobiol Aging. 2010 Oct;31(10):1805-13. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.09.017. Epub 2008 Nov 20.

Prodromal clinical manifestations of neuropathologically confirmed Lewy body 
disease.

Jicha GA(1), Schmitt FA, Abner E, Nelson PT, Cooper GE, Smith CD, Markesbery WR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine, 
Lexington, KY 40536, USA. gajich2@email.uky.edu

The mild cognitive impairment (MCI) stage of dementia with Lewy bodies (MCI-DLB) 
has not yet been defined, but is likely to differ in the MCI stage of 
Alzheimer's disease (MCI-AD). To determine whether clinical features distinguish 
MCI-DLB and MCI-AD, 9 cases of neuropathologically confirmed MCI-DLB and 12 
cases of MCI-AD were compared. No significant differences were found between 
MCI-DLB and MCI-AD cases in age at death, gender, ApoE status, education, time 
followed while clinically normal, or duration of MCI. MCI-DLB and MCI-AD cases 
differed clinically in the expression of Parkinsonism (P=0.012), provoked 
hallucinations or delirium (P=0.042), or the presence of any of these 
noncognitive symptoms of DLB (P<0.0001). Letter fluency (P=0.007) was 
significantly lower and Wechsler Logical Memory I (P=0.019) was significantly 
higher in MCI-DLB compared to MCI-AD cases. These data demonstrate the 
feasibility of differentiating underlying pathologic processes responsible for 
cognitive decline in the preclinical disease state and suggest that further 
refinement in diagnostic criteria may allow more accurate early detection of 
prodromal DLB and AD.

(c) 2008 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2008.09.017
PMCID: PMC2891418
PMID: 19026468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest The authors report no 
conflicts of interest.


1984. Am J Geriatr Pharmacother. 2008 Oct;6(4):187-97. doi: 
10.1016/j.amjopharm.2008.10.002.

Antipsychotic drug use among elderly nursing home residents in the United 
States.

Kamble P(1), Chen H, Sherer J, Aparasu RR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences and Administration, College of Pharmacy, 
University of Houston, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Antipsychotic utilization in elderly nursing home residents has 
increased substantially in recent years, primarily due to the use of atypical 
antipsychotic agents. However, few studies have examined antipsychotic 
utilization patterns in nursing home residents in the United States since the 
introduction of atypical agents in the 1990s.
OBJECTIVE: The goal of this study was to examine the prevalence of and the 
factors associated with antipsychotic drug use among elderly nursing home 
residents in the United States.
METHODS: This study involved a cross-sectional analysis of prescription and 
resident data files from the 2004 National Nursing Home Survey (NNNHS). The 
analysis focused on the use of 11 typical and 6 atypical antipsychotic agents 
among a nationally representative sample of elderly patients (aged > or =65 
years). Descriptive weighted analysis was performed to examine antipsychotic 
prevalence patterns. Multiple logistic regression analysis within the conceptual 
framework of the Andersen behavioral model was used to examine the factors 
associated with antipsychotic drug use among the elderly nursing home residents.
RESULTS: According to the 2004 NNHS, 0.32 million elderly nursing home residents 
received antipsychotic medications, for an overall prevalence of 24.82%. Most 
received atypical agents (23.45%), while 1.90% received typical agents. 
Frequently reported diagnoses among the elderly using an antipsychotic agent 
were dementia (70%), depression (41%), and anxiety (18%). Among the predisposing 
characteristics, female gender and age (> or =85 years) were negatively 
associated with antipsychotic drug use. Need factors such as increasing 
dependence in decision-making ability regarding tasks of daily life, depressed 
mood indicators, behavioral symptoms, history of falls, and bowel incontinence 
were positively associated with antipsychotic drug use. In addition to the use 
of antipsychotic agents in schizophrenia and bipolar mania, this study found 
high use in conditions such as dementia, anxiety, depression, and parkinsonism 
in the elderly.
CONCLUSIONS: Nearly 1 in 4 elderly nursing home residents in the United States 
received antipsychotic agents. Predisposing and need factors played a vital role 
in determining the use of antipsychotic agents in these elderly patients. 
Overall, the study findings suggest that there is a need to monitor 
antipsychotic drug use by elderly patients in US nursing homes in light of 
recent efficacy and safety data on atypical agents.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjopharm.2008.10.002
PMID: 19028374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1985. BMC Geriatr. 2008 Nov 25;8:31. doi: 10.1186/1471-2318-8-31.

Mobility and other predictors of hospitalization for urinary tract infection: a 
retrospective cohort study.

Rogers MA(1), Fries BE, Kaufman SR, Mody L, McMahon LF Jr, Saint S.

Author information:
(1)Division of General Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. maryroge@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Many hospitalizations for residents of skilled nursing facilities 
are potentially avoidable. Factors that could prevent hospitalization for 
urinary tract infection (UTI) were investigated, with focus on patient mobility.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort study was conducted using 2003-2004 data from 
the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The study included 408,192 
residents of 4267 skilled nursing facilities in California, Florida, Michigan, 
New York, and Texas. The patients were followed over time, from admission to the 
skilled nursing facility to discharge or, for those who were not discharged, for 
1 year. Cox proportional hazards regression was conducted with hospitalization 
for UTI as the outcome.
RESULTS: The ability to walk was associated with a 69% lower rate of 
hospitalization for UTI. Maintaining or improving walking ability over time 
reduced the risk of hospitalization for UTI by 39% to 76% for patients with 
various conditions. For residents with severe mobility problems, such as being 
in a wheelchair or having a missing limb, maintaining or improving mobility (in 
bed or when transferring) reduced the risk of hospitalization for UTI by 38% to 
80%. Other potentially modifiable predictors included a physician visit at the 
time of admission to the skilled nursing facility (Hazard Ratio (HR), 0.68), use 
of an indwelling urinary catheter (HR, 2.78), infection with Clostridium 
difficile or an antibiotic-resistant microorganism (HR, 1.20), and use of 10 or 
more medications (HR, 1.31). Patient characteristics associated with 
hospitalization for UTI were advancing age, being Hispanic or African-American, 
and having diabetes mellitus, renal failure, Parkinson's disease, dementia, or 
stroke.
CONCLUSION: Maintaining or improving mobility (walking, transferring between 
positions, or moving in bed) was associated with a lower risk of hospitalization 
for UTI. A physician visit at the time of admission to the skilled nursing 
facility also reduced the risk of hospitalization for UTI.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2318-8-31
PMCID: PMC2605742
PMID: 19032784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1986. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2008 Sep;48(9):625-33. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.625.

[Recent progress in ALS research: ALS and TDP-43].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Center Hospital of Neurology and 
Psychiatry.

Selective involvements of upper and lower motor neurons have been regarded as 
one of the most characteristic features of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). 
However, evidences of more extensive involvements affecting the systems other 
than the pure motor systems have been accumulated since the discovery of 
ubiquitin-positive inclusions (UbIs) in ALS, ALS-dementia (ALS-D), and 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) with UbIs (FTLD-U). A breakthrough 
occurred in ALS research in October 2006, when TAR DNA-binding protein43 
(TDP-43) was identified as the core protein that is ubiquitinated in the 
cytoplasm, neurites and nucleus as UbIs. Antibody to phosphorylated TDP-43 
selectively reacts to the inclusions and Western blotting demonstrates abnormal 
bands of phosphorylated TDP-43 in the brains of patients with ALS/FTLD-U. 
Similar findings were observed in ALS/parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) of 
Guam and Kii peninsula. These diseases are lumped in the "TDP-43 proteinopathy". 
In early 2008, several mutations of the TDP-43 gene were identified as the 
causative gene of autosomal-dominant familial ALS without SOD1 gene mutations. 
These findings suggest that abnormalities of TDP-43 directly or indirectly 
produce severe motor neuron degeneration. TDP-43 is thus one of the key proteins 
causing TDP-43 proteinopathies such as ALS, ALS-D, FTLD-U, and ALS/PDC of Guam 
and Kii. New revolutionary developments on ALS research for molecular mechanism 
and therapy are expected.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.48.625
PMID: 19048944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1987. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;26(6):513-21. doi: 10.1159/000178755. Epub 2008 
Dec 2.

Stage-independent and stage-specific phenotypic differences between vascular 
dementia and Alzheimer's Disease.

Chan M(1), Lim WS, Sahadevan S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tan Tock Seng Hospital, Singapore. 
peng_chew_chan@ttsh.com.sg

AIMS: We examined the effect of stratification by dementia severity on clinical 
and neuropsychological differences observed between vascular dementia (VaD) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) to ascertain whether any observed phenotypic 
differences would differ between the early and late stages.
METHODS: The phenotypic features at presentation of 219 newly diagnosed VaD (n = 
103) and AD (n = 116) patients were analyzed. All patients underwent clinical, 
neuropsychological and neuroimaging evaluation. Severity of dementia was staged 
using the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale.
RESULTS: VaD can be clinically distinguished from AD by criterion-related 
features that span across all stages of dementia. We also identified 
non-criterion-related features that differed according to dementia severity. In 
the CDR 0.5-1 stage, VaD patients demonstrated increased reading difficulty, 
loss of insight, apathy, and greater impairment in executive function compared 
with delayed and recognition memory. Unique distinguishing features for VaD in 
the CDR 2-3 stage included higher Geriatric Depression Scale scores, lower 
Barthel scores, gait apraxia and parkinsonism.
CONCLUSIONS: Phenotypic differences between VaD and AD can be conceptualized as 
either criterion-related stage-independent features, or stage-specific features 
(comprising cognitive and neuropsychological elements in the mild stages, and 
physical, affective and functional components in the later stages).

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000178755
PMID: 19052451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1988. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;26(6):547-55. doi: 10.1159/000180280. Epub 2008 
Dec 10.

Differentiation of early-stage Alzheimer's disease from other types of dementia 
using brain perfusion single photon emission computed tomography with easy 
Z-score imaging system analysis.

Waragai M(1), Mizumura S, Yamada T, Matsuda H.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, JR Tokyo General Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. 
waragai@kk.iij4u.or.jp

INTRODUCTION: We performed brain perfusion single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) to evaluate computer-assisted automated discrimination of 
early Alzheimer's disease (AD) from other types of dementia using the easy 
Z-score imaging system (eZIS).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: eZIS analysis of brain perfusion SPECT images was used in 
patients with early AD, vascular dementia (VD), mixed dementia (VD + AD), 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and normal 
controls. Significant changes in regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in the 
volume of interest were assessed in the posterior cingulate gyrus, precuneus and 
parietal cortices; the severity and extent of decreases in rCBF and the ratio of 
the extent of the decrease in rCBF to the decrease in whole-brain blood flow 
(rCBF ratio) were determined.
RESULTS: The severity of the decrease in rCBF in AD patients was significantly 
greater than in VD and FTD patients and controls. The extent of the decrease in 
rCBF in AD patients was significantly greater than in FTD patients and controls. 
The rCBF ratio in AD patients was higher than in VD and FTD patients and 
controls.
CONCLUSION: The eZIS indices, especially the rCBF ratio, may be useful in 
establishing the differential diagnosis between early-stage AD and FTD or VD, 
but the differentiation of AD from VD + AD or DLB remains difficult.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000180280
PMID: 19066428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1989. Ann Neurol. 2008 Nov;64(5):485-91. doi: 10.1002/ana.21541.

A critical evaluation of the Braak staging scheme for Parkinson's disease.

Burke RE(1), Dauer WT, Vonsattel JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY, 
USA. rb43@columbia.edu

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2010 Apr;67(4):550.

Braak and colleagues have proposed that, within the central nervous system, 
Parkinson's disease (PD) begins as a synucleinopathy in nondopaminergic 
structures of the lower brainstem or in the olfactory bulb. The brainstem 
synucleinopathy is postulated to progress rostrally to affect the substantia 
nigra and cause parkinsonism at a later stage of the disease. In the context of 
a diagnosis of PD, made from current clinical criteria, the pattern of lower 
brainstem involvement accompanying mesencephalic synucleinopathy is often 
observed. However, outside of that context, the patterns of synucleinopathy that 
Braak described are often not observed, particularly in dementia with Lewy 
bodies and when synucleinopathy occurs in the absence of neurological 
manifestations. The concept that lower brainstem synucleinopathy represents 
"early PD" rests on the supposition that it has a substantial likelihood of 
progressing within the human lifetime to involve the mesencephalon, and thereby 
cause the substantia nigra pathology and clinical parkinsonism that have 
heretofore defined the disease. However, the predictive validity of this concept 
is doubtful, based on numerous observations made in populations of aged 
individuals who, despite the absence of neurological signs, have brain 
synucleinopathy ranging up to Braak stages 4 to 6 at postmortem. Furthermore, 
there is no relation between Braak stage and the clinical severity of PD. We 
conclude that the relation between patterns of abnormal synuclein immunostaining 
in the human brain and the disease entity now recognized as PD remains to be 
determined.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21541
PMCID: PMC2605160
PMID: 19067353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1990. Brain Res. 2009 Jan 28;1251:1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.055. Epub 2008 
Nov 28.

CSF alpha-synuclein levels in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Noguchi-Shinohara M(1), Tokuda T, Yoshita M, Kasai T, Ono K, Nakagawa M, 
El-Agnaf OM, Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa, Japan.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is characterized by widespread depositions of 
alpha-synuclein, which are described as Lewy bodies. Recently, it was shown that 
neuronal cells in culture constitutively release alpha-synuclein into the 
culture medium and that alpha-synuclein is normally present in human 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). The aim of the present study was to evaluate the 
diagnostic value of CSF alpha-synuclein levels in discriminating DLB from 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Alpha-synuclein was measured in CSF from 16 patients 
with DLB and 21 patients with AD. Iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine cardiac 
scintigraphy was also performed to assess Lewy body pathology. CSF 
alpha-synuclein levels did not differ significantly between DLB and AD patients. 
However, the duration of illness was associated with lower alpha-synuclein 
levels (p<0.05) in DLB, while no such association was found in AD. The present 
data show CSF alpha-synuclein levels are not sensitive diagnostic markers to 
discriminate DLB from AD. However, the lower alpha-synuclein levels in DLB 
patients with longer duration suggest a reduction in CSF alpha-synuclein in 
association with increased severity of alpha-synucleinopathy in the brain.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.11.055
PMID: 19071095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1991. Genet Test. 2008 Dec;12(4):471-3. doi: 10.1089/gte.2008.0042.

Co-occurrence of sporadic parkinsonism and late-onset Alzheimer's disease in a 
Brazilian male with the LRRK2 p.G2019S mutation.

Santos-Rebou√ßas CB, Abdalla CB, Baldi FJ, Martins PA, Corr√™a JC, Gon√ßalves AP, 
Cunha MS, Borges MB, Pereira JS, Laks J, Pimentel MM.

Mutations in the leucine-rich repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2) gene represent the most 
common known genetic cause of inherited and idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) 
in different populations. The predicted multifunctionality of LRRK2 product and 
the pleomorphic pathology associated with LRRK2 mutations place this gene as a 
potential candidate for other neurodegenerative disorders, mainly Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). We report a Brazilian male expressing both late-onset AD and 
slowly progressive parkinsonism signs, and who presented the most frequent LRRK2 
mutation (p.G2019S). Although the co-occurrence of PD and AD would be expected 
occasionally, the shared mechanisms between the two complex disorders are still 
unclear and are discussed herein. In light of recent findings about the wide 
role of LRRK2 under normal and pathological conditions, it is tempting to 
speculate that LRRK2 mutations might play an upstream influence on the etiology 
of not just PD but also several alpha-synuclein and tau pathologies, including 
AD.

DOI: 10.1089/gte.2008.0042
PMID: 19072560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1992. Curr Pharm Des. 2008;14(30):3280-94. doi: 10.2174/138161208786404173.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs as anti-amyloidogenic compounds.

Hirohata M(1), Ono K, Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, Kanazawa 920-8640, Japan.

Amyloidosis is a clinical disorder caused by deposition of proteins that 
abnormally self-assemble into insoluble fibrils and impair organ function. More 
than 20 unrelated precursor proteins lose their native structure and misfold, 
leading to the formation of amyloid fibrils. The latter share cross-beta core 
structure in vivo and in vitro and gain abnormal functions. Local amyloid 
deposition occurs in the central nervous system in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
cerebral amyloid angiopathy. AD is the most common form of neurodegenerative 
disorder, with dementia in the elderly as well as dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB). Extracellular deposition of amyloid beta-peptide (Abeta) has been 
implicated as a critical step in the pathogenesis of AD. Involvement of 
neuroinflammation and microglial activation has been emphasized in the AD brain. 
Recent epidemiological studies have shown that long-term therapeutic use of 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) reduces the risk of developing AD 
and delayed the onset of AD. We review epidemiological studies of anti-AD 
effects of NSAIDs, experimental studies of anti-amyloidogenic as well as 
anti-inflammatory effects of NSAIDs, and recent clinical trials for AD with 
NSAIDs. We refer to the anti-fibrillogenic and fibril-destabilizing activities 
of NSAIDs for other proteins that can aggregate and form amyloid-like fibrils, 
including alpha-synuclein in DLB. The anti-amyloidogenic properties of some 
NSAIDs provide new insights for future therapeutic and preventative 
opportunities for AD and other amyloidoses, and protein-misfolding disorders.

DOI: 10.2174/138161208786404173
PMID: 19075706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1993. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2009 Mar;165(3):223-31. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2008.10.019. 
Epub 2008 Dec 10.

[Alzheimer disease: autosomal dominant forms].

[Article in French]

Guyant-Mar√©chal L(1), Campion D, Hannequin D.

Author information:
(1)Service de neurologie, CHU de Rouen, 1, rue de Germont, 76031 Rouen cedex, 
France. lucie.guyant-marechal@chu-rouen.fr

We propose a review devoted to the autosomal dominant forms of Alzheimer disease 
(AD). These forms are the consequences of either PSEN1 mutations (69%), APP 
mutations (1%), or APP duplication (7.5%), and exceptionally of PSEN2 mutations 
(2%). The main characteristic of these AD forms is the early age of onset 
usually before the age of 60 years. The first part of the review focuses on the 
identification of unusual clinical and neuropathological phenotypes enlarging 
the AD spectrum: intracerebral hemorrhages caused by severe amyloid angiopathy, 
spastic paraparesis, Lewy body dementia and exceptional cerebellar ataxia. The 
second part concerns the consequences of these mutations on A beta processing, 
thus demonstrating the key role of the causal "amyloid cascade".

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2008.10.019
PMID: 19081588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1994. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2009 Sep-Oct;49(2):e101-e104. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2008.10.001. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

Clinical findings, functional abilities and caregiver distress in the early 
stage of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD).

Ricci M(1), Guidoni SV(2), Sepe-Monti M(2), Bomboi G(2), Antonini G(2), Blundo 
C(3), Giubilei F(4).

Author information:
(1)Regina Apostolorum Hospital, Albano Laziale, Italy.
(2)Department of Neurological Science, II Faculty of Medicine, "Sapienza" 
University of Rome, Via di Grottarossa 1035, I-00189, Rome, Italy.
(3)Section of Neurology, San Camillo Hospital, Rome, Italy.
(4)Department of Neurological Science, II Faculty of Medicine, "Sapienza" 
University of Rome, Via di Grottarossa 1035, I-00189, Rome, Italy. Electronic 
address: franco.giubilei@uniroma1.it.

Few studies have compared neuropsychiatric disorders and functional abilities in 
the early stage of DLB and AD and their influence on caregiver distress. The aim 
of this study is to assess neuropsychiatric disorders, functional abilities and 
caregiver distress in DLB and in AD subjects. Sixteen subjects affected by 
probable DLB and 12 subjects affected by probable AD were enrolled. All subjects 
underwent a wide neuropsychological examination. Caregiver's distress was also 
assessed. Subjects affected by DLB performed better in long-term memory tests, 
whereas AD subjects performed better in attentive and executive function tests. 
The Neuropsychiatric Inventory (NPI) total score was significantly higher in DLB 
subjects than in AD subjects. Furthermore, DLB subjects scored worse than AD 
subjects in both Activities of Daily Living scale (ADL) and Instrumental 
Activities of Daily Living scale (IADL) scales. Overall caregiver distress was 
higher in DLB than in AD subjects. High distress was observed in DLB caregivers 
alone and was caused by delusion, hallucinations, anxiety and apathy. DLB 
subjects have a different neuropsychological profile, more psychiatric symptoms 
and more serious functional deficits than AD subjects in the early cognitive 
decline, furthermore DLB caregivers are more stressed than AD caregivers.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2008.10.001
PMID: 19084284 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1995. Expert Rev Neurother. 2008 Dec;8(12):1865-77. doi: 10.1586/14737175.8.12.1865.

Commonalities in the genetics of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

Gr√ºnblatt E(1).

Author information:
(1)University of W√ºrzburg, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry, Psychosomatic 
and Psychotherapy, Neurochemistry Laboratory, F√ºchsleinstr. 15, D-97080 
W√ºrzburg, Germany. gruenblatt_e@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are neurodegenerative 
diseases that have a tremendous impact on the lives of affected individuals. 
There is a great probability of developing concurrent parkinsonism in AD and 
vice versa than would be predicted by independent prevalence of each disease. 
Both diseases have genetic familial forms with a prevalence of less than 5-10%, 
but the majority of the cases are sporadic. Several hypotheses exist regarding 
the etiology of these diseases, such as oxidative stress, inflammatory 
processes, ubiquitin-proteasome system dysfunction, energy deficits, cell cycle 
deficiencies and glutamate exitotoxicities. Since diagnosis occurs in late-stage 
disease after neuronal loss, it decreases the opportunity for 
neuroprotective/neurorestorative therapies. Therefore, early and specific 
diagnosis is required as well as new therapy approaches for the growing burden 
of AD and PD.

DOI: 10.1586/14737175.8.12.1865
PMID: 19086884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1996. Sleep. 2008 Dec;31(12):1627. doi: 10.1093/sleep/31.12.1627.

Subclinical REM sleep behavior disorder and its clinical and research 
implications.

Schenck CH, Mahowald MW.

Comment on
    Sleep. 2008 May;31(5):717-23.

DOI: 10.1093/sleep/31.12.1627
PMCID: PMC2603484
PMID: 19090317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1997. Womens Health (Lond). 2009 Jan;5(1):39-48. doi: 10.2217/17455057.5.1.39.

Long-term effects of bilateral oophorectomy on brain aging: unanswered questions 
from the Mayo Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging.

Rocca WA(1), Shuster LT, Grossardt BR, Maraganore DM, Gostout BS, Geda YE, 
Melton LJ 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo 
Clinic, 200 First Street SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. rocca@mayo.edu

In the Mayo Clinic Cohort Study of Oophorectomy and Aging, women who had both 
ovaries removed before reaching natural menopause experienced a long-term 
increased risk of parkinsonism, cognitive impairment or dementia, and depressive 
and anxiety symptoms. Here, we discuss five possible mechanistic interpretations 
of the observed associations; first, the associations may be non-causal because 
they result from the confounding effect of genetic variants or of other risk 
factors; second, the associations may be mediated by an abrupt reduction in 
levels of circulating estrogen; third, the associations may be mediated by an 
abrupt reduction in levels of circulating progesterone or testosterone; fourth, 
the associations may be mediated by an increased release of gonadotropins by the 
pituitary gland; and fifth, genetic variants may modify the hormonal effects of 
bilateral oophorectomy through simple or more complex interactions. Results from 
other studies are cited as evidence for or against each possible mechanism. 
These putative causal mechanisms are probably intertwined, and their 
clarification is a research priority.

DOI: 10.2217/17455057.5.1.39
PMCID: PMC2716666
PMID: 19102639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no conflicts of interest to 
disclose.


1998. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2009 Jan;68(1):73-82. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181927577.

Early-onset familial lewy body dementia with extensive tauopathy: a clinical, 
genetic, and neuropathological study.

Clarim√≥n J(1), Molina-Porcel L, G√≥mez-Isla T, Blesa R, Guardia-Laguarta C, 
Gonz√°lez-Neira A, Estorch M, Ma Grau J, Barraquer L, Roig C, Ferrer I, Lle√≥ A.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Spain.

We describe a Spanish family in which 3 of 4 siblings had dementia with Lewy 
bodies, 2 of them starting at age 26 years and the other at 29 years. The father 
has recently been diagnosed with Lewy body disease, with onset at 77 years. 
Neuropathological examination of the brain of the index patient disclosed 
unusual features characterized by diffuse Lewy body disease and generalized 
neurofibrillary tangle pathology but with no amyloid deposits in any region. 
Moreover, Lewy body pathology colocalized with neurofibrillary tangles in most 
affected neurons. Mutation screening that included all coding exons of 
presenilin 1 (PSEN1), presenilin 2 (PSEN2), alpha-synuclein (SNCA), 
beta-synuclein (SNCB), microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), leucine-rich 
repeat kinase 2 (LRRK2), glucocerebrosidase (GBA), and exons 16 and 17 of the 
amyloid precursor protein (APP) genes did not identify any mutation. Genome-wide 
single nucleotide polymorphism was performed in 4 family members and ruled out 
any pathogenic duplication or deletion in the entire genome. In summary, we 
report a unique family with pathologically confirmed early-onset dementia with 
Lewy bodies with widespread tau and alpha-synuclein deposition. The absence of 
mutations in genes known to cause Lewy body disease suggests that a novel locus 
or loci are implicated in this neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181927577
PMID: 19104444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1999. Neurology. 2009 Apr 14;72(15):1296-300. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000340980.19702.6e. 
Epub 2008 Dec 24.

Quantifying the risk of neurodegenerative disease in idiopathic REM sleep 
behavior disorder.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Vendette M, Fantini ML, Massicotte-Marquez J, 
Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, L7-305 Montreal General Hospital, 1650 Cedar Ave., 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ronald.postuma@mcgill.ca

Comment in
    Neurology. 2009 Apr 14;72(15):1294-5.

OBJECTIVE: Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a potential 
preclinical marker for the development of neurodegenerative diseases, 
particularly Parkinson disease (PD) and Lewy body dementia. However, the 
long-term risk of developing neurodegeneration in patients with idiopathic RBD 
has not been established. Obtaining an accurate picture of this risk is 
essential for counseling patients and for development of potential 
neuroprotective therapies.
METHODS: We conducted a follow-up study of all patients seen at the sleep 
disorders laboratory at the H√¥pital du Sacr√© Coeur with a diagnosis of 
idiopathic RBD. Diagnoses of parkinsonism and dementia were defined according to 
standard criteria. Survival curves were constructed to estimate the 5-, 10-, and 
12-year risk of developing neurodegenerative disease.
RESULTS: Of 113 patients, 93 (82%) met inclusion criteria. The mean age of 
participants was 65.4 years and 75 patients (80.4%) were men. Over the follow-up 
period, 26/93 patients developed a neurodegenerative disorder. A total of 14 
patients developed PD, 7 developed Lewy body dementia, 4 developed dementia that 
met clinical criteria for AD, and 1 developed multiple system atrophy. The 
estimated 5-year risk of neurodegenerative disease was 17.7%, the 10-year risk 
was 40.6%, and the 12-year risk was 52.4%.
CONCLUSIONS: Although we have found a slightly lower risk than other reports, 
the risk of developing neurodegenerative disease in idiopathic REM sleep 
behavior disorder is substantial, with the majority of patients developing 
Parkinson disease and Lewy body dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000340980.19702.6e
PMCID: PMC2828948
PMID: 19109537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2000. Neurotherapeutics. 2009 Jan;6(1):128-40. doi: 10.1016/j.nurt.2008.10.033.

Biomarkers for evaluation of clinical efficacy of multipotential neuroprotective 
drugs for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Halperin I(1), Morelli M, Korczyn AD, Youdim MB, Mandel SA.

Author information:
(1)Tel-Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Department of Neurology, Memory Clinic, 
Tel-Aviv 64239, Israel.

During the last century, the world population has shown a staggering increase in 
its proportion of elderly members and thus neurodegenerative diseases like 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), respectively, are 
becoming an increasing burden on society. Among the diverse, significant 
challenges facing clinicians, is the improvement of diagnostic measures to 
detect early and subtle symptoms, a phase in which prevention efforts might be 
expected to have their greatest impact and provide a measure of disease 
progression that can be evaluated during the course of drug treatment. At 
present, clinical diagnosis of AD and PD is based on a constellation of symptoms 
and manifestations, although the disease originated several years earlier. Given 
the multiple etiological nature of AD and PD, it is reasonable to assume that 
the initial causative pathobiological processes may differ between the affected 
individuals. Therefore, the availability of biological markers or biomarkers 
will help not only early disease diagnosis, but also delineate the pathological 
mechanisms more definitively and reliably than the traditional cognitive and 
neurological phenotypes. In the current article, we review the literature on 
biochemical, genetic, and neuroimaging biomarkers and discuss their predictive 
value as indicative for disease vulnerability to detect individuals at risk for 
PD and AD, and to determine the clinical efficacy of novel, disease-modifying 
(neuroprotective) strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nurt.2008.10.033
PMCID: PMC5084261
PMID: 19110204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]