101. Ann Neurol. 1989 Jun;25(6):602-6. doi: 10.1002/ana.410250612.

Parkinsonism and neurofibrillary tangle pathology in pigmented nuclei.

Rajput AH(1), Uitti RJ, Sudhakar S, Rozdilsky B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, University of Saskatchewan, 
Saskatoon, Canada.

Four parkinsonian patients had neurofibrillary tangles, neuronal loss, and 
gliosis restricted to the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus. No Lewy body 
inclusions or other neuropathological changes accounting for parkinsonism were 
found in any of these patients. Their clinical features were characterized by an 
early age of onset, absence of dementia, absence of other neurological 
abnormalities, good response to drug therapy, and a long, slowly progressive 
course of illness. None of the patients had any history of encephalitis. These 
patients either represent a forme fruste of postencephalitic parkinsonism or a 
new entity thus far not described.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410250612
PMID: 2662896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Int J Neurosci. 1989 Oct;48(3-4):205-17. doi: 10.3109/00207458909002162.

The neuropsychology of de novo patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease: the 
effects of age of onset.

Reid WG(1), Broe GA, Hely MA, Morris JG, Williamson PM, O'Sullivan DJ, Rail D, 
Genge S, Moss NG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal North Shore Hospital, Sydney, Australia.

Comment in
    Int J Neurosci. 1990 Jun;52(3-4):243-7.

One hundred de novo patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) were classified into 
two groups according to age of onset of symptoms. Seventy two patients were 
under 70 years and 28 were 70 years and over. All patients were given 
neurological and neuropsychological assessments, and the severity of the signs 
was rated on a modified Columbia scale. The neuropsychological assessment was 
also administered to 50 age-and-education-matched controls. The 
neuropsychological test battery included tests of verbal learning, visual 
memory, verbal fluency, visuospatial skill, simple and choice reaction time, 
language and maze learning. The late-onset patients had significant impairment 
in nonverbal reasoning, auditory verbal learning, visual memory and choice 
reaction time in contrast to early-onset patients and controls. A relationship 
was found between bradykinesia and widespread cognitive impairment. Severity of 
tremor was found to be significantly correlated with impairment in auditory 
verbal learning, visual memory and increased choice reaction time, while 
rigidity was found to be associated with cognitive impairment in verbal fluency 
and visuospatial skill. Using DSM II criteria, 39% of the late-onset and 8% of 
the early-onset group were classified as demented. Dementia was more common in 
patients with bilateral symmetrical disease and in those patients with marked 
tremor and bradykinesia. The pattern of cognitive impairment in PD was 
consistent with that associated with a subcortical dementia. This study confirms 
that the expression of PD is markedly influenced by the age of onset.

DOI: 10.3109/00207458909002162
PMID: 2583935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1989 Oct;29(10):1256-60.

[The significance of measurement of contents of serum serine protease inhibitors 
in senile dementia of the Alzheimer type].

[Article in Japanese]

Amari M, Matsubara E, Ishiguro K, Shoji M, Hirai S.

We have evaluated serum alpha 1-antichymotrypsin content in dementia of the 
Alzheimer type (DAT). The subjects consisted of 26 patients with DAT, 15 with 
cerebrovascular dementia, 10 with mixed type dementia, 2 with Down syndrome, 17 
with Parkinson disease, 14 with spinocerebellar degeneration, 14 with 
cerebrovascular disease without dementia, 12 with Duchenne muscular dystrophy 
and 77 normal controls. DAT group showed statistically significant increase of 
serum alpha 1-antichymotrypsin content, as compared with normal control group (p 
less than 0.001), mixed type dementia group (p less than 0.05) and other 6 
groups (p less than 0.001). However, the levels of both alpha 1-antitrypsin 
content and inter-alpha-trypsin inhibitor content, included in serine protease 
inhibitors, were not significantly different between DAT and normal control 
groups. These findings indicated that measurement of serum alpha 
1-antichymotrypsin is useful as the diagnostic marker of DAT.

PMID: 2605832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Brain Lang. 1989 Nov;37(4):628-42. doi: 10.1016/0093-934x(89)90116-8.

Neurolinguistic features of spontaneous language production dissociate three 
forms of neurodegenerative disease: Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's.

Illes J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hearing and Speech Sciences, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, CA.

An analysis of the temporal (prospective) form (silent and filled hesitations, 
repetitions, incomplete phrases, context-related comments, interjections), 
syntactic form, and lexical (retrospective) form (verbal deviations, open and 
closed class phrases) of spontaneous language production of early and middle 
stage Alzheimer's, Huntington's, and Parkinson's patients was made. Results 
showed that the language structure was disrupted in each disease, but in 
different ways. Temporal interruptions of varying types were frequent in the 
language of Alzheimer's and Huntington's Disease patients; only long-duration 
silent hesitations were frequent in Parkinson's language samples. Syntactic 
complexity was reduced in Huntington's Disease. Verbal paraphasias were found in 
both the language of Alzheimer's patients, as well as moderately advanced 
Huntington's patients. Closed class phrases were predominant in the language of 
Alzheimer's patients and Huntington's patients, and open class phrases in the 
language of Parkinson's patients. Taken together, the results suggest that (1) 
there is a unique neurolinguistic profile for spontaneous language production 
for each neurodegenerative disease, (2) pathology of the neostriatum disrupts 
syntactic organization, (3) adaptive strategies are used to cope with verbal and 
speech-motor difficulties, and (4) adaptive strategies fail to be effective with 
increasing disease severity.

DOI: 10.1016/0093-934x(89)90116-8
PMID: 2479447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Acta Neurol Scand. 1989 Nov;80(5):444-50. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1989.tb03907.x.

Determination of urine thiocyanate in patients with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

Yoshida Y(1), Hamada R, Kamitsuchibashi H, Yamamoto K, Nakagawa M, Izumo S, 
Higuchi I, Soejima Y, Osame M, Igata A.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima 
University, Japan.

It has been reported that amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-Parkinsonism-dementia in 
Guam might be related to the eating of Cycas seeds, which contain cyanide. Based 
on this assumption, we determined the urinary thiocyanate excretion level in 
patients with ALS and compared this with that of other neurological diseases. 
The assay method was designed to use column chromatography with Amberlite IRA 
402. The thiocyanate level was determined using pyridine-barbiturate method. The 
24-h thiocyanate level was higher in the ALS patients of the middle stages than 
in the normal control group (Wilcoxon's test, P less than 0.02). There were no 
significant differences between the ALS patient groups of the early and terminal 
stages, Kugelberg-Welander disease group, Duchenne type muscular dystrophy group 
and control group. From these results, we concluded that ALS patients were 
contaminated with cyanide or thiocyanate and that, along with rapid muscular 
atrophy, the thiocyanate excretion levels were high.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1989.tb03907.x
PMID: 2589012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Neurology. 1989 Nov;39(11):1446-52. doi: 10.1212/wnl.39.11.1446.

Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease. I. Extending the clinical spectrum.

Farlow MR(1), Yee RD, Dlouhy SR, Conneally PM, Azzarelli B, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis 
46202-5124.

We present the clinical findings in affected members of a large kindred with 
Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease. Sixty-four patients exhibited 
progressive ataxia, dementia, and parkinsonian features. Inheritance appears to 
be autosomal dominant. Impaired smooth-pursuit eye movements, defective 
short-term memory, clumsiness of the hands, and ataxia of gait develop in the 
late 30s to early 60s. Eye movement abnormalities are characteristic of 
cerebellar dysfunction. Dementia progresses gradually over several years. Later, 
rigidity and bradykinesia appear and, at this stage, there is often psychosis or 
severe depression with rapid weight loss. Death occurs in 6 months to 2 years 
after onset of rigidity. Magnetic resonance imaging in 2 affected individuals 
showed cerebellar atrophy. There is decreased T2 signal in the basal ganglia, 
consistent with iron deposition.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.39.11.1446
PMID: 2812321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Neurology. 1989 Dec;39(12):1589-92. doi: 10.1212/wnl.39.12.1589.

History of dementia and Parkinson's disease in 1st-degree relatives of patients 
with Alzheimer's disease.

Hofman A(1), Schulte W, Tanja TA, van Duijn CM, Haaxma R, Lameris AJ, Otten VM, 
Saan RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical School, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

We assessed the family history of dementia and Parkinson's disease in 198 Dutch 
patients with Alzheimer's disease diagnosed before the age of 70 years, and in 
198 age- and sex-matched healthy population controls. Of the Alzheimer patients, 
48% had at least 1 1st-degree relative with dementia, compared with 19% of the 
controls. There were 24 patients and 1 control with 2 or more 1st-degree 
relatives with dementia, yielding a relative risk of 40.0. More Alzheimer 
patients than controls had a 1st-degree relative with Parkinson's disease, with 
a relative risk of 2.9. This study strongly confirms earlier findings of 
familial aggregation of Alzheimer's disease and provides evidence for familial 
aggregation of Alzheimer's disease with Parkinson's disease. The latter may 
point at a joint etiology of these diseases.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.39.12.1589
PMID: 2586775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


108. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 1989 Dec;11(6):799-820. doi: 10.1080/01688638908400937.

Different cognitive profiles on standard behavioral tests in Parkinson's disease 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Sullivan EV(1), Sagar HJ, Gabrieli JD, Corkin S, Growdon JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Brain and Cognitive Sciences, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) displayed a different pattern of 
cognitive deficit from patients with dementia resulting from Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Specifically, PD patients, whether or not impaired on a mental status 
examination, had deficient Picture Arrangement but normal Vocabulary test scores 
whereas AD patients were impaired on both measures. Furthermore, PD patients 
with impaired mental status examination scores showed a deficit in set formation 
on Picture Arrangement not seen in the AD patients. Finally, when recent memory 
performance, as measured by the Wechsler Memory Scale, was predicted from an 
estimated IQ, 71% of PD patients who had normal mental status examination scores 
were seen to have at least a mild memory impairment.

DOI: 10.1080/01688638908400937
PMID: 2592525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Stereotact Funct Neurosurg. 1990;54-55:250-67. doi: 10.1159/000100220.

Grafts and growth factors in CNS. Basic science with clinical promise.

Olson L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology and Neurobiology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.

In 1979, we presented the first evidence that grafts of fetal brain tissue to 
the adult central nervous system could counteract an experimentally induced 
neurological deficit. Using the unilaterally dopamine-denervated rat model of 
Parkinson's disease, it was first shown that fetal substantia nigra grafts were 
effective and, later, that adult adrenal medullary chromaffin tissue might be 
used as a possible substitute for fetal brain tissue. These observations led to 
the first clinical trials with chromaffin autografting in severe cases of 
Parkinson's disease, which were initiated at the Karolinska Hospital in 1982, 
and several years later to clinical trials with grafts of fetal dopamine 
neuroblasts obtained after early elective abortions. In parallel with the 
ongoing intense basic research aimed at optimizing grafting procedures and 
finding new possible clinical applications, there are now worldwide clinical 
trials of grafting procedures involving a large number of neurosurgical centers 
and a large number of patients. Here, I shall review our recent studies of 
grafts and growth factors as they relate to possible new therapeutic principles 
applicable not only to Parkinson's disease, but also to Alzheimer's senile 
dementia and possibly to spinal cord injury and other afflictions. Recent 
evidence suggests that cholinergic neurons in the brain, known to degenerate in 
Alzheimer's disease, depend on nerve growth factor. In one approach we have 
grafted genetically modified cell lines, designed to secrete large amounts of 
nerve growth factor, and demonstrated that they can rescue lesioned cholinergic 
neurons that would otherwise die. Nerve growth factor can also serve to enhance 
survival of, and promote fiber formation by, chromaffin grafts in experimental 
parkinsonism. Interestingly, a series of other growth factors, such as IGF-1, 
bFGF, aFGF, BDNF, TGF's, as well as their receptors, are now being cloned and in 
several cases shown to have interesting temporal and regional distributions as 
well as effects in the central nervous system. Our own studies using intraocular 
grafts suggest potent effects on fetal brain tissue growth of truncated IGF-1, 
bFGF, and aFGF. It thus appears as if neurosurgery is on the verge of entering a 
new era in which repair in the adult brain and spinal cord, once thought 
impossible in mammals, will become possible using growth factors and grafts.

DOI: 10.1159/000100220
PMID: 2080339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Eur Neurol. 1990;30(4):189-93. doi: 10.1159/000117343.

Auditory event-related potentials in different types of dementia.

Filipović S(1), Kostić VS, Sternić N, Marinković Z, Ocić G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, Belgrade, Yugoslavia.

Auditory event-related potentials were recorded in demented, drug-free patients 
with Huntington's disease and Alzheimer's disease, as well as in demented and 
nondemented patients with Parkinson's disease, who were matched for age, 
duration and stage of the disease. The normal P3 latency at a given age was 
predicted by using an age regression equation that had been calculated on the 
basis of the findings in 42 normal adults. Using this procedure, a prolonged P3 
latency was found in about two thirds of demented patients, irrespectively of 
the underlying disease. Although the prolonged P3 latency proved to be useful 
electrophysiological correlate of dementing illness, no differences were found 
between the observed groups in respect to other components of the auditory 
event-related potentials (N1 and P2).

DOI: 10.1159/000117343
PMID: 2145161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1990 Fall;4(3):150-60. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199040300-00003.

Subcognitive processing in the frontocaudate "complex loop": the role of the 
striatum.

Taylor AE(1), Saint-Cyr JA, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Toronto Western Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Anatomical connections between the frontal lobes and basal ganglia have long 
suggested joint participation in behavioural operations. Early experiments with 
nonhuman primates and patients are reviewed, followed by current research 
investigating the specific cognitive routines at risk in Parkinson disease. An 
hypothesis regarding the functional contribution of the basal ganglia to the 
frontostriate system is offered. The basal ganglia are considered to set limits 
on the context within which mental and motor events occur. It is argued that the 
nature of such processing is subcognitive.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199040300-00003
PMID: 2223020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Adv Neurol. 1990;53:343-7.

Risk factors for dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Salganik I(1), Korczyn A.

Author information:
(1)Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Ramat Aviv, Israel.

PMID: 2239475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Adv Neurol. 1990;53:355-60.

Parkinson's disease, motoneuron disease and Alzheimer's disease: origins and 
interrelationship.

Calne DB(1), Eisen A.

Author information:
(1)Belzberg Laboratory of Clinical Neuroscience, Department of Medicine, 
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The cause of neurodegenerative disease is considered. For Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, and motoneuron disease, accumulating evidence over the last 
3 years indicates that (a) the usual etiological mechanisms involve a 
subclinical lesion which kills some neurons and reduces the life expectation of 
their surviving neighbors, and (b) there may be more than one cause for each of 
the idiopathic syndromes now termed AD, PD, and MND.

PMID: 2239477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Neuropsychologia. 1990;28(11):1197-213. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(90)90055-s.

Sparing of attentional relative to mnemonic function in a subgroup of patients 
with dementia of the Alzheimer type.

Sahakian BJ(1), Downes JJ, Eagger S, Evenden JL, Levy R, Philpot MP, Roberts AC, 
Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)Section of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, Denmark Hill, London.

Patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT) received two tests of visual 
selective attention, together with tests of spatial and visual recognition 
memory and visuospatial conditional learning previously used to show deficits 
early in the course of DAT. One set of attentional tests compared visual 
discrimination learning along intra- and extra-dimensional shifts, using a 
"total change" design. In the 12 DAT patients capable of attempting the 
extra-dimensional shift (subgroup 1), performance was equivalent to that of 
controls. This subgroup was also unimpaired at simple and compound 
discrimination learning and reversal and an intra-dimensional shift. They were 
as accurate as controls on a visual search task requiring matching of stimuli on 
two dimensions with variable numbers of alternatives, but were significantly 
impaired in the tests of recognition memory and learning. By contrast, the other 
13 patients showed marked impairments in the attentional tasks. This subgroup 
was also significantly worse than subgroup 1 in performance on the visual 
recognition and conditional learning tasks, and showed greater severity on most 
of the clinical ratings of dementia. The sparing of attentional shifting in 
patients early in the course of DAT is contrasted with the impairments 
previously described in patients with Parkinson's disease with only mild or 
absent memory loss. The implications of this double dissociation of deficits for 
understanding the neural bases of the cognitive deficits in these two 
neurodegenerative diseases are discussed and their significance for the staging 
of DAT is considered.

DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(90)90055-s
PMID: 2290494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Neurology. 1990 Jan;40(1):38-41. doi: 10.1212/wnl.40.1.38.

Age-induced cognitive disturbances in Parkinson's disease.

Dubois B(1), Pillon B, Sternic N, Lhermitte F, Agid Y.

Author information:
(1)Clinique de Neurologie et Neuropsychologie, Paris, France.

We investigated the influence of age on the occurrence of cognitive disturbances 
in Parkinson's disease (PD), by evaluating neuropsychological performances in 
early- and late-onset groups of patients (less than 45 and greater than 65 
years, respectively), individually paired for all the variables of parkinsonism 
and compared with age-matched controls. Cognitive disorders were limited in the 
early-onset PD group compared with their age-matched controls. Conversely, we 
found global cognitive changes, including marked frontal lobe dysfunction, in 
the late-onset group. This specific cognitive impairment in older patients 
related to a significant interaction between the aging and disease processes. 
Late onset seemed to compound the subtle cognitive changes associated with the 
disease for which the early-onset group compensated. This compounding effect of 
aging may explain, at least partially, the high frequency of dementia in older 
PD patients.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.40.1.38
PMID: 2296380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mov Disord. 1990;5(2):156-61. doi: 10.1002/mds.870050212.

A pilot study of risk factors for dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Marder K(1), Flood P, Cote L, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY 10032.

To determine whether the risk factors for dementia in idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (IPD) are similar to the risk factors for Alzheimer's disease, we 
conducted a case-control study of potential risk factors. A structured interview 
was administered to surrogates of 17 demented subjects with IPD and 54 
nondemented subjects. Two factors emerged as possible risks for dementia. 
Demented patients were older than nondemented patients, although the duration of 
symptoms was similar. A family history of dementia was present in 30% of the 
demented group and 5.6% of the nondemented group. Dementia was most often 
reported among siblings. No difference was seen in toxic and occupational 
exposure, personal habits, or medical or surgical illnesses. We conclude that 
dementia in IPD shares some common risk factors with Alzheimer's disease. 
Efforts to assess the contribution of genetic susceptibility or shared 
environmental influences may clarify the relationship between these two 
diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870050212
PMID: 2325678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Environ Geochem Health. 1990 Mar;12(1-2):137-51. doi: 10.1007/BF01734063.

Models of environmentally induced neurological disease: epidemiology and 
etiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia in the 
Western Pacific.

Garruto RM(1), Yanagihara R, Gajdusek DC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Central Nervous System Studies, National Institutes of Health, 
20892, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) on Guam previously attained incidence rates 
50 to 100 times that of the continental United States and Europe and accounted 
for one in five deaths among Chamorros over age 25. A second neurological 
disorder in high incidence, parkinsonism-dementia (PD), and the early appearance 
in those populations of neurofibrillary tangles such as are seen in Alzheimer's 
disease and normal ageing have also been noted. Incidence and mortality rates of 
both diseases have declined dramatically during the past 30 years, and today, 
the risk of developing either disease among Guamanian Chamorros is only several 
times higher than in non-Guamanian populations. The decline is most likely a 
consequence of increased acculturation over the past three decades, with a 
concomitant decrease in isolation, changes in dietary habits and local water 
supplies, and much less dependence on locally grown foodstuffs. Similar declines 
are evident in the remaining two Pacific foci of high- incidence ALS, namely the 
Kii Peninsula focus in Japan and southern West New Guinea where western contact 
and introduction of new foodstuffs have occurred.The accumulating 
epidemiological, genetic and environmental evidence, as well as the development 
of new and promising experimental animal models, support the hypothesis that a 
basic metabolic defect, provoked by chronic nutritional deficiencies of calcium, 
lead to increased intestinal absorption of toxic metals and the co-deposition of 
calcium, aluminium and silicon in neurons of patients with ALS and PD. This 
elemental deposition is thought to result in aberrant microtubule assembly 
and/or abnormal post-translational modification of the amyloid precursor protein 
leading to widespread formation of neurofibrillary tangles, the hallmark 
pathological features in these disorders. The naturalistic paradigms of these 
foci in the Western Pacific have provided insights to understanding not only ALS 
and PD but other neurological disorders, such as classical ALS, Parkinson's 
disease, Alzheimer's disease and early neuronal ageing.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01734063
PMID: 24202580


118. Environ Geochem Health. 1990 Mar;12(1-2):152-67. doi: 10.1007/BF01734064.

Geographical associations between aluminium in drinking water and death rates 
with dementia (including Alzheimer's disease), Parkinson's disease and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis in Norway.

Flaten TP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, College of Arts and Science, University of 
Trondheim, N-7055, Dragvoll, Norway.

Comparisons of maps and correlation and regression analysis indicate a 
geographical association between aluminium (Al) in drinking water and registered 
death rates with dementia (coded from death certificates as the underlying or a 
contributory cause of death) in Norway. High levels of Al in drinking water are 
in most cases related to acid precipitation. In general, correlations between 
aggregate environmental measurements and mortality are a weak source of evidence 
for risk factors for disease, however, and interpretations regarding 
cause-and-effect relationships should therefore be made with great care. The 
major uncertainty probably relates to the use of registered death rates with 
dementia as a measure of incidence rates of Alzheimer's disease. The dementia 
rates are correlated with population density, and it is possible that the 
association between AI and dementia might be due to differences in diagnosis and 
reporting of dementia. Thus, the present study can only be regarded as 
introductory, and further epidemiological studies are needed to help elucidate 
the role of AI in Alzheimer's disease. The results provide little evidence of an 
association between AI in drinking water and Parkinson's disease or amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01734064
PMID: 24202581


119. Neurosci Lett. 1990 Mar 2;110(1-2):216-20. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(90)90814-p.

Plasma cysteine and sulphate levels in patients with motor neurone, Parkinson's 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Heafield MT(1), Fearn S, Steventon GB, Waring RH, Williams AC, Sturman SG.

Author information:
(1)School of Biochemistry, University of Birmingham, U.K.

Elevated plasma cysteine to sulphate ratios were found in patients with Motor 
neurone disease (MND), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Cysteine and sulphate were measured by colourimetric methods. Following recent 
discovery of a defect in sulphoxidation and sulphation of xenobiotics in these 
diseases, this finding confirms that endogenous sulphur metabolism is disturbed. 
The mean cysteine:sulphate ratios (x 10(3] in fasting early morning plasma were 
506, 521 and 477 for MND, PD and AD whereas it was 96 for normal controls (P 
less than 0.001). This excess of cysteine thiol groups may interfere with neural 
protein function. The deficiency of sulphate ions may lead to reduced xenobiotic 
detoxification.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(90)90814-p
PMID: 2325885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Neurophysiol Clin. 1990 May;20(2):131-6. doi: 10.1016/s0987-7053(05)80367-3.

Cardiac autonomic dysfunction during sleep in some neurological diseases.

Smirne S(1), Ferini Strambi L, Zucconi M, Pinto P, Franceschi M.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, University of Milan, Italy.

The most widely used tests for the investigation of the autonomic nervous system 
(ANS) functioning measure the heart rate (HR) variations during wakefulness. 
Most tests have some limitations: they require patient collaboration and can be 
modified by his or her emotional status. We studied HR variability in relation 
to body movements during sleep in some neurological diseases. Our method seems 
to be better than the traditional tests in detecting early cardiac ANS damage, 
especially when the patient is non-co-operative for ANS evaluation during 
wakefulness after various stimuli.

DOI: 10.1016/s0987-7053(05)80367-3
PMID: 2377155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cortex. 1990 Jun;26(2):239-46. doi: 10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80353-x.

Distractibility in early Parkinson's disease.

Sharpe MH(1).

Author information:
(1)South Australian Institute of Technology, Adelaide.

Post-mortem evidence has shown a depletion of dopamine in the mesocortical and 
mesolimbic pathways in brains of Parkinson patients. Since these dopaminergic 
pathways have been implicated in the control of attention in animals, selective 
attention to visual stimuli was studied in eight patients with early Parkinson's 
disease (Stage I or II as defined by the Hoehn and Yahr Scale) and eight normal 
controls of comparable age, sex and Full Scale Intelligence Quotient. Subjects 
with dementia, psychiatric disease and other neurological abnormalities were 
excluded. The Parkinson patients were more prone to interference in the presence 
of distractor items than the normal controls as shown on the focussing + 
distraction and switching + distraction of attention paradigms on the Distractor 
task. There findings are not accounted for by mood, intellectual status or 
memory and thus may be as a result of the loss of dopamine in the 
mesocortico-limbic projections.

DOI: 10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80353-x
PMID: 2387158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Ital J Neurol Sci. 1990 Aug;11(4):373-9. doi: 10.1007/BF02335940.

Hallucinations in Parkinson disease: neuropsychological study.

Meco G(1), Bonifati V, Cusimano G, Fabrizio E, Vanacore N.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Università La Sapienza, Roma.

Hallucinations occur fairly frequently in the course of the pharmacological 
treatment of Parkinson disease. Our aim in this study was to assess first the 
relation between hallucinations and mental deterioration and second the 
correlation between the perception disorder and the profile on the Minnesota 
Multiphasic Personality Inventory (MMPI). Of 304 parkinsonian subjects followed 
as outpatients at our center 27 (8.88%) had had hallucinations and 17 of these 
presented marked cognitive deficits (Mini Mental State less than 18) (62.9%) 
compared with 32 of the other 277 patients (11.5%) (X2 = 55.16, p less than 
0.0001). A group of 9 patients who had had hallucinations and 10 controls who 
had not, all free from marked cognitive deficits, were assessed on the 
Luria-Nebraska Neuropsychological Battery (LNNB) and on the MMPI. The two groups 
did not differ significantly in respect of the LNNB but did in respect of the 
MMPI scales. On this evidence the frequency of mental deterioration is 
significantly higher in patients who have hallucinated. We discuss the meaning 
of the MMPI differences both from the biochemical angle and from that of 
personality factors. These data suggest that the MMPI might be useful for 
predicting hallucinations in undeteriorated parkinsonian patients on 
pharmacological therapy.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02335940
PMID: 2246120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Neurology. 1990 Aug;40(8):1222-4. doi: 10.1212/wnl.40.8.1222.

Clinical features predicting dementia in idiopathic Parkinson's disease: a 
follow-up study.

Ebmeier KP(1), Calder SA, Crawford JR, Stewart L, Besson JA, Mutch WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Health, University of Aberdeen, Scotland.

We followed up, after 3 1/2 years, a whole population cohort of 249 patients 
with Parkinson's disease (PD) 1st examined in 1983 to 1984. Of the survivors, 
23.6% qualified for a DSM III-R diagnosis of dementia. In univariate tests, age, 
certain items of the Webster scale, the Hoehn and Yahr scale, a 10-question 
mental status questionnaire, and a history of smoking were associated with a 
diagnosis of dementia 3 1/2 years later. Logistic regression with DSM III-R 
diagnosis (demented versus nondemented) as the dependent variable, and age and 
symptom scales for PD as predictor variables, revealed that PD symptoms 
predicted dementia even after controlling for age. We conclude that dementia is 
probably more common in PD patients than would be expected in the general 
population and is associated with the severity of PD symptoms and signs 
independently of age.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.40.8.1222
PMID: 2381529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Arch Neurol. 1990 Sep;47(9):1019-24. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1990.00530090097019.

Patterns of acquiring parkinsonism-dementia complex on Guam. 1944 through 1985.

Zhang ZX(1), Anderson DW, Lavine L, Mantel N.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

For 1944 through 1985, documented clinical descriptions compatible with a 
diagnosis of parkinsonism-dementia complex were found in 363 Chamorros 
(including mixed Chamorros) and three Filipino immigrants who had lived on Guam 
before onset. Downward trends in age-adjusted incidence rates and upward trends 
in age at onset were seen for Chamorros of both sexes. Since 1980, new cases 
have occurred only among persons over 50 years of age, whereas a younger age at 
onset had been noted in the past. Evidence suggests that the length of the 
latent period varied widely (up to decades) and increased with time, the risk of 
acquiring parkinsonism-dementia complex had declined since the late 1950s, and 
the critical age of exposure to an unknown factor in the environment on Guam 
appears to have been during adolescence or adulthood.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1990.00530090097019
PMID: 2396931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Ann Neurol. 1990 Oct;28(4):561-7. doi: 10.1002/ana.410280414.

Alpha 1-antichymotrypsin as a possible biochemical marker for Alzheimer-type 
dementia.

Matsubara E(1), Hirai S, Amari M, Shoji M, Yamaguchi H, Okamoto K, Ishiguro K, 
Harigaya Y, Wakabayashi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gunma University School of Medicine, Japan.

We measured serum alpha 1-antichymotrypsin levels in 38 patients with 
Alzheimer-type dementia, 89 control subjects, 2 subjects with Down's syndrome, 
20 with vascular dementia, 18 with Parkinson's disease, 14 with spinocerebellar 
degeneration, 15 with cerebrovascular disease without dementia, and 14 with 
Duchenne muscular dystrophy. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of alpha 
1-antichymotrypsin were also measured in 15 patients with Alzheimer-type 
dementia, 26 control subjects, 6 with vascular dementia, 7 with cerebrovascular 
disorder, and 11 with degenerative disorders. In control subjects, there were no 
age-related changes or sex differences. Serum and CSF levels were significantly 
and specifically higher in patients with Alzheimer-type dementia than in other 
subjects (serum, p less than 0.001; CSF, p less than 0.05). Serum levels of 
alpha 1-antichymotrypsin were significantly elevated in the early stage of 
Alzheimer-type dementia, whereas there was no definite correlation between serum 
levels and the degree of dementia. CSF levels of alpha 1-antichymotrypsin tended 
to parallel the severity of dementia. Serum levels were not correlated with CSF 
levels. These data indicate that serum and CSF levels of alpha 
1-antichymotrypsin might be independently upregulated in Alzheimer-type 
dementia. We concluded that the measurement of serum levels of alpha 
1-antichymotrypsin could be useful as a screening marker for Alzheimer-type 
dementia. In addition, CSF levels also could be a useful marker for 
Alzheimer-type dementia, because they might reflect the state of dementia.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410280414
PMID: 2147546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Neurology. 1990 Oct;40(10):1523-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.40.10.1523.

Antemortem diagnosis of diffuse Lewy body disease.

Crystal HA(1), Dickson DW, Lizardi JE, Davies P, Wolfson LI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461.

Using the presence of widespread cortical Lewy bodies (LB) as the pathologic 
criteria of diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), we describe serial neurologic and 
mental status examinations in 6 patients with DLBD, 3 patients with Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), and 1 patient with Parkinson's disease (PD). The 6 patients with 
DLBD included 3 with neocortical neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) consistent with 
coincident AD. Most patients with DLBD had gait impairment concurrent with mild 
to moderate dementia. Abnormalities of tone or resting tremor were also 
prominent early symptoms in the subjects with DLBD, but not AD. Patients with 
DLBD frequently had abnormal EEGs with background posterior slowing and a 
frontally dominant burst pattern at the time of mild to moderate dementia. 
Agitation, hallucinations, and delusions were frequent early symptoms in DLBD 
patients. Patients with DLBD without concomitant AD had numerous Alz-50 negative 
cortical plaques. Patients with DLBD have a distinct clinical syndrome that can 
be differentiated from AD. Pathologic features, including the absence of Alz-50 
immunoreactivity, also differentiate DLBD from AD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.40.10.1523
PMID: 2170865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Neurology. 1990 Oct;40(10):1513-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.40.10.1513.

An estimate of the incidence of dementia in idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Mayeux R(1), Chen J, Mirabello E, Marder K, Bell K, Dooneief G, Cote L, Stern Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY.

The proportion of patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) who are 
considered demented ranges from 10% to 15%. Because dementia may affect survival 
in PD, the incidence rate of dementia, rather than proportion, would be a more 
accurate measure of disease frequency. We previously estimated the proportion of 
patients with PD and dementia to be 10.9% from the records of a cohort with the 
idiopathic form of PD in a major medical center. We reviewed the clinical 
records of this cohort after 4 years and 9 months to estimate the incidence rate 
of dementia. We identified 65 new cases of dementia from the 249 patient-records 
available. Using the number of person-years of follow-up for each case as the 
denominator, we estimated the overall incidence rate to be 69 per 1,000 
person-years of observation. The mean age of this cohort was 71.4 years. The 
cumulative incidence of dementia increased with age. By 85 years of age, over 
65% of the surviving members of the cohort were demented. The age-specific 
incidence rates for dementia in this cohort of PD were significantly greater 
than for a similarly aged cohort of healthy elderly people. The age-specific 
standard morbidity ratios indicated that, compared with people of similar ages, 
patients with PD have the highest increase in risk for dementia between ages 65 
and 75.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.40.10.1513
PMID: 2215941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Arch Neurol. 1990 Oct;47(10):1069-74. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1990.00530100031010.

Geographic patterns of parkinsonism-dementia complex on Guam. 1956 through 1985.

Zhang ZX(1), Anderson DW, Mantel N.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, Bethesda, Md 20892.

Average annual age-adjusted incidence rates of parkinsonism-dementia complex 
were obtained for the 19 election districts of Guam from 1956 through 1985. The 
highest rates were found in the southern and central districts, and the lowest 
rates were found in the northern and western districts. Geographic and temporal 
patterns of incidence were associated with socioeconomic status but not with 
geochemical factors. The risk of parkinsonism-dementia complex in susceptible 
sibships was much higher than that in the general population--even in districts 
with the highest incidence rates, but especially in districts with the lowest 
incidence rates. Our evidence tends to support the hypothesis that multiple 
factors linked to cycad use play an important role in the cause of PDC. 
Hypotheses related to metal exposure and simple genetic factors were 
unsatisfactory explanations for the epidemiologic patterns observed.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1990.00530100031010
PMID: 2222238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Cortex. 1990 Dec;26(4):515-24. doi: 10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80301-2.

Patients with early Parkinson's disease are not impaired on spatial orientating 
of attention.

Sharpe MH(1).

Author information:
(1)South Australian Institute of Technology.

The shifting of attention to visual stimuli was studied in twenty patients with 
early Parkinson's disease (stage I or II as defined by the Hoehn and Yahr scale) 
and twenty normal controls matched for age, sex and intellectual status. Both 
groups were screened to exclude dementia, psychiatric disease and other 
neurological abnormalities. The speed of shifting attention to visual stimuli 
was measured using the cost and benefit paradigm. The results showed an overall 
increase in response latencies in patients with early Parkinson's disease 
compared to the Control group, but without a concomitant slowness to shift their 
attention toward a visual spatial target. This slowness which appears to reflect 
a delay in the decision-making process, regardless of the demands of the task, 
was independent of motor impairment, mood, intellectual status and Levodopa 
medication. While the Parkinson patients and normal controls showed a 38 msec 
benefit when the target stimulus was expected in a given location, all subjects 
failed to demonstrate a cost when the target stimulus was presented in an 
unexpected location. This may be a reflection of age. Alternatively, subjects 
may have learned to inhibit responses to the invalid cue.

DOI: 10.1016/s0010-9452(13)80301-2
PMID: 2081389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1990 Dec 1;120(48):1791-800.

[The contribution of single-photon emission-computed tomography in cerebral 
function diagnosis].

[Article in German]

Weder B(1), Oettli R, Bekier A.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Kantonsspital St. Gallen.

Single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) makes it possible to 
visualize physiological and chemical processes in the cerebrum. In this 
technique, single photon emitting nuclides such as 99m technetium and 123 
iodine, which are tagged to other compounds, or 133xenon, are used for the study 
of several clinical conditions. After injection of the radiopharmaceutic agent 
the radioactivity is measured by a rotating gamma-camera from numerous 
directions. Based on the measured values, its distribution within the brain can 
be computed and transformed in tomographic slices. We present our experience 
with the method in clinical practice using preferentially 
N-isopropyl-(123I)-p-iodoamphetamine (123I-IMP) and 99mTc 
hydroxymethyl-propylene-amine-oxime (99mTc-HMPAO). These substances are 
distributed in accordance with regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF). Hitherto, 
the application of the method has concentrated on the study of cerebrovascular 
disease and epilepsy. SPECT has contributed to a better understanding of the 
pathophysiological processes and their dynamics after ischemic infarction. The 
method also provides essential insights in epileptics. In partial epilepsy, a 
focus of reduced or enhanced tracer activity can be ascertained, dependent on 
the timing of the examination, in the interictal and ictal stage respectively. 
Even in the early course of senile dementia of Alzheimer type, zones of 
diminished neuronal activity in temporo-parietal and frontal cortex are 
demarcated. Preliminary results in psychiatric diseases and parkinsonism need 
further confirmation. In this connection future interest will focus especially 
upon the use of receptor ligands.

PMID: 2084833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Neurotoxicology. 1991 Fall;12(3):347-77.

Pacific paradigms of environmentally-induced neurological disorders: clinical, 
epidemiological and molecular perspectives.

Garruto RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Central Nervous System Studies, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

During the past quarter century biomedical scientists have begun to recognize 
the unique opportunities for studying disease etiology and mechanisms of 
pathogenesis in non-Western anthropological populations with focal, endemic 
diseases. Such natural experiments as they are called, are important paradigms 
for solving etiological and epidemiological problems of widespread medical 
significance, with an ultimate goal towards treatment and prevention. The 
systematic search for etiological factors and mechanisms of pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative disorders is perhaps nowhere better exemplified than in the 
western Pacific. During the past three decades, the opportunistic and 
multidisciplinary study of hyperendemic foci of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
and parkinsonism-dementia which occur in different cultures, in different 
ecological zones and among genetically divergent populations have served as 
natural models that have had a major impact on our thinking and enhanced our 
understanding of these and other neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer 
disease and the process of early neuronal aging. Our cross-disciplinary approach 
to these intriguing neurobiological problems and the accumulated 
epidemiological, genetic, cellular and molecular evidence strongly implicates 
environmental factors in their causation, specifically the role of aluminum and 
its interaction with calcium in neuronal degeneration. As a direct consequence 
of our studies in these Pacific populations, we have undertaken the long-term 
development of experimental models of neuronal degeneration, in an attempt to 
understand the cellular and molecular mechanisms by which these toxicants affect 
the central nervous system. Our experimental studies have resulted in the 
establishment of an aluminum-induced chronic myelopathy in rabbits and the 
development of neurofilamentous lesions after low-dose aluminum administration 
in cell culture. These studies clearly demonstrate the philosophy that chronic 
rather than acute experimental models of toxicity are necessary in order to 
enhance our understanding of human neurodegenerative disorders with long-latency 
and slow progression. Finally, the ultimate significance of these Pacific 
paradigms may well depend on our ability to comprehensively evaluate and 
synthesize the growing body of relevant scientific data from other human 
disorders and from widely divergent academic fields, as well as our ability to 
recognize emerging new models in nature.

PMID: 1745428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neurotoxicology. 1991 Fall;12(3):403-13.

Animal test systems to study behavioral dysfunctions of neurodegenerative 
disorders.

Anger WK(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health Sciences University, Portland 97201.

The Eighth International Neurotoxicology Conference, Role of Toxicants in 
Neurological Disorders (1990), evaluated the evidence that chemical exposures 
may play a role in the development of neurodegenerative disorders. This article 
describes the major neurodegenerative disorders (Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, 
Huntington disease, Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer disease) addressed at the 
conference, followed by a description of test systems or models developed to 
study behavioral aspects of these disorders in animals. However, due to the 
complexity of the disorders and the species in which they are found, 
fully-developed models in animals of neurodegenerative disorders are lacking. 
This suggests the need for a clear strategy for selecting behavioral tests in 
animals to study aspects of any neurodegenerative disorders. Such a strategy is 
here exemplified for Alzheimer disease (AD) as a prototypical neurodegenerative 
disorder. Since an animal model cannot provide the full range of effects of 
human neurodegenerative diseases, particularly AD which produces incompletely 
characterized cognitive deficits, a rodent model must at this time be drawn from 
multiple sources, including: (1) Tests currently used to identify in rodents 
deficits associated with AD; (2) tests to identify Alzheimer-related signs in 
patients; and, (3) tests that relate to theoretical constructs of human and 
animal cognition. A battery that draws from those sources could include tests 
of: (a) Spatial learning and memory (Morris Water Maze and Radial Arm Maze), (b) 
delayed recall match-to-sample; (c) serial response learning; and, (d) visual 
discrimination (e.g., vertical vs. horizontal stimuli). This battery will 
identify behavioral changes characteristic of early-, middle- and late-stage AD, 
afford the potential to relate the findings to theoretical constructs of 
cognition, and evaluate learning capabilities not previously studied in rodent 
models of neurodegenerative disorders.

PMID: 1745432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Acta Neurochir (Wien). 1991;112(1-2):50-61. doi: 10.1007/BF01402454.

Reappraisal of the intracranial pressure and cerebrospinal fluid dynamics in 
patients with the so-called "normal pressure hydrocephalus" syndrome.

Sahuquillo J(1), Rubio E, Codina A, Molins A, Guitart JM, Poca MA, Chasampi A.

Author information:
(1)Neurosurgical Department, Vall d'Hebron Hospital, Barcelona, Spain.

Fifty-four shunt-responsive patients were selected from a prospective protocol 
directed to study patients with suspected normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH). 
Patients with gait disturbances, dementia, non-responsive L-Dopa Parkinsonism, 
urinary or faecal incontinence and an Evans ratio greater or equal to 0.30 on 
the CT scan were included in the study. As a part of their work-up all patients 
underwent intracranial pressure monitoring and hydrodynamic studies using 
Marmarou's bolus test. According to mean intracranial pressure (ICP) and the 
percentage of high amplitude B-waves, patients were subdivided in the following 
categories: 1) Active hydrocephalus (mean ICP above 15 mmHg), which is in fact 
no tone normal pressure hydrocephalus; 2) Compensated unstable hydrocephalus, 
when mean ICP was below 15 mmHg and B-waves were present in more than 25% of the 
total recording time and 3) Compensated stable hydrocephalus when ICP was lower 
or equal to 15 mmHg and beta waves were present in less than 25% of the total 
recording time. The majority of the patients in this study (70%) presented 
continuous high or intermittently raised ICP (active or unstable compensated 
hydrocephalus group). Mean resistance to outflow of CSF (Rout) was 38.8 mm 
Hg/ml/min in active hydrocephalus and 23.5 mm Hg/ml/min in the compensated group 
(Students t-test, p less than 0.05). Higher resistance to outflow was found in 
patients with obliterated cortical sulci and obliterated Sylvian cisterns in the 
CT scan. No statistically significant correlation was found when plotting the 
percentage of beta waves against pressure volume index (PVI), compliance or 
Rout. An exponential correlation was found when plotting beta waves against the 
sum of conductance to outflow and compliance calculated by PVI method (r = 
0.79). Patients with the so-called normal pressure hydrocephalus syndrome have 
different ICP and CSF dynamic profiles. Additional studies taking into 
consideration these differences are necessary before defining the sensitivity, 
specificity and predictive value of ICP monitoring and CSF studies in selecting 
appropriate candidates for shunting.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01402454
PMID: 1763684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1991;640:203-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1991.tb00218.x.

Alzheimer lesions in the entorhinal region and isocortex in Parkinson's and 
Alzheimer's diseases.

Jellinger K(1), Braak H, Braak E, Fischer P.

Author information:
(1)L. Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Lainz Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria.

Neuropathologic examination in elderly individuals and patients with Parkinson's 
disease with and without dementia reveals abundant isocortical amyloid deposits 
with no or only a few neuritic plaques, neuropil threads (NT), and 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), whereas NT and NFT may be present only in the 
entorhinal region of the parahippocampal cortex. In Down's syndrome, Alzheimer's 
disease, and Parkinson's disease, early neuronal degeneration with deposition of 
NT and NFT may selectively involve layer pre-alpha (II) of the entorhinal region 
(Brodmann 26 area) forming the origin of the glutamatergic perforant pathway. 
Its bilateral destruction isolates the hippocampus from isocortical influx. 
Comparative studies in a series of aged subjects and those with Parkinson's 
disease show that psychostatus correlates better with the number of NT and NFT 
in the entorhinal region than in hippocampal area CA-1 and isocortex. This 
pattern of neuronal degeneration may explain cognitive impairment in early 
stages of both Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1991.tb00218.x
PMID: 1776740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1991;640:8-13. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1991.tb00183.x.

Aluminum, Alzheimer's disease, and the olfactory system.

Perl DP(1), Good PF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Arthur M. Fishberg Center for Neurobiology, Mount 
Sinai Medical Center, New York, New York 10029.

In Alzheimer's disease, it has been recognized that there is a dramatic tendency 
for the development of neurofibrillary tangles among neurons of cortical regions 
associated with the olfactory system. We have demonstrated that neurofibrillary 
tangle-bearing neurons contain dramatically elevated levels of aluminum. The 
olfactory system, the only portion of the central nervous system with exposure 
to the external environment, is uniquely capable of uptake and transneuronal 
spread of exogenous substances. We argue that inasmuch as aluminum is not 
employed in any physiologic process, these deposits must arise from exogenous 
sources. Using parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam as a model, we present data 
which suggest that the olfactory system is particularly vulnerable to damage and 
is affected very early in the disease. This supports the concept that etiologic 
agents of importance to this epidemic may be airborne in nature and may enter 
the central nervous system via the olfactory pathways.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1991.tb00183.x
PMID: 1776763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 1991;136:91-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1991.tb05027.x.

Selegiline hydrochloride and cognition.

Lees AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Middlesex Hospital, London, UK.

Selegiline HCl, 10 mg per day has been reported to improve attention and 
episodic memory in Parkinson's disease and early Alzheimer's disease. Selegiline 
also improves motor reaction times in Parkinson's and subjective feelings of 
increased vitality, euphoria and energy. At doses of between 10 and 40 mg a day 
it has also been shown to improve depression particularly when psychomotor 
retardation is prominent and anxiety minimal.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1991.tb05027.x
PMID: 1801544 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


137. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1991 Fall;3(4):412-6. doi: 10.1176/jnp.3.4.412.

A retrospective analysis of the effects of anticholinergic medication on memory 
performance in Parkinson's disease.

Levin BE(1), Llabre MM, Reisman S, Weiner WJ, Brown MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami, School of Medicine, Florida 
33101.

We examined the effects of anticholinergic medication on memory function in 113 
patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). Subjects were divided into 
three disease duration groups: early, middle, and advanced. The battery 
consisted of three tasks assessing memory of logical discourse, semantically 
related words, and figural material. We found no evidence of 
anticholinergic-induced memory dysfunction in any of the three groups. Analysis 
of covariance indicated that age was not a significant variable; however, 
dementia may have influenced the relationship between anticholinergic medication 
and memory scores. Our results indicate that anticholinergic medication does not 
uniformly compromise memory function in PD patients.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.3.4.412
PMID: 1821262 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Semin Nucl Med. 1991 Jan;21(1):11-23. doi: 10.1016/s0001-2998(05)80076-5.

The scintigraphic evaluation of Huntington's disease and other movement 
disorders using single photon emission computed tomography perfusion brain 
scans.

Nagel JS(1), Ichise M, Holman BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA 02115.

The increasing availability of single-photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) perfusion brain scans has led to the investigation of a variety of 
neuropsychiatric conditions including the movement disorders such as 
Huntington's and Parkinson's disease. In general, observers have noted that 
Huntington patients have bilaterally decreased uptake of technetium 99m HM-PAO 
and iodine 123 IMP in the basal ganglia regions involving the heads of the 
caudate nucleic and adjacent structure, which reflects decreased neuronal 
function. These functional changes precede the morphological changes due to 
caudate nucleus atrophy that are observed on computed tomography and magnetic 
resonance imaging. Cortical changes occur in severely diseased Huntington's 
patients but are more nonspecific. Prediction of individuals at risk for 
Huntington's disease using SPECT scans should be done with caution and in 
association with other clinical data. In contrast, in Parkinson's disease mild 
diffusely decreased perfusion is commonly noted throughout the cerebral 
structures, except for the cerebellum. In Parkinson's disease, there is less 
agreement among observers as to whether the basal ganglia are abnormal. Some 
observers report that there are no specific basal ganglia perfusion defects in 
excess of those changes seen elsewhere in the brain. Others report diminished 
basal ganglia uptake associated with L-dopa therapy in some Parkinson's 
patients, and in patients with hemi-parkinsonism there have been perfusion 
deficits reported in the contralateral basal ganglia. In some Parkinson 
patients, bilateral Alzheimer's-like posterior temporoparietal cortical 
perfusion defects have been observed in association with progressive dementia. 
Basal ganglia and cortical perfusion changes also have been reported in a few 
patients with a variety of other less common movement disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0001-2998(05)80076-5
PMID: 1825359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1991 Jan;54(1):34-8. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.54.1.34.

Extrapyramidal features in advanced Down's syndrome: clinical evaluation and 
family history.

Vieregge P(1), Ziemens G, Freudenberg M, Piosinski A, Muysers A, Schulze B.

Author information:
(1)Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck Klinik für Neurologie, FRG.

Extrapyramidal, frontal release, and other neurological signs were studied in 54 
demented and non-demented patients with Down's syndrome (DS). Fourteen patients 
were demented and five showed extrapyramidal signs, mainly of the 
rigid-hypokinetic spectrum and similar to Parkinsonian features in advanced 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). None of the non-demented patients had Parkinsonian 
signs. The mean age of the demented DS patients with extrapyramidal signs was 
significantly higher than that of the patients without. Frontal release signs 
were present in demented and non-demented patients. A questionnaire showed no 
increase in either the proportion of early- or senile-onset dementia or 
Parkinsonism among first- and second-degree relatives of DS patients. 
Parkinsonian signs appear to be present at a lower frequency in DS than in 
advanced AD. A speculative hypothesis about a gene dosage effect of 
Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase in preventing toxic radical formation in the 
substantia nigra of DS patients is presented.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.54.1.34
PMCID: PMC1014295
PMID: 1826326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Int J Epidemiol. 1991;20 Suppl 2:S13-20. doi: 10.1093/ije/20.supplement_2.s13.

Familial aggregation of Alzheimer's disease and related disorders: a 
collaborative re-analysis of case-control studies.

van Duijn CM(1), Clayton D, Chandra V, Fratiglioni L, Graves AB, Heyman A, Jorm 
AF, Kokmen E, Kondo K, Mortimer JA, Rocca WA, Shalat SL, Soininen H, Hofman A; 
EURODEM Risk Factors Research Group, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Case-control studies of Alzheimer's disease were re-analysed to examine the 
association of Alzheimer's disease with family history in first degree relatives 
of dementia, Down's syndrome and Parkinson's disease. Overall, the relative risk 
of Alzheimer's disease for those with at least one first degree relative with 
dementia was 3.5 (95% confidence interval 2.6-4.6). Stratification according to 
age of onset of Alzheimer's disease showed that the relative risk decreased with 
increasing onset age. However, among patients with an onset of disease after 80 
years, there were still significantly more subjects with one or more first 
degree relatives with dementia as compared to controls (relative risk 2.6; 95% 
confidence interval 1.3-5.2). The relative risk of Alzheimer's disease was 
significantly lower in patients who had one first degree relative with dementia 
(relative risk 2.6; 95% confidence interval 2.0-3.5) as compared to those who 
had two or more affected relatives (relative risk 7.5; 95% confidence interval 
3.3-16.7). Furthermore, the re-analysis showed a significant association between 
Alzheimer's disease and family history of Down's syndrome (relative risk 2.7; 
95% confidence interval 1.2-5.7), which was strongest in those patients who had 
a positive family history of dementia. The relative risk of Alzheimer's disease 
for those with a positive family history of Parkinson's disease was 2.4 (95% 
confidence interval 1.0-5.8).

DOI: 10.1093/ije/20.supplement_2.s13
PMID: 1833349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1991;33:119-24. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-9135-4_19.

Parkinsonian features in advanced Down's syndrome.

Vieregge P(1), Ziemens G, Piosinski A, Freudenberg M, Kömpf D.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinische Universität zu Lübeck, Federal Republic 
of Germany.

The results of a clinical study on extrapyramidal, frontal release, and other 
neurological signs in 54 demented and non-demented patients with Down's syndrome 
(DS) are presented. Fourteen patients were demented, five of them showed 
extrapyramidal signs, mainly of the rigid-hypokinetic spectrum and rather 
similar to Parkinsonian features in advanced Alzheimer's disease (AD). None of 
the non-demented patients had Parkinsonian signs. The mean ages of the demented 
DS patients with extrapyramidal signs was significantly higher than that of the 
patients without the respective signs. Frontal release signs were present in 
demented and nondemented patients. From a questionnaire neither a raised 
proportion of early- or senile-onset dementia nor of Parkinsonism among first- 
and second-degree relatives of DS patients could be traced. Parkinsonian signs 
seem to be present at a lower frequency in DS than in advanced AD. A speculative 
hypothesis about a gene dosage effect of Cu/Zn-superoxide dismutase in 
preventing toxic radical formation in the substantia nigra of DS patients is 
presented.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-9135-4_19
PMID: 1836496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1991;147(5):337-55.

[Cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in French]

Guillard A(1), Fénelon G, Mahieux F.

Author information:
(1)Clinique Neurologique, Hôpital Tenon, Paris.

No clear general view has emerged from the many recent studies devoted to 
cognitive disorders in Parkinson's disease. Disparity of the populations and 
methods, as well as interference from motor disorders and possible psychiatric 
disorders account for the variability of epidemiological data. Subtle cognitive 
disorders can be found in most patients at the very beginning of the disease. 
Recent memory is disturbed in free recall tests, but recognition capacities are 
preserved. Individualization of visuospatial disorders is discussed. Alteration 
of conceptual capacities is the predominant disorder. Clinically obvious 
cognitive disorders appear only in some patients after several years of 
neurological disease. Some risk factors are agreed upon. The bradyphrenia 
concept is debated, and the term dementia is not accepted by all authors. The 
major cognitive alterations in Parkinson's disease differ from those observed in 
Alzheimer dementia, but the latter is more frequent in parkinsonian patients 
than in the general population. Patients with Parkinson's disease are also 
exposed to the risk of transient psychotic episodes. Where parkinsonian 
cognitive pathology is concerned, modern imaging methods are of no help to 
clinicians. The anatomical and biochemical changes observed in these patients 
are reviewed, and their responsibility in the genesis of cognitive disorders is 
discussed: lesions of brainstem nuclei and alterations in their cortical 
projections on one side, Alzheimer type dementia lesions and Lewys' bodies on 
the other side. The diverse and inconstant cognitive disorders of patients with 
Parkinson's disease cannot be explained by lesions of one single structure; they 
probably result from variable combinations of multiple known or unknown neuronal 
and biochemical changes.

PMID: 1853032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mov Disord. 1991;6(1):36-42. doi: 10.1002/mds.870060107.

Early-onset Parkinson's disease.

Giovannini P(1), Piccolo I, Genitrini S, Soliveri P, Girotti F, Geminiani G, 
Scigliano G, Caraceni T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute C. Besta, Milan, Italy.

The study was conducted on 120 patients (76 men and 44 women) affected by 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) responsive to L-dopa and observed for many 
years. Sixty had clinical onset between the ages of 20-40, representing 10.2% of 
our PD population; in the others the symptoms began after the 40th birthday. The 
two groups were matched for sex and length of illness. In all patients a 
diagnosis of IPD depended on history and clinical and neuroradiological 
findings. Clinical, pharmacological, evolutive, and epidemiological data were 
collected on all patients. Thirty-six patients from each group performed motor 
dexterity tests (reaction time to expected and unexpected stimuli) and cognitive 
tests (Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale. Benton, Short tale, and Zazzo's speed 
and accuracy test). To assess the prevalence of dementia and the severity of 
psychiatric side effects of L-dopa administration, the 60 patients with 
early-onset PD were compared with 134 consecutive unselected PD patients. Five 
percent of early-onset PD patients had a family history of the disorder. Our 
study showed that early-onset PD does not differ fundamentally from the 
late-onset form except that the former is characterized by a more rapid 
establishment of the full-blown parkinsonian clinical picture and deterioration 
of the therapeutic efficacy of L-dopa, with an earlier appearance of side 
effects. The results of our neuropsychological investigations suggest that 
early-onset PD may be a "pure" form of extrapyramidal compromise with 
exclusively motor manifestations.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870060107
PMID: 2005920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mov Disord. 1991;6(2):95-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.870060202.

Head trauma as a risk factor for Parkinson's disease.

Stern MB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Graduate Hospital, Philadelphia, PA 19146.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870060202
PMID: 2057017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1991 Feb;81(1):24-30. doi: 
10.1016/0168-5597(91)90100-c.

Masseter inhibitory reflex in movement disorders. Huntington's chorea, 
Parkinson's disease, dystonia, and unilateral masticatory spasm.

Cruccu G(1), Pauletti G, Agostino R, Berardelli A, Manfredi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Rome La Sapienza, Italy.

Evoked by electrical stimulation of the mental nerve, the masseter inhibitory 
reflex consists of an early and a late silent period (SP1 and SP2), which 
interrupt the voluntary electromyographic (EMG) activity in the masseter muscle. 
We recorded the masseter inhibitory reflex and measured its latency, depth of 
suppression, duration and recovery cycle to paired stimuli, in patients with 
Huntington's chorea. Parkinson's disease, dystonia, or unilateral masticatory 
spasm. In patients with Huntington's chorea the reflex data and recovery cycle 
were normal. In patients with Parkinson's disease or dystonia, although the 
reflex data were normal, SP2 recovered far more rapidly than it did in control 
subjects. This is possibly due to hypoactivity of an inhibitory control of the 
polysynaptic chain of ponto-medullary interneurons that mediate SP2. In patients 
with unilateral masticatory spasm, both SP1 and SP2 were absent. Suppression is 
probably absent because this involuntary movement originates at a point along 
the peripheral course of the nerve.

DOI: 10.1016/0168-5597(91)90100-c
PMID: 1705216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Neurology. 1991 Feb;41(2 ( Pt 1)):168-73. doi: 10.1212/wnl.41.2_part_1.168.

Young-onset Parkinson's disease: a clinical review.

Golbe LI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick 08903.

Young-onset Parkinson's disease (YOPD) is arbitrarily defined as that which 
produces initial symptoms between the ages of 21 and 39, inclusive. The special 
problems and concerns of the patient with YOPD present as much of a challenge 
and opportunity for the clinician as the disease itself does for the researcher. 
In contrast to juvenile parkinsonism, which is a heterogeneous group of 
clinicopathologic entities presenting (also arbitrarily) before age 21, YOPD 
appears to be the same nosologic entity as older-onset PD. It comprises 
approximately 5% of referral populations in Western countries and about 10% in 
Japan. Its annual incidence relative to the population at risk is about 1/10 
that of PD at age sixty. YOPD tends to have more gradual progression of 
parkinsonian signs and symptoms, earlier appearance of levodopa-related 
dyskinesias and levodopa-dose-related motor fluctuations, and frequent presence 
of dystonia as an early or presenting sign. Studies conflict with regard to the 
suspected greater familial frequency and lesser frequency of dementia than in 
older-onset PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.41.2_part_1.168
PMID: 1992358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Arch Neurol. 1991 Mar;48(3):269-73. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530150037014.

Risk of dementia in first-degree relatives of patients with Alzheimer's disease 
and related disorders.

Mayeux R(1), Sano M, Chen J, Tatemichi T, Stern Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY.

First-degree relatives of patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) are at greater 
risk for dementia when compared with the relatives of their healthy peers, but 
not when compared with the relatives of patients with Parkinson's disease. This 
may indicate that the risk of dementia in these relatives is not specific to AD 
or that these studies are biased. We obtained a family history and vital status 
information on each first-degree relative of patients attending a clinic and in 
a group of recruited healthy elderly subjects. Patients formed two groups: 
probable AD and other forms of dementia or cognitive disorders without dementia. 
The odds of dementia in first-degree relatives did not differ between patient 
groups. The odds of dementia in relatives of patients with probable AD or other 
forms of dementia was six times that in the relatives of the healthy elderly 
subjects. The cumulative incidence of dementia increased with age in the 
first-degree relatives of all subjects. Approximately 50% of the first-degree 
relatives of patients with AD were demented by age 91 years, but almost the same 
number of the other patient group's relatives were demented as well. That figure 
was never reached in the healthy elderly subject's relatives. Because the risk 
of dementia in first-degree relatives of patients with AD was similar to that 
for patients with other disorders, we cannot exclude the possibility that this 
is the result of selection and information biases. Our investigation implies 
that the increased risk of dementia may not be specific to relatives of patients 
with AD; the risk may also be increased in first-degree relatives of patients 
with other neurologic disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530150037014
PMID: 2001183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Neurology. 1991 Mar;41(3):365-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.41.3.365.

Visuospatial impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Levin BE(1), Llabre MM, Reisman S, Weiner WJ, Sanchez-Ramos J, Singer C, Brown 
MC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami School of Medicine, FL 33101.

We explored the nature of the visuospatial deficit in Parkinson's disease (PD) 
and its progression as a function of disease duration. We compared the 
performance of 183 patients with idiopathic PD and 90 control subjects matched 
for age and education on six visuospatial measures. We divided patients into 
three groups according to the disease duration: early (1 to 4 years), middle (5 
to 10 years), and advanced (greater than 10 years). Performance deteriorated in 
five of the six visuospatial measures, as a function of disease duration. 
However, the pattern of visuospatial decline depended on whether dementia was 
present. The results were not influenced by age or anticholinergic medication. 
These findings support the presence of visuospatial deficits in PD patients, 
with a changing pattern of impairment related to dementia and progression of the 
disease.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.41.3.365
PMID: 2006002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Arch Neurol. 1991 Apr;48(4):389-91. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530160057013.

Positron emission tomography in progressive supranuclear palsy.

Bhatt MH(1), Snow BJ, Martin WR, Peppard R, Calne DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Positron emission tomography with 6-[18F]fluoro-L-dopa (6-FD) provides in vivo 
information on the function of nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurons. We used 6-FD 
and positron emission tomography to investigate the integrity of the 
nigrostriatal system in seven patients with progressive supranuclear palsy. All 
patients had axial hypertonia, vertical gaze palsy, and parkinsonian features. 
Dementia, pyramidal signs, and ataxia were seen in varying proportions. We 
analyzed the scans with a graphic method to calculate a steady-state 6-FD uptake 
rate constant for the whole striatum. Results were compared with those obtained 
in seven age-matched controls. As a group, the patients with progressive 
supranuclear palsy had reduced 6-FD uptake constants. The 6-FD uptake constant 
correlated inversely with the duration of the disease. Normal positron emission 
tographic findings in one patient with the shortest duration of symptoms 
suggests that in early progressive supranuclear palsy, parkinsonism may relate 
to dysfunction distal to the dopaminergic neurons.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530160057013
PMID: 1901484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Funct Neurol. 1991 Apr-Jun;6(2):145-9.

Clinical observations in early and late onset Parkinson's disease.

Bostantjopoulou S(1), Logothetis J, Katsarou Z, Mentenopoulos G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Thessaloniki, Ahepa Hospital, Greece.

The present study compares 30 patients who developed idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (PD) at the age of 48 years or younger and 47 patients who developed the 
disease at the age of 68 years or older. PD patients with early onset had 
rigidity and bradykinesia as the predominant features at onset and during the 
course of the illness. In contrast older onset patients exhibited more often 
tremor at the beginning while later in the course most of them developed the 
full triad of symptoms i.e. tremor-rigidity-bradykinesia. In spite of such 
differences the overall disability status did not differ between the two groups 
of patients. An additional observation was that the early onset patients were 
apter to show earlier and more often abnormal movements and response 
fluctuations related to the L-Dopa therapy.

PMID: 1916456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Arch Neurol. 1991 Apr;48(4):361-3. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530160025009.

Compensatory mechanisms in degenerative neurologic diseases. Insights from 
parkinsonism.

Calne DB(1), Zigmond MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, University Hospital, 
Vancouver, Canada.

In animal models of parkinsonism, the ability to lose a substantial proportion 
of dopaminergic neurons without behavioral deficits does not derive from other 
systems taking over function of the dopaminergic pathway. The surviving 
nigrostriatal projection increases both the rate of synthesis and the release of 
dopamine, as compensatory adjustments. This capacity allows at least a fivefold 
rise in dopamine delivery per neuron, and this enhancement is potentiated 
further by receptor up-regulation. Decreased reuptake, due to loss of nerve 
endings, may also lead to augmented occupancy of dopamine receptors, and so 
constitute yet another compensatory mechanism. In humans, positron emission 
tomography has revealed subclinical impairment of the dopaminergic nigrostriatal 
pathway in subjects at risk for parkinsonism caused by 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine and Lytico-Bodig (the amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam). However, the 
separation of patients with clinically overt idiopathic parkinsonism from 
controls is less marked in vivo (by positron emission tomography) than in 
postmortem analysis (by neurochemical assay). This disparity may be attributable 
to the reduction in the number of nigrostriatal nerve endings, leading, in vivo, 
to a relative increase of extracellular dopamine because active reuptake into 
the nerve endings is an important mechanism for removing dopamine from the 
synaptic cleft. In contrast, in a postmortem setting, dopamine that is not 
sequestered in the storage vesicles of nerve endings is readily available for 
biochemical degradation during the interval between death and brain analysis. 
Finally, it is also possible that differences may derive, in part, from 
dissimilar kinetic systems for handling exogenous and endogenous levodopa.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1991.00530160025009
PMID: 2012508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Neurology. 1991 May;41(5):622-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.41.5.622.

"Early" initiation of levodopa treatment does not promote the development of 
motor response fluctuations, dyskinesias, or dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Cedarbaum JM(1), Gandy SE, McDowell FH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Cornell University Medical College, 
Burke Rehabilitation Center, White Plains, NY.

We reviewed the histories of patients seen in a large Parkinson's disease clinic 
from 1983 to 1989 to determine if there is a relationship between the timing of 
initiation of levodopa therapy and the development of motor response 
fluctuations, dyskinesias, and dementia. There were no factors predisposing to 
the development of response fluctuations or dementia. Younger age at disease 
onset predisposed to the development of dyskinesia. Dyskinesias occurred in a 
greater proportion of patients in whom the initiation of levodopa therapy was 
delayed by more than 2 years from disease diagnosis than among those in whom 
treatment was started earlier. We thus failed to identify any adverse 
consequences of early levodopa treatment in our patient population.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.41.5.622
PMID: 2027475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Neurology. 1991 May;41(5 Suppl 2):77-80; discussion 80-1. doi: 
10.1212/wnl.41.5_suppl_2.77.

Odor identification deficit of the parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam: 
equivalence to that of Alzheimer's and idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Doty RL(1), Perl DP, Steele JC, Chen KM, Pierce JD Jr, Reyes P, Kurland LT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, School of 
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Olfactory dysfunction is among the first signs of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), and the parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) 
of Guam. We have recently demonstrated that the odor identification and 
detection deficits of patients with PD are equivalent to those of patients with 
mild AD when subtle differences in cognitive function are statistically 
controlled for by analysis of covariance. In contrast, patients with progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) and patients with 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced parkinsonism 
evidence olfactory function much more similar to that of normal controls. In the 
present study, we administered the University of Pennsylvania Smell 
Identification Test and the Picture Identification Test to 24 patients with 
early signs of the PDC of Guam and statistically compared their test scores to 
those of 24 early-stage AD and 24 early-stage PD patients of similar age and 
gender from the United States mainland. Although the PDC group evidenced 
slightly more difficulty in identifying pictures than did the other 2 groups, 
the odor identification deficit associated with this disorder was of the same 
magnitude as that observed in AD and PD, suggesting that olfactory testing 
cannot be used to distinguish among these 3 diseases and that the olfactory 
dysfunction of these disorders may reflect a common neurologic substrate.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.41.5_suppl_2.77
PMID: 2041598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


154. BMJ. 1991 Jun 22;302(6791):1491-4. doi: 10.1136/bmj.302.6791.1491.

Relation between nicotine intake and Alzheimer's disease.

van Duijn CM(1), Hofman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1991 Aug 10;303(6798):361.

OBJECTIVE: To study the association between Alzheimer's disease and nicotine 
intake through smoking.
DESIGN: Population based case-control study.
SETTING: City of Rotterdam and four northern provinces of The Netherlands.
SUBJECTS: 198 patients with early onset Alzheimer's disease, 198 controls 
matched for age and sex, and families of 17 patients in whom Alzheimer's disease 
was apparently inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Age of onset of dementia, relative risk of Alzheimer's 
disease.
RESULTS: 89 of 193 patients with Alzheimer's disease had a history of smoking 
compared with 102 of 195 controls. Among the patients and controls with a family 
history of dementia, smoking was significantly less common in those with 
dementia (40/95 with dementia v 55/96 controls; relative risk 0.35; 95% 
confidence interval 0.16 to 0.78). The risk of Alzheimer's disease decreased 
with increasing daily number of cigarettes smoked before onset of disease 
(relative risk 0.3 in those smoking greater than 21/day v 1 in non-smokers). In 
six families in which the disease was apparently inherited as an autosomal 
dominant disorder, the mean age of onset was 4.17 years later in smoking 
patients than in non-smoking patients from the same family (p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest an inverse association between smoking and 
Alzheimer's disease, although smoking cannot be advocated for other health 
reasons. We speculate that nicotine may have a role in the aetiology of both 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.302.6791.1491
PMCID: PMC1670208
PMID: 1855016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Brain. 1991 Aug;114 ( Pt 4):1759-70. doi: 10.1093/brain/114.4.1759.

An analysis of lymphocyte 3H-N-methyl-scopolamine binding in neurological 
patients. Evidence of altered binding in Alzheimer's disease.

Ferrero P(1), Rocca P, Eva C, Benna P, Rebaudengo N, Ravizza L, Genazzani E, 
Bergamasco B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Turin, Italy.

Muscarinic cholinergic receptors were analysed in lymphocyte membranes from 35 
patients with early (n = 20) and late onset (n = 15) Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
86 patients with other neurological disorders and 60 normal controls by the 
specific binding of 3H-N-methyl-scopolamine (3H-NMS). The number of binding 
sites of 3H-NMS (Bmax) was significantly decreased both in early and late onset 
AD groups as compared with age-matched controls, by 54% and 40%, respectively, 
whereas the apparent binding affinity (Kd) was the same in all disease and 
control groups. In addition, the average Bmax in early AD was significantly 
lower than in late AD. The density of the binding of 3H-NMS was also 
significantly lower in a subgroup of old subjects with Down's syndrome (DS), 
whereas no changes were found in younger individuals with DS or in patients with 
Parkinson's disease, whether they were demented or not, multi-infarct dementia, 
myasthenia gravis or epilepsy. In the AD group, the difference in binding sites 
was unrelated either to the severity of dementia or disease duration. Treatment 
of the patients with cholinergic agents did not alter the binding values in any 
of the examined group. We conclude that the alteration of lymphocyte muscarinic 
receptors is highly associated with AD, but whether this reflects the central 
cholinergic deficit in these patients is uncertain.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/114.4.1759
PMID: 1884177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Geriatrics. 1991 Aug;46 Suppl 1:47-51.

Olfactory dysfunction in three neurodegenerative diseases.

Doty RL(1), Perl DP, Steele JC, Chen KM, Pierce JD Jr, Reyes P, Kurland LT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology and Head and Neck Surgery, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia.

Olfactory dysfunction is among the first signs of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), and the parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) 
of Guam. We have recently demonstrated that the odor identification and 
detection deficits of patients with PD are equivalent to those of patients with 
mild AD when subtle differences in cognitive function are statistically 
controlled for by analysis of covariance. In contrast, patients with progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) and patients with 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced parkinsonism 
evidence olfactory function much more similar to that of normal controls. In the 
present study, we administered the University of Pennsylvania Smell 
Identification Test and the Picture Identification Test to 24 patients with 
early signs of the PDC of Guam and statistically compared their test scores to 
those of 24 early-stage AD and 24 early-stage PD patients of similar age and 
gender from the United States mainland. Although the PDC group evidenced 
slightly more difficulty in identifying pictures than did the other 2 groups, 
the odor identification deficit associated with this disorder was of the same 
magnitude as that observed in AD and PD, suggesting that olfactory testing 
cannot be used to distinguish among these 3 diseases and that the olfactory 
dysfunction of these disorders may reflect a common neurologic substrate.

PMID: 1894145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Neuropeptides. 1991 Oct;20(2):73-8. doi: 10.1016/0143-4179(91)90054-m.

Substance P and neurodegenerative disorders. A speculative review.

Barker R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, Cambridge, UK.

The causes of the neurodegenerative disorders of Parkinson's disease (PD), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) are unknown. It 
is proposed that all these disorders result primarily from a loss of trophic 
peptidergic neurotransmitter, possibly Substance P (SP). This loss in turn 
produces the classical neuronal degeneration seen in each of these diseases and 
occurs due to a combination of natural aging and chronic autoimmune destruction 
following a viral infection of the CNS, early in life. The loss is therefore 
slow and by the time of clinical presentation the inflammatory process is 
disappearing as the antigenic stimulus lessens with its removal. The 
implications of the theory in terms of future research and therapy are briefly 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1016/0143-4179(91)90054-m
PMID: 1724684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Neurology. 1991 Oct;41(10):1554-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.41.10.1554.

Brain injury and neurologic sequelae: a cohort study of dementia, parkinsonism, 
and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Williams DB(1), Annegers JF, Kokmen E, O'Brien PC, Kurland LT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN.

We reviewed the medical records of 821 Olmsted County residents who had suffered 
head trauma with presumed brain injury between 1935 and 1974 and were more than 
40 years old at the time of their last medical assessment. These patients were 
followed over 15,000 person-years for dementia and other degenerative neurologic 
diseases. The standardized morbidity ratio (SMR) for dementia was 1.06, and the 
SMR for dementia of the Alzheimer type was 1.00. These values are not 
significantly elevated and are inconsistent with studies that suggest that head 
trauma is a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease. In addition, the SMRs for 
parkinsonism (1.04), Parkinson's disease (0.94), and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (1.05) were not significantly elevated, providing no evidence that 
head trauma is a risk factor for these disorders. However, these latter results 
are based on smaller total case numbers.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.41.10.1554
PMID: 1922795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Brain. 1991 Oct;114 ( Pt 5):2095-122. doi: 10.1093/brain/114.5.2095.

Cognitive impairment in early, untreated Parkinson's disease and its 
relationship to motor disability.

Cooper JA(1), Sagar HJ, Jordan N, Harvey NS, Sullivan EV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, Sheffield, UK.

Current knowledge of cognitive dysfunction in Parkinson's disease (PD) has 
largely been obtained from studies of chronically treated patients in whom 
effects of disease chronicity, treatment, depression and dementia are 
confounding factors. Studies of untreated patients have examined few cognitive 
domains and relationships between cognition, depression and motor disability 
have been incompletely explored. Accordingly, we studied 60 consecutive patients 
with newly diagnosed, untreated, idiopathic PD and 37 matched, healthy control 
subjects; no subject had clinical dementia or depression. All subjects received 
tests of specific processes of memory and cognition, including working memory, 
verbal and non-verbal short- and long-term memory, language, visuospatial 
capacity, set-formation and shifting and sequencing. Patients also received 
quantitative global clinical measures of severity of dementia, depression and 
motor disability. The PD group as a whole showed deficits in immediate recall of 
verbal material, language production and semantic fluency, set-formation, 
cognitive sequencing and working memory and visuomotor construction. However, 
this group was unimpaired in immediate memory span, long-term forgetting, 
naming, comprehension and visual perception. Language deficits and more severe 
frontal lobe impairments were confined to those PD patients scoring abnormally 
on a Mini Mental State examination. Motor disability correlated strongly with 
severity of depression but weakly with cognitive impairment. Cognitive 
sequencing, set-formation and set-shifting deficits tended to associate with 
depression, but otherwise there was no association between cognition and 
depression. The results indicate dissociation of cognition and motor control in 
early PD which suggests that cognitive dysfunction is largely independent of 
frontostriatal dopamine deficiency underlying motor disability. Some, but not 
all, of the frontal lobe deficits of chronic disease are detectable in early, 
untreated PD. The pathogenesis of the cognitive deficits shown here appears to 
involve extrastriatal dopamine systems or non-dopaminergic pathology. 
Longitudinal study is necessary to determine whether increasing disease duration 
exacerbates the early cognitive deficits and affects new cognitive domains, in 
addition to producing increasing motor disability.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/114.5.2095
PMID: 1933236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Am J Psychiatry. 1991 Nov;148(11):1558-61. doi: 10.1176/ajp.148.11.1558.

Extrapyramidal symptoms due to dopamine-blocking agents in patients with AIDS 
encephalopathy.

Hriso E(1), Kuhn T, Masdeu JC, Grundman M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Vincent's Medical Center, New York, NY 10011.

OBJECTIVE: The authors attempted to determine whether patients with AIDS are 
more susceptible to neuroleptic side effects than other patients.
METHOD: Retrospective chart review was used to assess the frequency and severity 
of extrapyramidal symptoms in patients with AIDS and psychotic patients without 
AIDS who had taken dopamine-blocking agents. The charts of 804 men younger than 
50 years were reviewed, and patients were excluded if they had not taken 
dopamine blockers, had taken them for more than 1 month, had received 
concomitant antiparkinsonian agents, had focal brain lesions or histories of 
Parkinson's disease or meningitis, had used cocaine, amphetamines, or opiates 
within 1 month of admission, or, among the comparison group, had HIV risk 
factors. For the remaining 31 AIDS and 32 comparison patients, age, duration of 
dopamine blocker treatment, dose in chlorpromazine equivalents, and nature and 
severity of parkinsonian complications were recorded.
RESULTS: The mean drug dose and body weight were significantly lower in the AIDS 
group. The likelihood of developing extrapyramidal symptoms was 2.4 times as 
high among the AIDS patients as among the comparison group. Such symptoms were 
developed by 50% of the AIDS patients who received less than 4 mg/kg of 
chlorpromazine equivalents per day and 78% of those who received more than 4 
mg/kg per day.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary results suggest that AIDS patients are more 
susceptible to extrapyramidal symptoms than psychotic patients without AIDS and 
that neuroleptics should be used cautiously and in lower doses for patients with 
AIDS.

DOI: 10.1176/ajp.148.11.1558
PMID: 1681751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Phys Sportsmed. 1991 Dec;19(12):85-92. doi: 10.1080/00913847.1991.11710211.

Exercise and Alzheimer's Disease, Parkinson's Disease, and Multiple Sclerosis.

Poser CM, Ronthal M.

In brief Sports and fitness activities of patients who have degenerative 
neurologic diseases must be individually tailored to the type and severity of 
their disease. In early Alzheimer's disease, dementia is the only restrictive 
problem. In Parkinson's disease, bradykinesia, rigidity, and dysequilibrium have 
to be considered, whereas in multiple sclerosis, weakness, incoordination, and 
impaired balance are the most serious problems. Patients who have degenerative 
neurologic diseases must avoid contact sports, but can continue most other 
sports for a while. Using stationary exercise equipment is beneficial, and 
supervised swimming is the single most rewarding fitness activity for most 
patients who have these diseases.

DOI: 10.1080/00913847.1991.11710211
PMID: 27438500


162. Int Psychogeriatr. 1992;4 Suppl 2:147-60.

The evolution of dementia in idiopathic Parkinson's disease: neuropsychological 
and clinical evidence in support of subtypes.

Reid WG(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Sydney, New South Wales, 
Australia.

One hundred and seven newly diagnosed, untreated patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) were divided into two groups according to their age at reported 
onset of symptoms. Of these, 79 patients were under age 70 (early-onset) and 28 
patients were age 70 and over (late-onset). The group of 50 control subjects 
comprised spouses, friends of the PD patients, and community volunteers. The 
patients were participants in a multicenter drug study of Parkinson's disease. 
Each had received a detailed neurological and neuropsychological assessment in 
the baseline placebo phases of the study. Thirty-4 patients with early-onset and 
12 patients with late-onset were reassessed 3 years after treatment with 
low-dose levodopa, with bromocriptine, or with a combination of the two drugs. 
The results of the baseline phase of the study revealed that 8% of the 
early-onset group and 32% of the late-onset group were classified as demented. 
The 3-year follow-up revealed that the prevalence of dementia had increased to 
17% in the early-onset group and to 83% in the late-onset group. This study 
confirms that at least two distinct subtypes of Parkinson's disease exist. The 
subtypes differ both clinically and neuropsychologically. The age at onset of 
symptoms is a critical determinant of the rate and type of cognitive decline in 
Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 1288660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect. 1992;4(1):53-68. doi: 10.1007/BF02257622.

Neurochemical markers in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Alzheimer's 
disease, Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and normal 
controls.

Hartikainen P(1), Reinikainen KJ, Soininen H, Sirviö J, Soikkeli R, Riekkinen 
PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kuopio, Finland.

Several neurotransmitter markers were investigated in the cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) from patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) (n = 27), Parkinson's disease 
(PD) (n = 35) and ALS (n = 26) and from control subjects (n = 34) to compare the 
possible alterations in the biochemical profiles of these different 
neurodegenerative diseases. The main proportion of the patients represented an 
early phase of the illness at the time of the diagnosis. Correlations of the 
degree of dementia and the stage of the disease with CSF measures were 
evaluated. The CSF levels of somatostatin like-immunoreactivity (SLI) were 
significantly reduced in AD patients when compared with those of normals and ALS 
patients. The CSF concentrations of homovanillic acid (HVA) were significantly 
decreased for PD patients and the decrease focused on the non-demented patients. 
A trend of decreasing HVA values towards the most advanced stage of Parkinson's 
disease assessed by Webster's scale was also displayed. The content of 
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylglycol (MHPG) in the CSF was higher for ALS patients 
than for other groups. The lowest 5-hydroxy-indoleacetic acid (5HIAA) levels 
were observed in the PD group and the lowest acetylcholinesterase (AChE) 
activities were found in the PD patients with the most severe disease. Changes 
in CSF measures were too subtle to be beneficial for diagnostic purposes, but 
adequate for reflecting the different neurochemical profiles of these three 
degenerative neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02257622
PMID: 1347220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Prog Brain Res. 1992;93:249-61. doi: 10.1016/s0079-6123(08)64576-8.

The hypothalamic lateral tuberal nucleus: normal anatomy and changes in 
neurological diseases.

Kremer HP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Hospital, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The lateral tuberal nucleus is a circumscribed cell mass in the lateral 
posterior part of the hypothalamus, containing about 60000 neurons. It can be 
recognized in man and higher primates, probably not in other mammals. Its 
neurotransmitter content and connections with other parts of the brain are as 
yet unknown. But receptors for corticotropin-releasing factor and somatostatin, 
as well as muscarinic cholinergic receptors, benzodiazepine receptors and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors have been localized within the confines of the 
nucleus. The lateral tuberal nucleus is affected in a number of human 
neurodegenerative diseases. Changes in Parkinson's disease are the least 
obvious: Lewy bodies appear in small amounts, the majority of them apparently 
lying outside a neuronal perikaryon. Neuronal loss does not occur. In 
Alzheimer's disease the number of neurons seems to be normal as well. Rarely 
silver staining tangles occur, and the deposition of A4/beta-protein in 
amorphous plaques is moderate. Yet, NTL neurons stain heavily in Alz-50 
immunocytochemistry, while Alz-50 staining in NTL neurites is very dense. These 
changes are interpreted as indicating early Alzheimer-related pathology. In 
Huntington's disease the NTL loses neurons. This loss is related to the severity 
of the disease: patients who first display motor disturbances at an early age 
will lose more neurons than those who start later. The relation between these 
clinical characteristics and the severity of neuronal loss is such, that it 
seems likely that NTL neurons possess a special vulnerability for the effect of 
the Huntington gene. This could be related to their NMDA-receptor content. It is 
hypothesized that the NTL is involved in a neuronal network that regulates 
feeding and metabolism. NTL pathology may explain the peculiar catabolic state 
of many patients with Alzheimer's or Huntington's diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0079-6123(08)64576-8
PMID: 1362279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Dysphagia. 1992;7(4):205-8. doi: 10.1007/BF02493471.

Clinical and demographic data in 75 patients with near-fatal choking episodes.

Ekberg O(1), Feinberg M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania, 
Philadelphia 19104.

The clinical background and circumstances of 75 patients who had survived a 
near-fatal choking episode, i.e., had undergone a Heimlich maneuver, 
oropharyngeal suctioning, or intubation, is reported. Sixty had choked on a 
solid bolus (often of a complex texture like sandwiches and chicken soup). Four 
patients had choked on mashed banana. In 30 patients neurologic disease (such as 
cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson disease, or dementia) was present. Choking 
occurred during breakfast (16 patients), lunch (21), dinner (26), and snacks 
(12). Twenty-five choked at home, 18 in nursing homes, 14 in hospitals, nine in 
restaurants, and nine in drinking establishments. Twelve were being fed at the 
time of choking. Fifty-eight of the individuals had oral, pharyngeal, or 
esophageal abnormalities on radiographic examination that could explain the 
choking episode. Fourteen patients who were able to vocalize during the choking 
episode had probably suffered from esophageal impaction. Our study indicates 
that elderly individuals and those with neurogenic dysphagia are at risk for 
choking. Dysphagia diet (semisolids) may actually contribute to the risk in 
these patients. Young adults may also be at risk during episodes of consumption 
of alcohol and snacks.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02493471
PMID: 1424833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Ciba Found Symp. 1992;169:142-54; discussion 154-64. doi: 
10.1002/9780470514306.ch9.

Aluminium and Alzheimer's disease.

Wisniewski HM(1), Wen GY.

Author information:
(1)New York State Institute for Basic Research in Developmental Disabilities, 
Staten Island 10314.

The hypothesis that aluminium (Al) is a cause of (or a risk factor in) the 
development of beta-amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and 
dementia in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is based on studies by Wisniewski et al, 
Klatzo et al and Terry & Peña in 1965 that showed that injection of experimental 
animals with Al compounds induces the formation of NFT. Other publications 
revealed that Al affects cognitive functions in experimental animals and humans 
undergoing dialysis for renal failure. Electron probe and laser microprobe mass 
analysis (LAMMA) studies have demonstrated the presence of Al in NFT and cores 
of amyloid stars and nuclei of neurons in AD patients. Other studies have 
indicated the association between amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Guam 
parkinsonism-dementia complex and Al in the environment. A recent report 
suggests that the chelating agent desferrioxamine slows the rate of cognitive 
decline in AD patients. Extensive studies of the pathology of AD and Al-induced 
encephalopathy by our group and others indicate that Al does not cause 
Alzheimer's disease neuropathology. However, under certain conditions, cognition 
can be affected when Al enters the brain. Therefore, for individuals with renal 
failure or undergoing dialysis or individuals with a damaged blood-brain 
barrier, the intake of Al should be controlled.

DOI: 10.1002/9780470514306.ch9
PMID: 1490420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Neuroepidemiology. 1992;11 Suppl 1:23-8. doi: 10.1159/000110957.

A community-based study of dementia: the Rotterdam Elderly Study.

Breteler MM(1), van den Ouweland FA, Grobbee DE, Hofman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The Rotterdam Elderly Study is designed as a community-based prospective 
follow-up study. The study population consists of almost 12,000 individuals aged 
55 years and over who are living in an urban area in Rotterdam, the Netherlands. 
The objective of the study is to investigate the prevalence, incidence and 
determinants of neurogeriatric disorders, cardiovascular diseases, locomotor 
diseases and ophthalmologic diseases. In this paper we give a general outline of 
the Rotterdam Elderly Study, and a detailed description of the case finding and 
diagnostic procedures for the study of dementia. The risk factors for dementia 
that are assessed in the study are summarized.

DOI: 10.1159/000110957
PMID: 1603244 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1992 Spring;6(1):35-43. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199205000-00004.

Clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease: neuropathologic findings in 650 cases.

Mendez MF(1), Mastri AR, Sung JH, Frey WH 2nd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Paul-Ramsey Medical Center, MN 55101.

Despite the introduction of formal clinical criteria for Alzheimer disease (AD), 
the clinical diagnosis of AD remains one of exclusion of other dementias. To 
determine the accuracy of a clinical diagnosis of AD as made by practicing 
physicians, we reviewed the clinicopathologic records of a dementia brain bank 
and summarized the literature. Of 650 demented patients diagnosed during life as 
having AD, at autopsy 505 (78%) had AD with or without other neuropathologic 
conditions; only 390 (60%) of these had AD as the only neuropathologic 
condition. Of the remaining 145 (22%) patients with no neuropathologic evidence 
of AD, 39 had the nigrostriatal changes of Parkinson disease (PD), 25 had 
nonspecific degenerations, 15 had Pick disease, 14 had multiple infarcts, and 11 
lacked any neuropathologic abnormality. Although the overall clinical accuracy 
for AD was lower than that summarized from the literature, clinical accuracy 
improved significantly between 1986 and 1990. In our broad sample of 
practitioners, accuracy of clinical diagnosis of AD may be improving, but 
continues to be hampered by difficulty in distinguishing the dementia of AD from 
certain dementing conditions and from AD mixed with other neuropathologic 
conditions.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199205000-00004
PMID: 1605942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Prog Drug Res. 1992;38:171-297. doi: 10.1007/978-3-0348-7141-9_3.

The new generation of monoamine oxidase inhibitors.

Cesura AM(1), Pletscher A.

Author information:
(1)Pharma Division, Preclinical Research, F. Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd., Basel, 
Switzerland.

Irreversible and unspecific inhibitors of MAO were the first modern 
antidepressants, but after an initial success they fell into discredit due to 
adverse side effects. In the past two decades interest in MAO inhibitors has 
been renewed because of progress in basic research, a milestone being the 
finding that there are two subtypes of MAO, MAO-A and MAO-B. These are distinct 
proteins with high amino acid homology, coded by separate genes both located on 
the short arm of the human chromosome X. The enzyme subforms show different 
substrate specificities in vitro and different distributions within the central 
nervous system and in peripheral organs. In the central nervous system of man 
MAO-A seems to be mainly involved in the metabolism of 5 HT and noradrenaline, 
whereas 2-phenylethylamine and probably dopamine are predominantly deaminated by 
MAO-B. In the intestinal tract tyramine is mainly metabolized by MAO-A. These 
characteristics indicate distinct physiological functions of the two 
MAO-subforms. Several irreversible and reversible non-hydrazine inhibitors with 
relative selectivities for one of the MAO-subforms have been developed. They 
belong to various chemical classes with different modes of enzyme inhibition. 
These range from covalent mechanism based interaction (e.g. by propargyl- and 
allylamine derivatives) to pseudosubstrate inhibition (e.g. by 
2-aminoethyl-carboxamides) and non-covalent interaction (e.g. by brofaromine, 
toloxatone and possibly moclobemide). The most important pharmacological effects 
of the new types of MAO inhibitors are those observed in neuropsychiatric 
disorders. The inhibitors of MAO-A show a favorable action in various forms of 
mental depression. The drugs seem to have about the same activity as other types 
of antidepressants, including tricyclic and related compounds as well as 
classical MAO inhibitors. The onset of action of the MAO-A inhibitors is claimed 
to be relatively fast. Other possible indications of these drugs include 
disorders with cognitive impairment, e.g. dementia of the Alzheimer type. In 
subjects with Parkinson's disease the MAO-B inhibitor L-deprenyl exerts a 
L-dopa-sparing effect, prolongs L-dopa action and seems to have a favorable 
influence regarding on-off disabilities. The action is in general transitory 
(months to several years). In addition L-deprenyl has been shown to delay the 
necessity for L-dopa treatment in patients with early parkinsonism. Whether the 
drug influence the progression of the disease is still a matter of debate. 
L-deprenyl also appears to have some antidepressant effect (especially in higher 
doses) and to exert a beneficial influence in other disorders, e.g. dementia of 
the Alzheimer type.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-0348-7141-9_3
PMID: 1609114 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect. 1992;4(3):241-54. doi: 10.1007/BF02260907.

Cognitive profile of Alzheimer patients with extrapyramidal signs: a 
longitudinal study.

Soininen H(1), Helkala EL, Laulumaa V, Soikkeli R, Hartikainen P, Riekkinen PJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kuopio, Finland.

The cognitive profile of Alzheimer patients without (ADE-, n = 17) and with (AD, 
E+, n = 15) extrapyramidal signs (rigidity or bradykinesia), at the time of 
diagnosis, was examined in a 3-year follow-up study and compared to cognitive 
performance of demented (PD D+, n = 18) and nondemented (PD D-, n = 17) patients 
with Parkinson's disease and normal elderly controls (n = 19). Although the AD 
E+ and AD E- groups did not differ significantly at the initial testing, the AD 
E+ patients showed greater deterioration on visual, praxic and expressive speech 
functions as well as in category memory. The cognitive profile of the AD E+ 
patients was similar to that of the PD D+ patients except that the AD E+ 
patients recognized more false positive targets on list-learning task. The AD E- 
patients had better preserved praxic functions and WAIS Performance IQ but they, 
like AD E+ patients, recognized more false positive targets on list-learning 
than the PD D+ patients did. The results suggest that AD patients with 
extrapyramidal signs, even if mild, at the time of diagnosis may have greater 
progression of cognitive impairment, especially on cortical functions, which may 
explain earlier need for institutional care observed in previous studies as 
compared to patients without these signs.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02260907
PMID: 1627257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1992 Spring;4(2):179-84. doi: 
10.1176/jnp.4.2.179.

Comparison of two cognitive screening measures for efficacy in differentiating 
dementia from depression in a geriatric inpatient population.

Harper RG(1), Chacko RC, Kotik-Harper D, Kirby HB.

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas.

The Folstein Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) and dementia screening 
measures developed by Benton (temporal orientation, oral word association, and 
visual reconstruction tasks) were compared for diagnostic efficacy with 
geriatric inpatients manifesting depression without dementia or mild or moderate 
dementias complicated by depression. Both instruments showed generally 
acceptable differentiation between dementia and depression-only cases overall. 
The MMSE was less sensitive in identifying mild and moderate multi-infarct 
dementias but showed better specificity than the Benton measures. The degree and 
type of dementia and the associated risk of classification error were found to 
be important factors in the choice of screening instruments.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.4.2.179
PMID: 1627979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Eur J Pediatr. 1992 Feb;151(2):85-9. doi: 10.1007/BF01958948.

Familial glucocorticoid deficiency with achalasia of the cardia associated with 
mixed neuropathy, long-tract degeneration and mild dementia.

Grant DB(1), Dunger DB, Smith I, Hyland K.

Author information:
(1)Hospital for Sick Children, London, United Kingdom.

This paper describes the progress of two previously reported brothers with 
familial glucocorticoid deficiency, achalasia of the cardia, and alacrima. In 
their early 'teens both boys developed polyneuropathy with sensory, motor and 
autonomic components, Parkinsonism, and signs of both dorsal column and 
pyramidal tract damage. The older boy also showed signs of dementia. Red cell 
folate levels were markedly reduced but plasma and CSF folate were normal. Serum 
B12 and erythrocyte concentrations were at or below the lower limit of normal 
CSF levels of homovanillic acid and 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid (the major 
metabolites of dopamine and serotonin in brain) were low, indicating impaired 
turnover of the two amines within the nervous system. Positron emission 
photometry scans in the older boy showed low binding of c-methyl-spiperone and 
reduced uptake of 18-F-L-fluorodopa in the striatum, confirming the impairment 
in dopamine metabolism and suggesting both reduced synthesis and reduced 
receptor density. Treatment with L-dopa up to 800 mg/day (along with carbidopa 
200 mg/day) corrected the low CSF homovanillic acid levels and produced some 
improvement in the Parkinsonism but no other obvious clinical benefit. Empirical 
treatment with hydroxycobalamin (1000 micrograms three times a week) and folinic 
acid (15 mg/day) was without clinical effect. The cause of the neurological 
disorder, low red-cell folate concentrations, and amine disturbance remains 
unknown, as does the pathogenesis of the adrenocortical failure.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01958948
PMID: 1537368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Brain. 1992 Feb;115 Pt 1:271-91. doi: 10.1093/brain/115.1.271.

Cognitive performance in multiple system atrophy.

Robbins TW(1), James M, Lange KW, Owen AM, Quinn NP, Marsden CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Cambridge, UK.

The cognitive performance of a group of patients with multiple system atrophy 
(MSA) of striato-nigral predominance was compared with that of age and IQ 
matched control subjects, using three tests sensitive to frontal lobe 
dysfunction and a battery sensitive to memory and learning deficits in 
Parkinson's disease and dementia of the Alzheimer type. The MSA group showed 
significant deficits in all three of the tests previously shown to be sensitive 
to frontal lobe dysfunction. Thus, a significant proportion of patients from the 
MSA group failed an attentional set-shifting test, specifically at the stage 
when an extra-dimensional shift was required. They were also impaired in a 
subject-ordered test of spatial working memory. The MSA group showed deficits 
mostly confined to measures of speed of thinking, rather than accuracy, on the 
Tower of London task. These deficits were seen in the absence of consistent 
impairments in language or visual perception. Moreover, the MSA group showed no 
significant deficits in tests of spatial and pattern recognition previously 
shown to be sensitive to patients early in the course of probable Alzheimer's 
disease and only a few patients exhibited impairment on the Warrington 
Recognition Memory Test. There were impairments on other tests of visual memory 
and learning relative to matched controls, but these could not easily be related 
to fundamental deficits of memory or learning. Thus, on a matching-to-sample 
task the patients were impaired at simultaneous but not delayed matching to 
sample, whereas difficulties in a pattern-location learning task were more 
evident at its initial, easier stages. The MSA group showed no consistent 
evidence of intellectual deterioration as assessed from their performance on 
subtests of the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS) and the National Adult 
Reading Test (NART). Consideration of individual cases showed that there was 
some heterogeneity in the pattern of deficits in the MSA group, with one patient 
showing no impairment, even in the face of considerable physical disability. The 
results show a distinctive pattern of cognitive deficits, unlike those 
previously seen using the same tests in patients with Parkinson's and 
Alzheimer's diseases, and suggesting a prominent frontal-lobe-like component. 
The implications for concepts of 'subcortical' dementia and 'fronto-striatal' 
cognitive dysfunction are considered.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/115.1.271
PMID: 1559159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Ital J Neurol Sci. 1992 Feb;13(1):83. doi: 10.1007/BF02222893.

Common risk factors of three diseases.

Piccoli F, Brighina F, La Bella V, Monte M, Guarneri R.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02222893
PMID: 1559788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Can J Neurol Sci. 1992 Feb;19(1 Suppl):117-23.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease: 
phylogenetic disorders of the human neocortex sharing many characteristics.

Eisen A(1), Calne D.

Author information:
(1)"Neurodegenerative Disorders Centre", Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

Features common to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease (PD) 
and Alzheimer's disease (AD) are reviewed. Shared epidemiological aspects 
include an increasing frequency which is proportional for each disease. We draw 
attention to geographic non-uniform distribution which, for ALS and PD, 
correlates positively with latitude. Clinical and pathological overlap occurs in 
the same patients, and in members of the same family. A high early morning 
plasma cysteine/sulphate ratio possibly related to the development of 
proteinacious inclusions, as well as ubiquinated neuronal inclusions, 
characterize ALS, PD and AD. HLA-DR (the human group II major histocompatibility 
class) staining is marked in ALS, PD and AD and may represent 
autoimmunity-incited by-products of neuronal degeneration. Based upon 
demonstrated glutaminergic connections between the neocortex and anterior horn 
cells, the entorhinal cortex and the basal ganglia we hypothesize that ALS, AD 
and PD are phylogenetic disturbances of the neocortical cell. The postsynaptic 
neuron may degenerate secondarily to anterograde effects of deranged glutamate 
metabolism. Future therapeutic strategies should be directed to agents that 
decrease transmission induced by excitatory amino-acids.

PMID: 1571856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Nucl Med. 1992 Feb;33(2):181-5.

The scintigraphic appearance of Alzheimer's disease: a prospective study using 
technetium-99m-HMPAO SPECT.

Holman BL(1), Johnson KA, Gerada B, Carvalho PA, Satlin A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 
02115.

Erratum in
    J Nucl Med 1992 Apr;33(4):484.

Comment in
    J Nucl Med. 1992 Jul;33(7):1431-2.
    J Nucl Med. 1992 Feb;33(2):312.

Alzheimer's disease produces regional abnormalities in brain blood flow and 
metabolism that may result in recognizable scintigraphic patterns. We determined 
the predictive value of 99mTc-HMPAO SPECT for the presence of Alzheimer's 
disease based on a prospective study of 132 consecutive patients coming to our 
nuclear medicine clinical unit for evaluation of their memory loss or cognitive 
abnormalities. During clinical follow-up averaging 10.1 mo, a final diagnosis 
was established in 113 patients, 52 of which had Alzheimer's disease. The 
probability of Alzheimer's disease was determined for seven scintigraphic 
patterns. The probability was 19% that patients with memory loss and normal 
perfusion had Alzheimer's disease. For abnormal perfusion patterns, the 
probability of Alzheimer's disease was 82% with bilateral temporoparietal 
defects, 77% with bilateral temporoparietal defects with additional defects, 57% 
with unilateral temporoparietal defects, 43% with frontal defects only, 18% with 
other large defects and 0% with multiple small cortical defects. We conclude 
that for 99mTc-HMPAO SPECT the predictive value of bilateral temporoparietal 
defects for Alzheimer's disease is high, while the perfusion patterns of 
unilateral temporoparietal perfusion defects and frontal defects only, which 
occur in 20% of patients with Alzheimer's disease, are not predictive of that 
disease.

PMID: 1732438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Neurosci Lett. 1992 Feb 17;136(1):59-62. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(92)90647-p.

Ubiquitin expression in globose tangles in the locus coeruleus in brains of 
patients with Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Kida E(1), Barcikowska M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Medical Research Centre, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Warszawa.

The locus coeruleus belongs to brain areas exhibiting remarkable neuronal loss 
already during physiological aging and very early neurofibrillary tangles. We 
performed a semiquantitative, immunocytochemical study focused on the expression 
of ubiquitin in neurofibrillary tangles in the locus coeruleus as compared with 
the central superior nucleus. The locus coeruleus exhibited later ubiquitin 
expression in the neurofibrillary tangles, a lower percentage of ubiquitinated 
tangles and more frequently granular cytoplasmic staining with Tau-1 than the 
central superior nucleus. These results suggesting different, probably delayed, 
processing of Tau protein in the locus coeruleus might contribute additionally 
to cell injury in this area.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(92)90647-p
PMID: 1321968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Gerontol. 1992 Mar;47(2):M28-34. doi: 10.1093/geronj/47.2.m28.

The nature of excess mortality in nursing home patients with dementia.

van Dijk PT(1), van de Sande HJ, Dippel DW, Habbema JD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Social Medicine, Erasmus University, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Survival and excess mortality in 606 dementia patients admitted to a 
psychogeriatric nursing home were analyzed in a historical prospective 8-year 
follow up. The overall 2-year survival rate after admission was 55%, 60% for 
women and 39% for men. Patients with senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type had 
higher 2-year survival rates than those with multi-infarct dementia (57% vs 
41%). Physical impairment, inactivity, dependency as measured on an 
observational scale, and comorbidity had an adverse effect on survival. Diseases 
with the lowest two-year survival were myocardial infarction, heart failure, 
atrial fibrillation, parkinsonism, pulmonary infection, anemia, pressure sores, 
and malignancies. The mortality rates of dementia patients were higher than 
those of the general population, especially during the first months after 
admission. This excess mortality of dementia patients was better described by an 
additive than by a multiplicative factor, suggesting that dementia can primarily 
be regarded as an independent, competing mortality risk.

DOI: 10.1093/geronj/47.2.m28
PMID: 1538062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Neurol Clin. 1992 May;10(2):471-85.

Cognitive impairments in Parkinson's disease.

Levin BE(1), Tomer R, Rey GJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami, School of Medicine, Florida.

The clinical neuropsychologic profiles of patients with Parkinson's disease and 
patients with SDAT show both overlap and dissociation. Speech, language, and 
certain memory skills are examples of dissociable differences, especially in the 
early stages of the disease. Furthermore the presence of depression, evidence of 
cognitive slowing, and absence of aphasia in patients with Parkinson's disease 
suggest prominent subcortical involvement. It is probably premature to 
categorize all of the cognitive changes in patients with Parkinson's disease as 
subcortical, however. Some skills, such as visuospatial and executive functions, 
are impaired in both disorders, and although the etiologic bases for task 
failure may differ for each, this issue remains open-ended. Another problem is 
that often the evidence for or against the cortical/subcortical distinction is 
insufficient and in some cases based on a single measure thought to be 
representative of a given cognitive domain. Most importantly there are few 
comparative studies that provide unequivocal support for making a 
cortical/subcortical distinction. Failure to equate for level of cognitive 
impairment or functional disability between dementias and strict adherence to 
cross-sectional study designs further compromise efforts to characterize each 
syndrome precisely. Whitehouse suggested that a prospective study of several 
different dementias studied in parallel, examining a wide range of cognitive 
skills, is required before the cortical/subcortical classification scheme can be 
validated. A critical component is an autopsy program to confirm diagnoses and 
provide clinicopathologic correlation. It is possible that the diverse nature of 
the cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease is not a 
methodologic artifact but reflects multiple disease subtypes. Ross, Mahler, and 
Cummings proposed three dementia syndromes in patients with Parkinson's disease: 
one that is relatively mild and meets the criteria for subcortical dementia, a 
second that is more severe and shows a wider range of cognitive impairment but 
is still neuropathologically distinct from SDAT, and a third severe dementia 
with both subcortical and cortical involvement that may reflect basal ganglia 
and Alzheimer-type pathology.

PMID: 1584185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1992 May 11;648:161-8. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1992.tb24534.x.

beta-Methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism 
dementia of the western Pacific.

Duncan MW(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of New South Wales, Kensington, Australia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1992.tb24534.x
PMID: 1637043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Stroke. 1992 Jun;23(6):839-42. doi: 10.1161/01.str.23.6.839.

Stroke and Parkinson's disease.

Levine RL(1), Jones JC, Bee N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Middleton Veterans Affairs Hospital, Madison, Wis.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: We sought to determine whether the recently reported 
decreased incidence of stroke and atherosclerotic disease in a university 
hospital-based Parkinson's disease patient population would be demonstrated in 
our patient population.
METHODS: We performed a retrospective case-control review of the last 119 
Parkinson's disease patients discharged from the Middleton Veterans Affairs 
Hospital Neurology Service to study the incidence of ischemic stroke, myocardial 
ischemia, tobacco use, and other stroke risk factors. Controls were age and sex 
matched and were randomly taken from 238 non-Parkinson's disease discharges in 
which stroke or myocardial infarction was not the reason for hospitalization.
RESULTS: The cumulative incidences of ischemic stroke, hypertension, and 
diabetes mellitus were not significantly different between groups. Myocardial 
infarction, coronary artery disease, tobacco use, atrial fibrillation, cancer, 
and ethanol abuse were significantly more prevalent in the controls, whereas 
dementia and congestive heart failure were the only variables studied that were 
more prevalent in the Parkinson's disease patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study failed to demonstrate that Parkinson's disease patients 
from a Veteran population were protected from ischemic stroke.

DOI: 10.1161/01.str.23.6.839
PMID: 1595102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Nervenarzt. 1992 Jul;63(7):434-9.

[Pisa syndrome].

[Article in German]

García C(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychiatrisches Krankenhaus, Bad Hersfeld.

The Pisa Syndrome is a rare dystonic syndrome, first described by Ekbom et al. 
1972 as a side effect of neuroleptic therapy and subsequently by Patel et al. 
1991 as a symptom of dementia of the Alzheimer type. It consists of tonic 
flexion of the trunk to one side, accompanied by a slight rotation. The 
presentation of three clinical cases, including one without neuroleptic but with 
thymoleptic medication, is followed by etiological and therapeutical 
considerations as well as data concerning the prevalence of this rare syndrome. 
Finally, the question of a possible psychogenesis of this condition is 
discussed.

PMID: 1354332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 1992 Jul-Aug;29(7-8):549-53. doi: 
10.3143/geriatrics.29.549.

[Silent lacunes in the elderly Parkinson's disease correlated with ambulatory 
blood pressure].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeuchi K(1), Matsubayashi K, Kimura S, Kawamoto A, Ozawa T, Shimada K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicien & Geriatrics, Kochi Medical School.

Lacunes on brain MRI, causal blood pressure, 24-hour ambulatory blood pressure 
and common carotid blood flow measured by the doppler method were studied in 31 
elderly patients with Parkinson's disease (mean age 67.5 +/- 7.3 years). 
Nineteen patients with Parkinson's disease (61%) had at least one lacune. 
Patients with lacunes (P(+)) were significantly higher in age than patients 
without lacune (P(-)). The difference of casual blood pressure between patients 
in the two groups was not significant. On the other hand, the average of 
ambulatory blood pressure measurements during a 24-hour period was significantly 
higher in the P(+) group than in the P(-) group. The average of carotid blood 
flow was also significantly lower in the P(+) group than in the P(-) group, 
however, after adjustment for age, the difference between them became 
insignificant. In conclusion, the incidence of silent lacunes on brain MRI was 
fairly common in elderly patients with Parkinson's disease. A high average 
24-hour ambulatory blood pressure was suggested to be one of the risk factors of 
lacunar stroke in elderly cases of Parkinson's disease. The concept of "combine 
type" in Parkinsonism was supposed to be suitable as well as in senile dementia 
of Alzheimer type.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.29.549
PMID: 1434050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Neurology. 1992 Jul;42(7):1336-40. doi: 10.1212/wnl.42.7.1336.

Content of the neurotoxins cycasin (methylazoxymethanol beta-D-glucoside) and 
BMAA (beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine) in cycad flour prepared by Guam Chamorros.

Kisby GE(1), Ellison M, Spencer PS.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health Sciences University, Portland 97201.

Exposure to cycad seed kernel is an etiologic factor for the western Pacific 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC). 
Traditionally processed cycad flours (n = 17) obtained from Chamorro residents 
of Guam and the adjacent island of Rota at risk for neurodegenerative disease 
were extracted and analyzed by high-performance liquid chromatography for 
content of beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) and methyl-azoxymethanol 
beta-D-glucoside (cycasin). Cycasin (detection limit: picomole) was present in 
concentrations of 0.004 to 75.93 micrograms/g (mean, 12.45 +/- 5.0 
micrograms/g), and levels of BMAA (detection limit: subpicomole) ranged from 
0.00 to 18.39 micrograms/g (mean, 5.44 +/- 1.56 micrograms/g). On average, 
cycasin content was approximately 10 times higher than that of BMAA. The largest 
concentrations of cycasin were found in samples from villages with a high 
reported prevalence of ALS/PDC. Ingestion of cycad-derived food would result in 
estimated human exposure to milligram amounts of cycasin per day. The cytotoxic 
properties of cycasin merit consideration in relation to the etiology of western 
Pacific ALS/PDC.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.42.7.1336
PMID: 1620343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Neurology. 1992 Sep;42(9):1791-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.42.9.1791.

Paralimbic frontal lobe hypometabolism in depression associated with 
Huntington's disease.

Mayberg HS(1), Starkstein SE, Peyser CE, Brandt J, Dannals RF, Folstein SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins Medical Institutions, Baltimore, MD.

We measured regional cerebral glucose metabolism using 
2-[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose and positron emission tomography in depressed 
and nondepressed patients with early Huntington's disease (HD), compared with 
appropriately matched controls. Caudate, putamen, and cingulate metabolism was 
significantly lower in patients with HD than in control subjects, independent of 
mood state. Orbital frontal-inferior prefrontal cortex hypometabolism, however, 
differentiated depressed patients from both nondepressed patients and normal 
controls. These findings implicate selective dysfunction of the paralimbic 
regions of the frontal lobes in the mood disorder of HD. The metabolic pattern 
is similar to that in depression associated with Parkinson's disease, suggesting 
that the integrity of pathways linking paralimbic frontal cortex and the basal 
ganglia may be integral to the normal regulation of mood.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.42.9.1791
PMID: 1387463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Ann Neurol. 1992 Sep;32(3):312-20. doi: 10.1002/ana.410320303.

Rapidly progressive autosomal dominant parkinsonism and dementia with 
pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration.

Wszolek ZK(1), Pfeiffer RF, Bhatt MH, Schelper RL, Cordes M, Snow BJ, Rodnitzky 
RL, Wolters EC, Arwert F, Calne DB.

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 
68198-2045.

We describe a family with nearly 300 members over 8 generations with 32 affected 
individuals who have an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease 
characterized by progressive parkinsonism with dystonia unrelated to 
medications, dementia, ocular motility abnormalities, pyramidal tract 
dysfunction, frontal lobe release signs, perseverative vocalizations, and 
urinary incontinence. The course is exceptionally aggressive; symptom onset and 
death consistently occur in the fifth decade. Positron emission tomographic 
studies with [18F]6-fluoro-L-dopa (6FD) were performed in 4 patients and 7 
individuals at risk for development of the disease. All affected subjects had 
markedly reduced striatal uptake of 6FD (p less than 0.001). All individuals at 
risk had normal striatal uptake, but high 6FD uptake rate constants were noted 
in 3 of the 7 studied. Autopsy findings revealed severe neuronal loss with 
gliosis in substantia nigra, pontine tegmentum, and globus pallidus, with less 
involvement of the caudate and the putamen. There were no plaques, tangles, Lewy 
bodies, or amyloid bodies. This kindred appears to represent a neurodegenerative 
disease not heretofore described. We propose the following name for this new 
genetic disease: autosomal dominant parkinsonism and dementia with 
pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410320303
PMID: 1416801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Psycholinguist Res. 1992 Sep;21(5):383-9. doi: 10.1007/BF01067922.

Acoustic analysis in the differentiation of Parkinson's disease and major 
depression.

Flint AJ(1), Black SE, Campbell-Taylor I, Gailey GF, Levinton C.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Psychiatry, Toronto General Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

In its early stages, Parkinson's disease (P.D.) may be difficult to distinguish 
from major depression (M.D.) leading to inappropriate management. Both illnesses 
are characterized by psychomotor retardation. The neurovegetative symptoms used 
to diagnose M.D. are not specific and in P.D. may be due to the physical illness 
itself. Currently, differentiation of the two disorders relies on subjective 
clinical observation. Improved diagnostic accuracy based on more objective data 
is needed. To this end, this study used computerized acoustic analysis to 
contrast speech patterns in P.D. and M.D. The sample consisted of 30 P.D. 
patients without depression or dementia, 30 patients with uncomplicated M.D., 
and 31 normal controls, each 60 years of age or over. Of the acoustic variables 
studied, M.D. patients had significantly reduced rates of speech compared with 
P.D. patients. The data suggest that this temporal measure of speech may be 
useful in the differentiation of P.D. and M.D.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01067922
PMID: 1447729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1992 Oct-Dec;5(4):228-32. doi: 
10.1177/002383099200500408.

Pattern of use of antidepressants in long-term care facilities for the elderly.

Conn DK(1), Goldman Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Baycrest Centre for Geriatric Care, Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

Despite some evidence that neuroleptic medication is overused or misused in 
long-term care facilities for the elderly, there has been virtually no attention 
paid to the pattern of use of antidepressants in these facilities. All patients 
in long-term care in a geriatric hospital and a home for the aged who were 
receiving antidepressants were identified; 10.5% of the patients in the hospital 
and 12.7% in the home for the aged were receiving an antidepressant. The rate of 
use of antidepressants on the different units ranged from 0% to 26.8%. The most 
commonly prescribed antidepressant was doxepin followed by nortriptyline. The 
mean dose of antidepressant was 34.8 mg. Although depression was the most common 
reason for the prescription of an antidepressant (69% of patients receiving 
one), other reasons included pain, agitation, aggression, and insomnia. Patients 
had been receiving antidepressants for up to 10 years, with a mean duration of 
32 months. The majority of patients (60%) had a history of depression predating 
their institutional admission. Patients receiving antidepressants were compared 
to a group not receiving antidepressants, who were matched for age, sex, unit, 
and attending physician. Patients receiving antidepressants were more likely to 
have a history of stroke (33.8% versus 16.9%). There was no significant 
difference between the two groups regarding the prevalence of dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, thyroid disease, malignant tumor, congestive heart failure, 
or diabetes mellitus. Prospective studies are required to determine the efficacy 
of antidepressants in this population and to identify factors that can predict a 
positive response to treatment.

DOI: 10.1177/002383099200500408
PMID: 1418368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Semin Nucl Med. 1992 Oct;22(4):233-46. doi: 10.1016/s0001-2998(05)80118-7.

The use of positron emission tomography in the clinical assessment of dementia.

Mazziotta JC(1), Frackowiak RS, Phelps ME.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiological Sciences, UCLA School of Medicine 90024.

A number of reasons can be cited for performing a test that identifies patients 
early in their course who have fatal and currently untreatable neurological 
disorders. At this stage of illness there is clinical ambiguity. The patient, 
family, and physician are typically faced with a battery of negative test 
results and an ambiguous clinical impression that can lead to periodic 
repetition of tests that involve cost, inconvenience, potential morbidity to the 
patient, and lack of definitive diagnosis. An accurate test would lead to the 
avoidance of these low-yield, repetitive, and costly evaluations. In addition, 
such studies can identify homogeneous groups of individuals with degenerative 
disorders leading to dementia who could be enrolled in experimental therapeutic 
programs. In these programs therapies could be monitored in an objective and 
noninvasive fashion using positron emission tomography (PET). The magnitude of 
the health problems resulting from the dementing illnesses is great in terms of 
medical practice, economics, and family hardship. The number of individuals with 
these disorders is predicted to increase dramatically in the future. The ability 
to provide an accurate diagnosis and more clear prognosis early in the disease 
course should diminish ambiguity for patients, families, and physicians. Ample 
evidence is cited in this article to show that PET has the ability to provide 
such information objectively and noninvasively.

DOI: 10.1016/s0001-2998(05)80118-7
PMID: 1439869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Minerva Med. 1992 Oct;83(10):621-7.

[Neurological changes in aged patients with fractures of the femur: prevalence 
and clinical aspects].

[Article in Italian]

Santus G(1), Pasolini G, Ranzenigo A, Inzoli MR.

Author information:
(1)Divisione di Medicina Riabilitativa, Ospedale S. Orsola Fatebenefratelli, 
Brescia.

This study evaluates the prevalence and clinical significance of the main 
neurological diseases in 246 hospitalized elderly patients with hip fracture, 
who have to undergo rehabilitative treatment. Eighty-three patients already had 
clinically noticeable neurological diseases before fracture; they were compared 
to other components the survey. As for the type of fracture and surgical 
treatment, differences have not been found. Medical conditions have proved worse 
among neurological disease bearers; the same patients also had to run into more 
complications. What results from the study, considering the high prevalence of 
neurological diseases in patients with hip fractures, suggests that these 
neurological diseases are important risk factors for accidental falls and it's 
necessary to provide these patients with careful, continuous hospital 
assistance.

PMID: 1461533 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1992 Nov;32(11):1193-202.

[A clinicopathological study on 13 cases of motor neuron disease with dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Yoshida M(1), Murakami N, Hashizume Y, Takahashi A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Higashi Nagoya National Hospital.

Thirteen patients suffering from motor neuron disease with dementia were studied 
to analyze the clinicopathological spectrum. The diagnosis of the disease was 
made on the basis of a clinical history of progressive dementia and motor neuron 
involvement. The mean age at onset of 11 sporadic cases was 54.9 years (range, 
43 to 69 years), with a mean duration of disease of 25 months (range, 11 to 47 
months). The initial symptoms were dementia in 7 cases, motor neuron involvement 
in 2 cases, and both dementia and motor neuron involvement in 2 cases. The 
clinical picture of motor neuron disturbance in sporadic cases represented 
bulbar-type of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Bulbar palsy was the initial 
symptom in 7 sporadic cases and all 11 patients developed bulbar palsy with 
advancing course of illness. Muscular wasting and fasciculation were more 
predominant in the upper limbs, shoulder girdle and anterior chest. 
Fasciculation was more extensively and frequently observed in those portions 
than that of classical ALS. In contrast, muscle strength in the lower limbs was 
well preserved so that all patients could walk even when respiratory failure 
developed. Hyperreflexia including jaw jerk was found in all cases and positive 
Babinski sign in 7 cases. Parkinsonism appeared in the initial stage in one 
sporadic case and in two familial cases. The type of dementia with uninhibited 
behavior and personality change closely mimicked that of Pick's disease. The 
degree of dementia was mild or moderate in 8 cases and severe in 3 cases. 
Language disorder was characterized by progressive reduction of speech output, 
leading finally to mutism in 5 cases. Perseveration was observed in 10 cases. 
Visuospatial disorder was absent even in the advanced stage. Mild memory 
disturbance was noted in the early stage in 10 cases. Pathological examination 
was performed in 7 cases including one familial case, revealing frontal atrophy 
in 3 cases, frontotemporal atrophy in 2 cases and temporal atrophy in 2 cases. 
On microscopic examination there were mild neuronal loss, gliosis, mild spongy 
state of the cortical superficial layers and fibrous gliosis in the 
frontotemporal white matter. The scattered senile plaques in one case did not 
justify a diagnosis of Alzheimer's type dementia. Neither circumscribed atrophy 
nor Pick body was found in any case. The nucleus basalis of Meynert showed no 
neuronal loss. The substantia nigra showed a mild to severe loss of nerve cells 
without Lewy bodies in all cases.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 1301319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Arch Neurol. 1992 Dec;49(12):1262-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1992.00530360060019.

Cerebral glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease with and without dementia.

Peppard RF(1), Martin WR, Carr GD, Grochowski E, Schulzer M, Guttman M, McGeer 
PL, Phillips AG, Tsui JK, Calne DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Although cognitive impairment is commonly associated with Parkinson's disease, 
the relative importance of cortical and subcortical pathologic changes to the 
development of dementia is controversial. Characteristic abnormalities in 
cortical glucose metabolism have been reported previously in Alzheimer's 
disease, a disease in which cortical changes predominate. We measured cerebral 
glucose metabolism with positron emission tomography in 20 control subjects and 
in 14 patients with PD with mental status ranging from normal to severely 
demented to determine whether changes in cortical glucose metabolism occur in 
early PD and whether the degree and pattern of metabolic change relate to the 
severity of dementia. The patients were divided into demented and nondemented 
groups according to the results of neuropsychological assessment. Age-adjusted 
covariance analyses were performed, since the age distribution varied between 
groups. The nondemented patients with PD showed widespread cortical glucose 
hypometabolism without any selective temporoparietal defects. The pattern of 
glucose hypometabolism seen in the demented patients with PD resembled that 
described in patients with Alzheimer's disease; ie, there was a global decrease 
in glucose metabolism, with more severe abnormalities observed in the 
temporoparietal regions.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1992.00530360060019
PMID: 1449406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Arch Neurol. 1992 Dec;49(12):1296-303. doi: 
10.1001/archneur.1992.00530360098025.

Suicide and patients with neurologic diseases. Methodologic problems.

Stenager EN(1), Stenager E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Odense University, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The suicide risk in patients with many neurologic diseases has been 
reported to be greater than that in the general population. Studies on the 
subject are, however, often encumbered with methodologic problems. We appraised 
these problems and, based on an evaluation, reappraised knowledge of the suicide 
risk in patients with specific neurologic diseases.
DATA SOURCE: Using the computerized database MEDLINE, we identified all 
published reports with the key words suicide, attempted suicide, and neurologic 
diseases.
STUDY SELECTION: We assessed and reviewed studies concerning the most common 
neurologic diseases for methodologic problems in the study design.
DATA EXTRACTION: The following methodologic problems emerged during our review: 
(1) choice of study type, ie, autopsy study or follow-up study; (2) choice of 
study population; (3) choice of control groups; (4) epidemiologic/statistical 
methods used; and (5) validity of statistics reported.
DATA SYNTHESIS: We analyzed the methodologic problems in studies of patients 
with multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, Huntington's chorea, spinal cord lesions, 
cranial trauma, brain tumors, Parkinson's disease, vascular disorders, and 
migraine. In most of the studies, the methods used gave rise to uncertainty 
about the conclusion presented.
CONCLUSION: An increased suicide risk was found in patients suffering from 
multiple sclerosis and spinal cord lesions as well as in selected groups of 
patients with epilepsy. In other neurologic diseases, the suicide risk may be 
increased, but the results are uncertain due to the methodologic problems in the 
study design.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1992.00530360098025
PMID: 1449409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Curr Opin Neurol Neurosurg. 1992 Dec;5(6):889-94.

Lewy body disease.

Hansen LA(1), Galasko D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego.

Subsumed under the rubric of Lewy body disease are idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (PD), pure diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), and, most commonly, 
combined brainstem and neocortical Lewy bodies with Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
pathology in a relatively early developmental stage. Clinical correlates are 
dementia with psychiatric and subcortical features plus mild extrapyramidal 
signs (EPS).

PMID: 1467583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Schweiz Rundsch Med Prax. 1992 Dec 15;81(51):1534-7.

[Progressive supranuclear palsy].

[Article in German]

Tackmann W(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Abteilung, Weserbergland-Klinik, Höxter.

Progressive supranuclear palsy, first described as clinical entity by Steele, 
Richardson and Olszewski, is a degenerative disorder of the central nervous 
system. Besides progressive supranuclear oculomotor disturbances, other 
characteristic signs are pseudobulbar paresis, axial rigidity, gait disturbances 
and subcortical dementia. Misinterpretation in the early stage as Parkinson's 
disease is frequently seen. A causal therapy is still missing.

PMID: 1470796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Acta Neurochir Suppl (Wien). 1993;58:3-7. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-9297-9_1.

Reparative strategies in the brain: treatment strategies based on trophic 
factors and cell transfer techniques.

Olson L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology and Neurobiology, Karolinska Institutet, Sweden.

Three reparative strategies based on transfer of genes, molecules, or cells to 
the central nervous system are reviewed. When neurons are already lost, they can 
sometimes be replaced by transfer to the target area of neurons or other cells 
compensating for the lost functions. This technique is undergoing clinical 
trials in Parkinson's disease. Before neurons have died, it may be possible to 
prevent "stressed" neurons from dying, and stimulate nerve terminal 
ramifications from remaining neurons using treatment with neurotrophic factors. 
Such approaches, with an emphasis on the NGF family of neurotrophins and their 
receptors, are reviewed. Finally, advances of molecular biology techniques 
suggest that it should be possible to transfer genes directly into non-dividing 
cells of the central nervous system. The three different approaches all aim at 
long-lasting counteractive and reparative measures in the central nervous 
system. It is predicted that they have general applicability, and may become 
important not only in neurodegenerative diseases, but also in other common 
afflictions of the nervous system such as ischaemia, stroke and injury.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-9297-9_1
PMID: 8109297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Eur Neurol. 1993;33(6):403-8. doi: 10.1159/000116984.

Staging of Alzheimer-related cortical destruction.

Braak H(1), Braak E, Bohl J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt, FRG.

The gradual intraneuronal accumulation of an insoluble fibrous material which 
partly consists of abnormally phosphorylated tau protein (neurofibrillary 
change) represents an important neuropathological hallmark of Alzheimer's 
disease. Neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads formed from this material 
develop in only a few types of cortical pyramidal cells. The first changes are 
seen in the entorhinal cortex. The destructive process then spreads into the 
hippocampal formation and eventually encroaches upon the isocortex. This 
sequence of events permits the distinction of six stages with a progressive 
increase in the severity of cortical destruction. The entorhinal region serves 
as an important interface between the isocortex and hippocampus. This interface 
function is markedly impaired due to the early deterioration of the entorhinal 
cortex. Severe entorhinal involvement is considered to represent the 
morphological counterpart of clinically incipient Alzheimer's disease. Similar 
changes are found in mentally impaired individuals suffering from Parkinson's 
disease or progressive supranuclear palsy.

DOI: 10.1159/000116984
PMID: 8307060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Neuroepidemiology. 1993;12(6):345-9. doi: 10.1159/000110337.

Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases: epidemiological comparison. 2. Persons at 
risk.

Treves TA(1), Chandra V, Korczyn AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tel Aviv Medical Center, Tel Aviv University, 
Israel.

Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases are age-related degenerative disorders that 
share common clinical, pathological and biochemical features. Epidemiological 
studies demonstrate a similar distribution of the disease in place and time. 
Causes of death and populations at higher risk are similar. These findings 
suggest that these diseases must have common determinants.

DOI: 10.1159/000110337
PMID: 8309510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Eur Neurol. 1993;33 Suppl 1:6-23. doi: 10.1159/000118533.

Pathogenesis of idiopathic parkinsonism.

Uitti RJ(1), Calne DB.

Author information:
(1)University of British Columbia, Neurodegenerative Disorders Centre, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Idiopathic parkinsonism (Parkinson's disease) makes up the largest diagnostic 
subgroup of patients with parkinsonism. Various hypotheses exist regarding the 
pathogenesis of idiopathic parkinsonism: these include genetic predilection 
aging, environmental factors, oxidative stress, excitotoxicity, autoimmunity, 
and trauma. We suggest that the pathogenesis of idiopathic parkinsonism is 
likely to be multifactorial, deriving from environmental factor(s) acting upon a 
genetically predisposed individual. Because of the compelling evidence 
indicating common clinical and pathological findings in idiopathic parkinsonism, 
Alzheimer's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, we believe that these 
conditions result from pathological processes with more similarity than 
diversity. A primary glutamatergic cell neocortical abnormality provides an 
attractive unifying explanation which may explain the overlapping abnormalities 
found in idiopathic parkinsonism, Alzheimer's disease, and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

DOI: 10.1159/000118533
PMID: 8375434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Med Genet. 1993 Jan 1;45(1):68-76. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320450118.

Potential role of an additive genetic component in the cause of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia in the western Pacific.

Bailey-Wilson JE(1), Plato CC, Elston RC, Garruto RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biometry and Genetics, Louisiana State University Medical 
Center, New Orleans 70112.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and parkinsonism-dementia (PD) are 
neurological degenerative disorders that occur in three high incidence foci in 
the western Pacific: among the Chamorros of Guam and the Commonwealth of the 
Northern Marianas Islands, among Japanese on the Kii peninsula of Honshu Island, 
and among the Auyu and Jakai peoples of southern West New Guinea. Previous 
studies have implicated both genetic susceptibility and environmental risk 
factors in the causation and familial clustering of these disorders. The data 
analyzed consist of 2,026 individuals in nuclear families ascertained on Guam 
through two mechanisms: (1) nuclear families were included in the study if one 
or both parents in the family were affected with ALS or PD or both; and (2) a 
group of "controls" was selected by obtaining nuclear families where neither 
parent was affected and both had lived through the age of risk. Clinically, ALS 
and PD are two distinct disorders. However, preliminary analyses indicated that 
combining all three diagnoses into one affected diagnosis for genetic analyses 
(thereby assuming any genetic effect on susceptibility to the two disorders was 
due to the same genetic mechanism) was reasonable. An age, sex and birth 
cohort-specific liability was defined and segregation analysis was performed 
under both logistic and normal models for this liability at the time of disease 
onset. Under either model, purely environmental, Mendelian dominant and 
Mendelian recessive hypotheses could be rejected, but a two-allele additive 
major locus hypothesis could not be rejected.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320450118
PMID: 8418664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]