1. Can Med Assoc J. 1965 Mar 6;92(10):514-6.

FINGERPRINT PATTERNS IN HUNTINGTON'S CHOREA AND PARKINSON'S DISEASE.

BARBEAU A, TRUDEAU JG, COITEUX C.

In the course of a continuing search for means of predicting Huntington's chorea 
before the onset of neurological symptoms, a study of fingerprint patterns was 
undertaken, using the technique employed by Hodges and Simon in the 
investigation of patients with Wilson's disease. Fingerprint patterns of 61 
patients with Huntington's chorea and 50 with Parkinson's disease were compared 
with norms established by Scotland Yard. Although an increased incidence of the 
"whorl" pattern was seen in the left second and third fingers in patients with 
Huntington's chorea, this finding could not be interpreted as having diagnostic 
or prognostic value as it was found also in some normal subjects and in 
occasional cases of Parkinson's disease. The pattern supposedly characteristic 
of Wilson's disease was also seen in persons with Huntington's chorea.

PMCID: PMC1928158
PMID: 14275039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Contemp Neurol Ser. 1975;12:45-70.

Patterns of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Parkinsonism-Dementia on Guam.

Brody JA, Stanhope JM, Kurland LT.

The striking concentration of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonismdementia (PD) among the Chamorro people of Guam has attracted 
attention since the early 1950's. Extensive studies conducted over the past 20 
years have not revealed the causes of these diseases and the reasons for their 
remarkable concentrations on Guam. Approximately 1 in 10 Guamanian deaths over 
age 25 is from ALS, and another 1 in 10 is from PD. ALS still occurs 
approximately 50 times more frequently on Guam than in the continental United 
States. Advances in virologic and biochemical techniques, and long years of 
study, appear to be leading us to a point where some of the problems will be 
resolved. We shall attempt to review the pertinent background information and 
summarize the data and observations up to the present time.

PMID: 1095295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Apr;101(4):287-301. doi: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112097.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam, 1945-1972. I. 
Descriptive epidemiology.

Reed DM, Brody JA.

An overview of the epidemiologic studies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
and parkinsonism-dementia (PD) from 1945 through 1972 is presented. During this 
period 350 cases of ALS were documented. PD, which is apparently unique to the 
native Chamorro population, was not recognized during the early years of the 
study. A total of 213 PD patients have now been seen. The rates of both diseases 
have declined by approximately 50 per cent since 1965. In the early years 
incidence per 100,000 for ALS males approached 60; for females it was about 40. 
For PD males it was about 50; for females it was close to 20. The declines in 
both diseases have occurred in both sexes and at all age groups and no cohort 
phenomenon was observed. Marked geographic differences in the distribution of 
the diseases were observed with southern villages having the highest rates and 
western villages having the lowest rates; the remainder of the island was 
intermediate. Recent declines have been most marked in the southern high-rate 
villages. Chamorros living on the island of Rota have rates similar to those on 
Guam; those on Saipan have lower rates. A possible excess of ALS among Filipino 
residents ofGuam was noted; ALS has not been seen among other ethnic groups. 
Geographic mapping even in high incidence areas did not reveal true clusters or 
foci. Extensive case-control studies did not reveal any patterns of prior 
illness, life-style, or exposures distinguishing patients. A tendency for 
patients to be of somewhat lower socioeconomic level, have less education, eat 
more homegrown foods and raw meats, and more contact with animals was found. No 
Mendelian genetic patterns were observed; males were affected more frequently 
than female for both diseases. Cases did not occur before age 20, reached 
maximum frequency between ages 55 and 65 and there-after declined. Environmental 
factors associated with some aspects of the traditional way of life seem to be 
causally involved, but, since most aspects of the traditional life have changed 
in the past 50 years, the specific factors remain elusive.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112097
PMID: 1124759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Apr;101(4):302-10. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112098.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam, 1945-1972. II. 
Familial and genetic studies.

Reed DM, Torres JM, Brody JA.

The extraordinarily high rate of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD) in the Chamorro linguistic group on Guam suggested a 
genetic etiology for these diseases. Results of three studies are described. Two 
involved comparisons of the rates of disease in relatives and spouses of index 
patients and controls. In the third we examined offspring of doubly affected 
parents, 10 spouse pairs with ALS, 3 spouse pairs with PD and 13 spouse pairs in 
which 1 spouse had ALS and the other PD. Within the limitations of numbers and 
age of offspring, we found a tendency among siblings and offspring of ALS cases 
to have a higher risk than control relatives. Numbers were small and in no 
instance were significant differences encountered. Spouses of patients had at 
least as high risk of developing ALS or PD as any of the groups of blood 
relatives. A slightly higher age-specific rate of ALS and PD occurred in the 
offspring of doubly affected parents. The only group large enough for present 
analysis are 60 offspring of doubly affected ALS parents over the age of 20. 
Thus far only 3 have developed ALS. Within our entire patient population of 350 
ALS cases and 219 PD cases there were 12 instances in which one parent of the 
patient was not Chamorro. In addition there is a consistent two- to threefold 
excess of affected males which could not be accounted for by competitive risks 
of death from other causes among females. While a familial tendency does exist 
these findings and observations are not compatible with any simple Mendelian 
form of inheritance. It is possible that genetic influences affect the 
occurrence of these diseases but our studies suggest that environmental factors 
play at least as important a role.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112098
PMID: 1124760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Exp Med. 1975 Aug 1;142(2):483-94. doi: 10.1084/jem.142.2.483.

RNA-instructed DNA polymerase activity in a cytoplasmic particulate fraction in 
brains from Guamanian patients.

Viola MV, Frazier M, White L, Brody J, Spiegelman S.

Nervous system tissues from a number of patients with idiopathic neurological 
disorders were examined for biochemical evidence of RNA tumor virus infection. 
RNase-sensitive DNA polymerase activity was found in a cytoplasmic particulate 
fraction from two patients with Guamanian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
but not in brains from two normal U.S. individuals. The buoyant density of the 
enzyme-containing fraction was 1.16-1.18 g/ml and could be converted to a denser 
region of the gradient (1.24 g/ml) by treatment with the nonionic surfactant, 
Sterox. The cation and detergent requirements for the endogenous RNase-sensitive 
DNA polymerase reaction were determined. The early (5 min) endogenous reverse 
transcriptase product was analyzed by cesium sulfate gradient centrifugation. 
RNase- and heat-sensitive RNA-DNA hybrids were detected in the product analysis 
of two ALS, one Parkinsonism-dementia (PD) brain, and two brains from 
asymptomatic Chamorros but not in brains from normal U.S. individuals and a 
number of patients with neuro-psychiatric disorders. The DNA product was a 4.5S 
heteropolymer that hybridized more extensively to RNA extracted from the 
enzyme-containing pellet from PD brain as compared to a similar fraction from 
normal U.S. brain. The DNA product appeared to be unrelated to Rausvher or visna 
virus 70S RNA as determined by RNA-[-3H]DNA hybridization.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.142.2.483
PMCID: PMC2189894
PMID: 49390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1976 Apr;39(4):367-74. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.39.4.367.

Acetylcholine and choline in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Parkinson's 
disease and Huntington's chorea.

Welch MJ, Markham CH, Jenden DJ.

Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) acetylcholine (ACh) and choline (Ch) levels 
were measured in patients with Huntington's chorea (N=11), Parkinson's disease 
(N=8), and subjects at risk for Huntington's chorea (N=4), and all three groups 
were found not to differ significantly from normal controls (N=10). The values 
found for lumbar CSF ACh and Ch levels in the normal subjects were comparable 
with previously reported values. The use of physostigmine, a cholinesterase 
inhibitor, in collecting the CSF samples did not appear to make a difference 
with regard to ACh and Ch concentrations. Evidence suggesting a 
ventricular-lumbar gradient, with lumbar CSF Ch concentration being less than 
ventricular CSF Ch concentration, was found. Finally, ACh levels in CSF did not 
correlate with corresponding Ch levels.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.39.4.367
PMCID: PMC492287
PMID: 132512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Clin Invest. 1977 May;59(5):922-32. doi: 10.1172/JCI108714.

Antibodies to human caudate nucleus neurons in Huntington's chorea.

Husby G, Li L, Davis LE, Wedege E, Kokmen E, Williams RC Jr.

Antibodies reacting with neuronal cytoplasmic antigens present in normal human 
caudate and subthalamic nuclei were detected in 37 of 80 probands afflicted with 
Huntington's disease (HD). IgG antibodies were detected by immunofluorescence 
using frozen sections of unfixed normal human and rat brain. Specificity of IgG 
binding was confirmed using pepsin F(ab')2 fragments of IgG isolated from 
positive sera. In vitro complement fixation of IgG antibody was detected in 22 
of 31 sera tested. Neuronal cytoplasmic antigens reacting with positive HD sera 
were diminished after trypsin or RNAase treatment of tissue sections but were 
not removed by DNAase, neuraminidase, EDTA, or dithiothreitol treatment. 
Antibody staining of neurons could be removed after absorption with isolated 
caudate nucleus neurons or by using perchloroacetic acid extracts of caudate 
nucleus. Prevalence of antibody reacting with neuronal cytoplasm was 3% in 60 
normal controls and 6% among a wide variety of patients with diverse 
neurological disorders. However, one-third of 33 patients with Parkinson's 
disease showed presence of antineuronal antibody. Among patients with HD, a 
significant association was noted between duration of clinical disease greater 
than 7 yr and titers of antibody of 1:2 or greater (P less than 0.001). When 115 
family members of HD probands were tested, 30% of unaffected spouses showed 
presence of antineuronal antibody. 23.2% of first-degree relatives at risk for 
developing HD was also positive (P less than 0.001). 10.5% of second-degree 
relatives showed presence of antineuronal antibody. These data may support an 
environmental or infectious factor somehow involved in the ultimate expression 
of HD.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI108714
PMCID: PMC372300
PMID: 140183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Can J Neurol Sci. 1977 May;4(2):81-8.

Slow infections of the central nervous system.

Becker LE.

This review describes the recent advances in slow infections of the nervous 
system emphasizing the pathogenetic aspects of these diseases. A theoretical 
model for the pathogenesis of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is 
proposed, illustrating the factors that may affect host response to the measles 
virus and allow it to persist and produce the panencephalitis. The isolation of 
an oncogenic virus from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) has 
implications in the consideration of a viral etiology for some brain tumors. The 
agent responsible for the transmissibility of kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
(CJD) remains uncharacterized despite recent interest in viroids and 
abnormalities in replication of cell membranes. The epidemiological data on 
multiple sclerosis suggests an exposure to an infectious agent at an early age 
of life modified by the host response. No specific agent has been consistently 
associated with multiple sclerosis. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
Parkinson's disease, Mollaret's meningitis and Behcet's disease are other 
examples where a virus is suspect but unproven. The ability of viruses to 
persist in the host for months to years has linked many chronic neurologic 
diseases to an infectious agent, enlarging the spectrum of disease caused by 
viruses.

PMID: 322829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Arch Neurol. 1977 Nov;34(11):683-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1977.00500230053008.

Cerebrospinal fluid gamma-aminobutyric acid variations in neurological 
disorders.

Enna SJ, Stern LZ, Wastek GJ, Yamamura HI.

Neuropathologically, Huntington's disease is characterized by a profound 
reduction in neuronal cells originating in the corpus striatum and globus 
pallidus. Since one of these cell types utilizes gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
as a neurotransmitter, it may be possible to differentially diagnose this 
disorder on the basis of the CSF content of this amino acid. In order to 
determine the validity of this hypothesis, cerebrospinal fluid GABA was 
analyzed, using a recently developed radioreceptor assay procedure and was found 
to be significantly reduced in patients diagnosed as having Huntington's disease 
and also lower in patients with Alzheimer's disease, though no difference was 
noted between Parkinson patients and control subjects. The results suggest that 
analysis of cerebrospinal fluid GABA may have diagnostic, and perhaps 
predictive, value in certain neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1977.00500230053008
PMID: 143928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Acta Med Scand. 1978;203(1-2):75-85. doi: 10.1111/j.0954-6820.1978.tb14835.x.

Factors influencing the occurrence of "on-off" symptoms during long-term 
treatment with L-dopa.

Granérus AK.

"On-off" symptoms were found to have developed in 43 of 85 parkinsonian patients 
who had been treated with L-dopa for five years or more, the risk of such 
symptoms apparently being greater the younger the patient had been at the début 
of the disease and at the start of treatment. The dopa dose had been higher 
throughout the treatment in the patients developing "on-off" symptoms than in 
those maintaining an even effect, and, furthermore, the initial improvement had 
been more marked and dyskinesia had appeared earlier and in a higher frequency. 
The clinical observations in the present studies seemed to be related to some 
pharmacological findings, where different degrees of the nigrostriatal neuron 
degeneration and the efficacy of the remaining neurons could be of importance 
for a varying therapeutic response. It also seemed possible that a higher dopa 
dose could evoke "on-off" symptoms more easily than a lower one in thereto 
predisposed individuals. As the patients maintaining an even symptomatology 
during long-term treatment with L-dopa were older, and in particularly as they 
had dementia in a higher frequency than those developing "on-off" symptoms, the 
possibility of a more widespread neuron damage, influencing the clinical 
manifestation in these patients, had to be taken into consideration.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0954-6820.1978.tb14835.x
PMID: 626117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Encephale. 1979;5(3):219-37.

[Neuropharmacological data on the striatum].

[Article in French]

Allain H, Reymann JM, Bentue Ferrer B, Menault F, Van Den Driessche J.

The striatum constitutes the most voluminous basal ganglia in man. It is issued 
from ganglionic eminences which are very early bound by limbic kernels. If the 
cortical and reticulo-spinal projections have been first described the existence 
of anatomical connexions with the limbic system offers a large number of 
functional possibilities. The knowledge of the distribution of the different 
chemical substances which are present within this structure as well as the 
enzymes necessary for their synthesis and destruction permits to establish a 
chemical mapping, the dopaminergic one being the best known. The dopaminergic 
synaptic function in the striatum helps to understand the respective roles of 
the pre and post-synaptic receptors as well as the mechanisms by which the other 
neuromediators can modulate the dopaminergic activity, the cyclic nucleotides 
being often necessary for this action. These fundamental data subtend the 
mechanism of action of most of the drugs which are involved in extrapyramidal 
phenomenons (neuroleptics, dopaminergic agonists) and allows to put forth 
physiopathological hypothesis on Parkinson disease, Huntington chorea, as well 
as certain induced or spontaneous dyskinetic states. The functions of the 
striatum are then evoked: if the role of this structure in motor control is 
critical, its involvement in complex behaviours is strongly suggested.

PMID: 39737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Acta Neurol Scand. 1979 Mar;59(2-3):80-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1979.tb02914.x.

Changing epidemiology of Parkinson's disease: predicted effects of levodopa 
treatment.

Marttila RJ, Rinne UK.

Recent studies suggest that levodopa treatment reduces the excess mortality due 
to Parkinson's disease, found to be three times that expected in the general 
population. This will affect the equilibrium state of the epidemiology of 
Parkinson's disease. The predicted increase in prevalence of Parkinson's disease 
was calculated according to two mortality patterns, one the same as expected in 
the general population and the other 1.5 times that expected; the proportional 
increase in prevalence is 1.8 and 1.4, respectively. The predicted increase in 
the duration of the disease if 6.3 or 3.2 years. As a consequence, there will be 
an increase of patients with long-term levodopa treatment difficulties, and with 
Parkinson's disease symptoms not treatable with levodopa, e.g. dementia. This 
seriously warrants the research of new approaches in the treatment of 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1979.tb02914.x
PMID: 452843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1980;(16):111-28. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8582-7_12.

Progressive supranuclear palsy: clinico-pathological and biochemical studies.

Jellinger K, Riederer P, Tomonaga M.

Ten autopsy cases of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) are reported. Age at 
onset ranged from 16 to 67 years and the duration of illness 3 to 24 years. The 
clinical features were aggressive mental retardation in 4 cases with early 
onset, paroxysmal dysequilibrium, ophthalmoplegia, rigidity and akinesia, 
pseudobulbar palsy and variable degrees of dementia. Neuropathology showed 
widespread neurofibrillary degeneration associated with system-bound neuronal 
loss and gliosis in subcortical areas, particularly affecting the subthalamic 
nucleus, substantia nigra, brainstem tegmentum and dentate nuclei, with no or 
little involvement of the cerebral cortex. The distribution of the lesions and 
the ultrastructure of the neurofibrillary tangles made of 15 nm straight 
filaments (seen in one case) in PSP are different from postencephalitic 
parkinsonism, Guam Parkinson-dementia complex and brainstem affection in 
(pre)senile dementia. Post-mortem biochemical analysis of two brains disclosed 
severe reduction of tyrosine hydroxylase, the key synthetic enzyme of the 
catecholamine pathway, not only in the nigrostriatal system as seen in 
Parkinson's disease, but in most areas of the brain-stem and limbic system. The 
implication and possible pathogenic and therapeutic significance of these 
biochemical findings are discussed. The etiology of PSP and its nosological 
position within the degenerative extrapyramidal disorders remain unknown.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8582-7_12
PMID: 6107328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Q J Med. 1980;49(195):283-93.

The impact of treatment with levodopa on Parkinson's disease.

Shaw KM, Lees AJ, Stern GM.

The progress of 178 patients with Parkinson's disease who began treatment with 
levodopa between November 1969 and December 1972 is reviewed after six years. 
One hundred and twenty-five patients showed an initial improvement of their 
individual total disability scores exceeding 25 per cent, but after six years of 
sustained treatment only 37 patients still obtained similar benefit. By 1978 
only five patients had maintained their initial improvement compared to 69 
patients after two years therapy; however, 47 patients were still better than 
before treatment. The overall mortality ratio--the ratio of observed to expected 
death rate--for all the patients was 1.45:1. In those patients who unable to 
tolerate levodopa for longer than two years the ratio was 2.38:1; in those who 
were able to tolerate sustained medication, life expectancy was normal (ratio of 
0.91:1 for males and 1.14:1 for females). Involuntary movements were the 
commonest complication of treatment. Three main types were distinguished. Peak 
dose dyskinesias, beginning 20 to 90 minutes after an oral dose and most severe 
midway through the inter-dose period, affected 80 per cent of patients. Early 
morning and end-of-dose dystonia occurred in 20 per cent of patients and 
biphasic dyskinesia--two distinct episodes of involuntary movements within each 
inter-dose period--was the least common pattern affecting 3 per cent of 
patients. Involuntary movements increased in frequency and severity as treatment 
continued. End-of-dose deterioration ('wearing-off' effect of individual doses) 
occurred in 65 per cent of patients: unpredictable oscillations in motor 
performance (the 'on-off' phenomenon) unrelated to the time and dosage of 
levodopa, occurred in 10 per cent. Psychiatric side effects included toxic 
confusional states, visual pseudohallucinations and paranoid psychoses and 
constituted the most frequent reason for stopping medication. Forty (22 per 
cent) of the patients had suffered severe depression before the onset of disease 
and levodopa had no sustained antidepressant effect in this group. After six 
years of treatment with levodopa, 32 per cent of the patients had unequivocal 
dementia.

PMID: 7465763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mech Ageing Dev. 1980 Sep-Oct;14(1-2):253-64. doi: 10.1016/0047-6374(80)90125-6.

Levodopa in the treatment of (pre) senile dementia.

Jellinger K, Flament H, Riederer P, Schmid H, Ambrozi L.

A progressive decrease of dopamine and related enzyme activities and a decline 
in the dopaminergic receptor functions in the striatum and limbic system 
controlling behavior have been observed in senescent brain. These changes 
provide a neurochemical basis for some behavioral and mental disturbances of the 
aged and suggest the possibility of a substitution therapy of neurotransmitter 
deficiency of senile and presenile dementia. Previous reports on the effects of 
levodopa treatment of dementia in parkinsonism and aging have given conflicting 
results. A controlled double-blind study of 6 months' administration of levodopa 
plus decarboxylase inhibitor given at oral doses of 250 mg daily versus placebo 
in twelve patients aged 54--60 years showing initial signs of organic dementia 
was performed. Clinical rating of twelve parameters of organic brain syndrome 
and psychometric studies using three subtests of the HAWIE (digit span, coding B 
test and block design) indicate improvement in the overall scores of organic 
brain syndrome and in particular in the visuospatial functions, visual memory, 
and visual-motor coordination. In general, improvement increased with the 
duration of levodopa treatment. These preliminary data suggest some beneficial 
effect of levodopa treatment in early stages of presenile dementia and thus open 
new therapeutic aspects in neurogerontology.

DOI: 10.1016/0047-6374(80)90125-6
PMID: 7010010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1980 Sep;43(9):846-8. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.43.9.846.

Dementia associated with Parkinson's disease: a genetic study.

Heston LL.

Relatives of 12 probands who had severe dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease were studied. A high risk for Parkinson's disease was found among 
relatives but only one instance of dementia. The high risk to relatives and the 
dementia of the probands appeared to be related to the overall severity of the 
Parkinsonian illness.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.43.9.846
PMCID: PMC490678
PMID: 7420108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Semin Nucl Med. 1981 Jan;11(1):32-49. doi: 10.1016/s0001-2998(81)80051-7.

Positron computed tomography studies of cerebral glucose metabolism in man: 
theory and application in nuclear medicine.

Phelps ME.

The capability of positron computed tomography (PCT) to delineate the 
substructures of the brain and its facility for accurately measuring the local 
tissue radioactivity concentration allow the application of tracer kinetic 
models for the study of local cerebral function in man. This principle and an 
adaptation of the 14C-deoxyglucose (DG) model of Sokoloff et al. with 
18F-2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) is being used at UCLA. Brookhaven National 
Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, NIH, and the Massachusetts General 
Hospital to determine the local cerebral glucose metabolic rate (LCMRGIc) in 
normal man at rest and during sensory activation and the changes that occur in 
patients with a variety of cerebral disorders. Kinetic studies with PCT have 
been employed to measure the rate constants of the model in different gray and 
white matter structures of the brain in both normal and ischemic states. The 
precision of the method in normals has been shown to be about +/- 5% for 1.5-2.0 
sq cm regions of the brain. Studies in normals have yielded values for 
hemispheric CMRGIc that are in agreement with measurement using the Kety-Schmidt 
technique and LCMRGIc values in agreement with values in monkeys using DG 
autoradiography. Studies in volunteers subjected to visual and auditory 
stimulation are demonstrating the potential of this technique for investigating 
the human brain's response to different stimuli. STudies in patients with stroke 
show excellent correlation between the degree, extent, and particular structures 
involved and the clinical symptoms. The method consistently detected 
hypometabolism in cortical, thalamic, and striatal tissues that were 
dysfunctional due to deactivation or damage but which appeared normal on x-ray 
CT. Studies in patients with partial epilepsy have shown hypometabolic zones 
that highly correlated anatomically with interictal EEG spike foci and were 
associated with normal x-ray CT studies in 77% of the patients studied. The 
studies on epilepsy at UCLA have resulted in the integration of the LCMRGIc 
study into the clinical workup of patients with partial epilepsy that are 
candidates for surgical resection of their epileptogenic focus (effective June 
1979). Studies on Huntington's chorea, Parkinson's disease, aphasia, dementia, 
schizophrenia, and tumors are in early stage of investigation but also are 
providing exciting new results. Further studies are needed to determine the role 
of the local function information obtained with the PCT-FDG method in 
elucidating the basic mechanism and the potential to aid in improving the 
approach to medical therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0001-2998(81)80051-7
PMID: 6972094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Arch Neurol. 1981 Jun;38(6):339-42. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1981.00510060041004.

Organic mental syndrome and confusional states in Parkinson's disease. 
Relationship to computerized tomographic signs of cerebral atrophy.

Sroka H, Elizan TS, Yahr MD, Burger A, Mendoza MR.

Ninety-three patients with a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, otherwise 
unselected, were specifically evaluated for organic mental syndrome (OMS) and 
other neurologic motor signs other than those referrable to extrapyramidal 
dysfunction; in addition, they had cranial computerized tomography (CT) to 
measure any structural changes in brain parenchyma. Cortical (sulci) atrophy and 
ventricular enlargement as CT signs of cerebral atrophy were correlated with 
different clinical patterns of the disease. An age-adjusted control population, 
with intact mentation, was similarly studied. The presence of classic OMS in a 
sizable segment of the usual parkinsonian population was invariably associated 
with CT signs of cerebral atrophy. Atrophic changes on CT scans, however, were 
not necessarily correlated with any intellectual dysfunction, or only weakly so, 
independent of age. The "typical" parkinsonian patients without evidence of OMS 
were indistinguishable from an age-adjusted control group with regard to 
structural changes in their scans. However, the parkinsonian patients with 
definite, permanent OMS and other focal neurologic deficit probably constitute a 
separate or distinct subset of the parkinsonian population, with a pathologic 
substrate more likely to be similar to that of the so-called Alzheimer-type 
dementias. Duration of the parkinsonian syndrome was not predictive of either 
mental status or scan findings, after adjustment for age as a factor.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1981.00510060041004
PMID: 7236060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gerontology. 1982;28 Suppl 1:35-52. doi: 10.1159/000212572.

Parkinson's disease as a model for changes in dopamine receptor dynamics with 
aging.

Rinne UK.

Parkinson's disease ranks among the most prevalent neurological diseases in the 
elderly. The disease usually begins after the age of 50 years, and the risk of 
the disease rises steeply with advancing age. The primary etiology of 
Parkinson's disease is still unknown, although the aging process may be an 
important predisposing factor. There is some overlapping between Parkinson's 
disease and senile dementia of Alzheimer's type, although both seem to be 
disease entities. In Parkinson's disease, the most prominent and significant 
neuropathological change is the progressive loss of substantia nigra dopamine 
neurons. Studied of striatal dopamine receptors showed that the specific binding 
of 3H-spiroperidol was either significantly increased or reduced in the caudate 
nucleus and putamen of parkinsonian patients without levodopa therapy. Scatchard 
analysis showed that there were corresponding changes in the number of 
receptors, but no significant changes in the mean dissociation constant. 
Increased binding of 3H-spiroperidol in the basal ganglia was also found in 
parkinsonian patients suffering from psychotic episodes and treated with 
neuroleptic drugs. Normal and low binding of 3H-spiroperidol was found in 
patients treated with levodopa. The behavior of dopamine receptors in the 
nucleus accumbens was similar to that of dopamine receptors in the striatum. 
Clinically, the patients with low binding of 3H-spiroperidol in the striatum 
were more disabled and had lost the beneficial response to levodopa. Thus in 
some patients with Parkinson's disease a denervation supersensitivity seemed to 
develop and in others a loss of postsynaptic dopamine receptor sites in the 
neostriatum. The latter alteration may contribute to the decreased response of 
parkinsonian patients to long-term levodopa therapy. However, in patients with a 
deteriorating response to levodopa, there seem to be still enough dopamine 
receptors in the striatum for drugs stimulating the dopamine receptors to 
alleviate directly the parkinsonian disability. Indeed, dopaminergic agonists 
seem to be a significant and valuable adjuvant therapy to levodopa for 
parkinsonian patients with a deteriorating response and/or on-off phenomena.

DOI: 10.1159/000212572
PMID: 7044903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1982;5 Suppl 1:S29-37. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-198200051-00006.

Behavioral alterations and the therapy of parkinsonism.

Klawans HL.

The pathologic changes of parkinsonism and the side effects of drug therapy may 
produce pronounced behavioral changes in patients with Parkinson's disease. 
Dementia is the primary manifestation of disease-induced mental alterations and 
careful pharmacologic management is necessary. Psychosis is the most dramatic of 
the changes induced by levodopa. It may occur early in the course of therapy, 
usually in patients with a past history of a schizophreniform disorder, or after 
several years of treatment. Therapeutic intervention with dosage adjustments 
and/or drug holidays are indicated when psychosis occurs. Treatment of 
depression in the Parkinson patient is essentially the same as in a nonparkinson 
patient.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-198200051-00006
PMID: 7116345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1982 May;30(5):312-7.

Definition and therapy of chronic cerebro-vascular diseases.

Agnoli A, Denaro A, Ruggieri S.

Chronic cerebro-vascular disorders could be considered in a broad sense as a 
large body of knowledge in which three main categories of clinical disturbances 
have to be be considered: 1) Pathological aging that manifest itself with light 
short term memory impairment associated with a mild parkinsonian symptomatology 
or pseudobulbar signs. 2) Senile dementia Alzheimer type and multi infarct 
dementia. 3) Chronic cerebro-vascular disorders as defined by the Ad Hoc 
Committee (Paris, 1980). At present the therapy of chronic cerebro-vascular 
disorders is based on two main groups of drugs and can be divided into: 1) A 
treatment of prevention or secondary prevention which tends to correct or modify 
the different risk factors. 2) A treatment that seeks to control and modify the 
neurological and neuropsychological after effects and the disorders of the 
higher nervous activities which result from the lesion.

PMID: 7048224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 1983;95:43-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01516.x.

Neurochemical insights into monoamine oxidase inhibitors, with special reference 
to deprenyl (selegiline).

Riederer P, Jellinger K.

Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is distributed in neurons and non-neuronal tissue in the 
human central nervous system. It occurs there as MAO type A and MAO type B. It 
is not, however, established where both types are located intra- and/or 
extra-neuronally. Recently, the use of selective MAO-B blockers has shown 
beneficial effects in the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). Knowledge about 
the locus of action of MAO inhibitors is therefore of great importance. Our 
findings indicate that MAO-B inhibitors like deprenyl act by blocking neuronal 
and extra-neuronal MAO-B. This demonstrates that in the early stages of PD the 
action of deprenyl improves dopamine neurotransmission and hormonal action, 
whereas in the advanced stages of the disease, when there is progressive loss of 
dopaminergic neurons accompanied by gliosis, the drug seems to exert beneficial 
effects via the hormonal route.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01516.x
PMID: 6145282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 1983;95:19-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01513.x.

Problems associated with long-term levodopa treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Rinne UK.

Levodopa treatment improves significantly not only the parkinsonian disability 
but also the mortality rate. However, during long-term levodopa treatment the 
therapeutic benefit gradually declines. Furthermore, most cognitive skills 
improve initially, but long-term levodopa treatment is associated with declining 
intellectual capacity and dementia. In patients on long-term levodopa treatment 
there seems to be a low threshold for certain clinical side-effects, especially 
postural hypotension, psychiatric disturbances and various types of fluctuations 
in disability. Low age at onset of Parkinson's disease, and at the commencement 
of levodopa therapy, the duration of levodopa treatment and a high dose of 
levodopa seem to be significant risk factors for the development of response 
fluctuations, but not the pretreatment duration of Parkinson's disease nor the 
disability of the patients. A readjustment of the levodopa dosage, and as an 
adjuvant drug treatment, deprenyl, a specific inhibitor of MAO type B, or a 
direct-acting dopamine agonist may prove helpful in the management of 
fluctuations in disability. It is important, moreover, to try to prevent these 
phenomena by taking into account the predictive risk factors of response 
fluctuations in the treatment strategy of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01513.x
PMID: 6587715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Eur Neurol. 1983;22(4):240-55. doi: 10.1159/000115567.

Lisuride in the treatment of parkinsonism.

McDonald RJ, Horowski R.

Lisuride is a new effective antiparkinson agent that is useful in the management 
of patients in an advanced stage of parkinsonism where levodopa therapy is no 
longer sufficient and/or limited by 'wearing off' reactions. Patients with these 
problems usually respond favorably to 1.5-4.5 mg of lisuride daily provided the 
daily dose is built up gradually over a period of 4-8 weeks. All the clinical 
features of parkinsonism may be improved and the daily dose of levodopa may be 
reduced by 30-40%. In some instances it may be possible to give lisuride as a 
replacement for levodopa. Less established, however, is the potential role of 
lisuride in treating patients in the early stages of parkinsonism and the 
long-term effects of lisuride. And, as with other ergots, caution should be 
exercised in using lisuride if patients have a history of hypotension, hepatic 
dysfunction, cardiac arrhythmias, and dementia. Finally, lisuride, unlike other 
drugs, is highly water soluble with a nearly immediate outset of 
antiparkinsonian action when given intravenously and may therefore be of 
considerable value in the emergency treatment of severe parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1159/000115567
PMID: 6884394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Med Genet. 1983 Feb;14(2):289-98. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320140209.

Blood groups, immunoglobulin allotypes and dermatoglyphic features of patients 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia of Guam.

Garruto RM, Plato CC, Myrianthopoulos NC, Schanfield MS, Gajdusek DC.

Blood group frequencies, immunoglobulin allotypes, and dermatoglyphic patterns 
were determined on patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD), two chronic, degenerative, neurologic disorders of 
unknown cause found commonly among the Chamorros of the Mariana Islands, in an 
attempt to identify a specific genetic or phenetic marker associated with either 
disorder. With the exception of the Kidd system, no significant differences were 
found in blood group frequencies nor in immunoglobulin allotypes between ALS 
patients, PD patients, and unaffected controls. The dermatoglyphic analysis 
demonstrated that ALS patients had higher frequencies of palmar patterns and 
accessory triradii in the IV interdigital area, and PD patients had 
significantly higher frequencies of complete simian creases and of palmar 
patterns in the thenar/I interdigital area than unaffected controls. The 
frequencies of the remaining dermatoglyphic traits showed no significant 
differences. We conclude that none of the marker systems tested show a 
particular pattern of association in patients and controls or a genetic 
predisposition to either disorder, and that early identification of at-risk 
individuals remains elusive.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320140209
PMID: 6573136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Gerontol. 1983 Jul;38(4):414-9. doi: 10.1093/geronj/38.4.414.

Immune function among normal Guamanians of different age.

Hoffman PM, Robbins DS, Gibbs CJ Jr, Gajdusek DC.

To determine if immune function differed in normal Guamanian Chamorros at 
various ages we measured the percentage and total numbers of lymphocytes and 
T-lymphocytes, their response to phytohemagglutinin (PHA), and serum levels of 
immunoglobulin A, G, and M in subjects 20 to 83 years of age. Regression 
analysis showed highly significant negative correlations for total lymphocytes 
and T-cells with age and a less significant negative correlation for PHA 
response with age in this population. Serum IgA levels increased with age, IgM 
levels declined, and IgG levels were unchanged. These findings are similar to, 
but less marked than, immunologic aberrations previously observed in Guamanians 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or Parkinsonism-dementia. The occurrence of 
prominent differences in immune functions between younger and older individuals 
in a population where neurofibrillary degeneration in brain occurs at an early 
age and neurodegenerative and other age-related diseases are highly prevalent 
suggests the possibility that immunity and age-associated degenerative disease 
may be linked etiologically in this population.

DOI: 10.1093/geronj/38.4.414
PMID: 6602828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Riv Patol Nerv Ment. 1983 Nov-Dec;104(6):243-54.

Sporadic multi-system atrophy with early onset and rapid fatal outcome (atypical 
O.P.C.A.?). Case report.

Barontini F, Marconi GP, Arnetoli G.

The authors report the clinical, instrumental and histopathological data 
observed in a 27 year old man, who died 20 months after the onset of a rapidly 
progressive neurological syndrome referable to a multitopic brain damage. The 
clinical picture, which at its fully developed stage was represented by 
supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, cerebellar ataxia, akinetic-rigid parkinsonism 
with axial dystonia and dementia, appeared consistent with the diagnosis of 
P.S.P. The histological examination showed degenerative changes of varied degree 
in the cerebellum, the brain-stem and the basal ganglia, but the neurofibrillary 
tangles characteristic of P.S.P. were not found, either with 
electron-microscopy. The case presented considerable difficulties regarding its 
nosological classification. Nevertheless, the lack of neuropathological findings 
of storage disease as well as the particular location of the degenerative 
lesions have induced the authors to consider it as an atypical form of sporadic 
O.P.C.A. in the field of M.S.A.

PMID: 6543985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ann Med Psychol (Paris). 1983 Nov;141(9):945-56.

[Parkinson's disease and mental deterioration. Apropos of 30 cases].

[Article in French]

Mouren P, Poinso Y, Oppenheim G, Mouren A, Nguyen Quang N.

The influence of Parkinson illness on intellectual faculties is appreciated in 
different ways. The existence of a real parkinson dementia is contested by some 
who see in the intellectual impoverishment of these patients a simple decline in 
efficiency. This is often partial and linked to neurological consequences which 
are not always taken into account by psychometric tests. 30 parkinson patients 
are beeing examined in this light. In spite of the small number, quite clear 
tendencies are apparent and which confirm the possible existence of these two 
types of phenomena, one beeing dementia and the other simply weakness without 
authentic senility. Risk factors are also isolated which emphasize age and 
accidents due to L-Dopa intolerance.

PMID: 6666920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1984;140(10):539-52.

[Neurotransmitter anomalies in Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in French]

Berger B.

Neurochemical and histochemical techniques for characterization of 
neurotransmitters and their receptors in normal and pathological human brain 
have modified our understanding of Alzheimer's disease. From a hopeless 
clinico-pathological entity, it has become one of the models of possible 
physiopathological relations between neurotransmitter anomalies and dementia 
processes. Three types of neuromediator (or neuro-modulator): cholinergic, 
aminergic and peptidergic, appear to be affected to different degrees in 5 
electively involved anatomical systems: cholinergic innominocorticoamygdalian 
and septohippocampic systems, noradrenergic ceruleocortical system, 
serotoninergic pontocortical system and cortical somatostatin and substance P 
systems. Critical analysis of neurochemical data shows that the biochemical 
nosology of Alzheimer's disease is confronted by the difficulty of constituting 
homogeneous series of both normal and pathological cases. Difficulties are 
increased when an attempt is made to establish correlations between 
neurotransmitter deficits and lesions or the demential process. This is the 
result of several factors: individual variability, difficulty in selecting valid 
controls, time elapsed before post-mortem sampling, imperfect understanding of 
the progressive topographical course of both cortical and subcortical lesions, 
which only now are being studied systematically and in a quantifiable manner, 
and finally the frequent absence of distinction between early and late forms of 
the disease. Truly senile forms should probably be distinguished, some authors 
believing them to be a particular type of aging process, from the presenile 
forms with more extensive biochemical changes. The constant presence of 
cholinergic symptoms show these to be fundamental features of the dementia but 
lesions of noradrenergic and serotoninergic systems also probably play an 
important role, and this triad is found in other dementia processes: trisomy 21, 
Parkinson's disease with dementia. Numerous questions concerning the 
neurotransmitter disorders in Alzheimer's disease remain unanswered: to what 
extent are the lesions due to neurone destruction? What occurs to the receptors? 
What factors condition severity of the disease? May the latter be directly 
correlated with the severity of the global dementia process or rather with the 
constitutive elements of the syndrome such as memory or attention disorders? 
What are the consequences of the peptidergic lesions? What is the sequential 
relation between lesions of corticopetal and intracortical afferent systems and 
what are their respective physiopathological significance?(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
400 WORDS)

PMID: 6150545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ann Neurol. 1984;15 Suppl:S119-25. doi: 10.1002/ana.410150723.

Patterns of cerebral glucose utilization in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's 
disease.

Kuhl DE, Metter EJ, Riege WH, Markham CH.

Patterns of local cerebral glucose utilization were measured with positron 
emission tomography using the fluorine-18-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) 
method in 8 patients with Parkinson's disease, in 13 patients with Huntington's 
disease, in 15 subjects at risk for Huntington's disease, and in aged-matched 
normal control subjects. On the average, global cerebral metabolism in patients 
with Parkinson's disease was moderately reduced (20%), but the relative 
distribution of glucose utilization throughout the brain in these patients was 
normal. These results support the conclusion that alterations of the 
nigrostriatal pathway in Parkinson's disease have no major selective effect on 
the metabolism of particular cerebral regions. In Huntington's disease, however, 
there was a characteristic decrease in glucose utilization in the caudate nuclei 
and putamen, and this local hypometabolism appeared early and preceded bulk 
tissue loss. In patients with Huntington's disease, glucose utilization 
typically was normal throughout the rest of the brain, regardless of the 
severity of symptoms and despite the apparent shrinkage of brain tissue. The 
results also suggest the possibility that the caudate nuclei may be 
hypometabolic in some asymptomatic subjects who are potential carriers of the 
autosomal dominant gene for Huntington's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410150723
PMID: 6234856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Ann Neurol. 1984 Jan;15(1):42-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.410150108.

Calcium and vitamin D metabolism in Guamanian Chamorros with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia.

Yanagihara R, Garruto RM, Gajdusek DC, Tomita A, Uchikawa T, Konagaya Y, Chen 
KM, Sobue I, Plato CC, Gibbs CJ Jr.

We evaluated 16 Guamanian Chamorros with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 33 
patients with parkinsonism-dementia for disturbances of calcium and vitamin D 
metabolism. The serum immunoreactive parathyroid hormone level was mildly 
elevated in 6 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in 5 patients with 
parkinsonism-dementia. There were significant positive correlations between 
serum immunoreactive parathyroid levels and duration of illness in male patients 
with motor neuron disease, but not in female patients or in patients with 
parkinsonism-dementia. Intestinal absorption of calcium, as assessed by serum 
and urinary activity of calcium 47 following oral administration, was decreased 
in 2 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in 4 patients with 
parkinsonism-dementia, all of whom had low levels of serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D. Reductions in cortical bone mass were striking in patients with motor neuron 
disease. A significant negative correlation was found between the percentage of 
cortical area of the second metacarpal bone and muscle atrophy and weakness, and 
significant positive correlations were found between degree of immobility and 
ratio of urinary hydroxyproline to creatinine in patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia. In general, abnormalities in 
calcium metabolism were subtle. Thus, if the demonstrated deposition of metals, 
particularly calcium and aluminum, in central nervous system tissues of 
Guamanians with these two conditions is a cause of the diseases and of the early 
appearance of neurofibrillary tangles in neurons, the accumulation has 
apparently occurred long before onset of symptoms, and detectable abnormalities 
of calcium and vitamin D metabolism may already have been corrected.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410150108
PMID: 6546847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Neurology. 1984 Mar;34(3):310-4. doi: 10.1212/wnl.34.3.310.

HLA-linked complement markers in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease: C4 variant 
(C4B2) a possible marker for senile dementia of the Alzheimer type.

Nerl C, Mayeux R, O'Neill GJ.

We determined the gene frequencies for the alleles of the HLA-linked complement 
markers C2, properdin factor B (BF), C4A (Rodgers) and C4B (Chido), and the red 
cell enzyme glyoxalase-I in 38 unrelated patients with senile dementia of the 
Alzheimer type, 42 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease, and 59 
unaffected, aged-matched control blood donors. In senile dementia of the 
Alzheimer type and in Parkinson's disease, no significant difference was found 
in the gene frequencies of alleles at either the BF, C2, or GLO-I locus compared 
with those of age-matched controls. In senile dementia of the Alzheimer type, a 
striking increase in the frequency of the rare C4B locus allele, C4*B2, was 
apparent, resulting in the high relative risk of RR = 8.8 (p less than 0.0001) 
for this disorder.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.34.3.310
PMID: 6538270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Aust Fam Physician. 1984 May;13(5 Suppl):6-8, 11.

The drug treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Morris JG.

The drug treatment of Parkinson's disease should be tailored to the age of the 
patient, coexistence of dementia or postural hypotension, duration of the 
disease process and the emergence of side effects. In the early stages of the 
disease when disability is minimal, amantadine or anti-cholinergic drugs may 
suffice. As the patient's lifestyle becomes hampered, levodopa in combination 
with carbidopa or benserazide is introduced. Mild dopa induced dyskinesia can be 
ignored but when it is troublesome the dose of levodopa should be reduced. 
Fluctuations are minimised by giving small doses of levodopa frequently 
throughout the day or by adding bromocriptine to the drug regimen. Postural 
symptoms often respond to fludrocortisone and elevation of the head of the bed. 
In elderly or demented patients anticholinergic drugs and amantadine should be 
avoided. In these patients small doses of levodopa alone may be preferable to 
the combined preparations. More effective drugs with fewer side effects are 
likely to emerge with future successful research into the different types of 
dopamine receptors and other possible transmitters.

PMID: 6497767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 1984 Jun;52(6):207-14. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1002019.

[Exogenous psychoses in Parkinson syndrome. Frequency and causal conditions].

[Article in German]

Schneider E, Fischer PA, Jacobi P, Grotz A.

Exogenous psychotic symptoms of a wide variety have been reported to appear more 
and more frequently since the introduction of levodopa in the therapy of 
Parkinson's disease. They were considered to be caused by treatment related 
imbalance of cerebral neurotransmitters and hypersensitivity of the dopaminergic 
receptors, respectively. In the present investigation an analysis was done 
concerning the relevance of different antiparkinsonian drugs and other factors 
such as severity of neurological and cerebroorganic symptomatology, age, 
duration of treatment, EEG and brain atrophic changes and additional physical 
diseases for the appearance of psychotic symptoms. The questions were posed to 
152 patients (54 men, 88 women) aged 34-76 years, which received a treatment 
with levodopa alone, in combination with a decarboxylase inhibitor, amantadines 
and/or anticholinergics for a period of 1-9 years. An exogenous psychotic 
symptomatology was observed in 42 patients (27,6%), explicitly under all 
antiparkinsonistic drugs, but not when amantadines were given as the initial 
treatment. In patients receiving levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor psychotic 
symptoms could be observed most frequently but at the same time the duration of 
treatment was the longest. In 15 patients psychotic symptoms appeared under 
different antiparkinsonian drugs. In 28 patients this symptomatology was 
followed by a constant severe dementia. Predisposing factors for exogenous 
psychosis proved to be: a higher age at the beginning of the treatment and the 
initiation of treatment, a pronounced neurological symptomatology and signs of 
dementia as well as additional physical diseases. Because of the very complex 
conditions under which exogenous psychosis can be observed and the additional 
fact that they can appear under each antiparkinsonian substance, levodopa cannot 
be considered as the sole cause.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1002019
PMID: 6745832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Br J Psychiatry. 1984 Jul;145:20-38. doi: 10.1192/bjp.145.1.20.

Genetics, ageing and dementia.

Wright AF, Whalley LJ.

The contribution of genetic differences to variation in ageing and the 
relationship of ageing to certain types of dementia are discussed. 
Neuropathological changes commonly found in the ageing brain are present in more 
severe form in Alzheimer-type dementia, Down's syndrome, multi-infarct dementia, 
and a substantial number of patients with Parkinson's disease. An increased 
frequency of ageing-associated changes outside the brain have been reported in 
Alzheimer-type dementia, Down's syndrome, and multi-infarct dementia, although 
the evidence is generally meagre and in many cases requires further 
corroboration. Genetic studies of Alzheimer-type dementia support the existence 
of heterogeneity on the basis of family history and age of onset; early onset is 
associated with greater genetic risk and severity of abnormality. The increasing 
evidence of an association between DNA damage, premature ageing, and neuronal 
cell loss may provide insights into the aetiology of these and other forms of 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.145.1.20
PMID: 6234964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neurol Clin. 1984 Aug;2(3):473-86.

Progressive supranuclear palsy. Clinical and pharmacologic update.

Jankovic J.

A distinct clinicopathologic entity, PSP is differentiated from Parkinson's 
disease by the presence of supranuclear ophthalmoparesis. Downward gaze palsy 
that can be overcome by oculocephalic maneuver is the most characteristic 
clinical finding. The other distinguishing clinical features of PSP include 
axial distribution of rigidity and broad-based gait with early postural 
instability. Furthermore, pseudobulbar palsy is an early feature, while profound 
dementia usually occurs late in the course of the disease. Because of the 
variable clinical presentation and occasional lag in the onset of 
ophthalmoparesis and other distinguishing signs, the diagnosis of PSP is often 
delayed for many years. However, the constellation of axial rigidity, 
pseudobulbar signs, and parkinsonism without tremor when combined with 
ophthalmoparesis should suggest the correct diagnosis. Pathologic examination of 
the PSP brain reveals neuronal cell loss, gliosis, granuolvacuolar degeneration, 
and unique neurofibrillary tangles in the pontomesencephalic tegmentum, tectum, 
basal ganglia, vestibular nuclei, periaqueductal gray matter, and dentate 
nuclei. The etiology of this neurodegenerative disorder is unknown and the 
neurodiagnostic studies usually are not helpful in proving the diagnosis. The 
treatment of PSP is unsatisfactory, but the anti-parkinson drugs, particularly 
dopamine agonists, may be useful in the early stages of the disease.

PMID: 6398402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1985;457:35-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1985.tb20798.x.

Neurobiological studies of transmitter systems in aging and in Alzheimer-type 
dementia.

Price DL, Kitt CA, Struble RG, Whitehouse PJ, Cork LC, Walker LC.

Dysfunction and death of specific neuronal systems are important processes 
occurring in aging and in Alzheimer's and in Parkinson's disease. The 
neuropathology and neurochemistry of some of the neuronal systems at risk in 
these settings are subjects of active research; the nature and consequences of 
these cellular pathologies have begun to be clarified. The availability of 
animal models (including aged monkeys, macaques with cholinergic deficiencies, 
and monkeys with MPTP-induced nigrostriatal pathology, all of which recapitulate 
certain features of human aging or disease) allow the opportunity to assess the 
efficacies of new pharmacotherapies, neural grafts, and trophic factors. These 
approaches can be monitored by behavioral testing and, in some instances, by in 
vivo imaging methods, which can in turn be correlated with morphologic and 
chemical analyses of brain. Demonstration of the efficacy of these procedures in 
nonhuman primates would have profound implications on the development of new 
therapies designed to alleviate the effects of aging and disease on the human 
brain.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1985.tb20798.x
PMID: 2869729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Surg Neurol. 1985 Jan;23(1):59-63. doi: 10.1016/0090-3019(85)90161-2.

Parkinsonism as a manifestation of brain tumor.

Polyzoidis KS, McQueen JD, Rajput AH, MacFadyen DJ.

Neoplasm is an uncommon cause of the parkinsonian syndrome. We are presenting 
three cases of intracranial tumors whose major manifestations included 
parkinsonism. Surgical treatment resulted in control of the extrapyramidal 
symptoms in two of our patients. Because no curative treatment is available for 
the vast majority of parkinsonian patients, early detection of an underlying 
neoplasm may offer a most rewarding outcome. Unilaterality of the symptoms, 
overwhelming dementia, or suspicion of a mass should lead to the performance of 
computed tomography.

DOI: 10.1016/0090-3019(85)90161-2
PMID: 2981121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis. 1985;63:199-209.

Local cerebral glucose utilization in symptomatic and presymptomatic 
Huntington's disease.

Kuhl DE, Markham CH, Metter EJ, Riege WH, Phelps ME, Mazziotta JC.

Patterns of local cerebral glucose utilization were measured with positron 
emission CT using the 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose method in 13 patients with HD, 15 
subjects at risk for HD, and control subjects. These data were compared with CT 
measures of cerebral atrophy, age, and duration and severity of symptoms. The 
results indicate that in HD there is a characteristic decrease in glucose 
utilization in the caudate and putamen and that this local hypometabolism 
appears early and precedes bulk tissue loss. In contrast to demented patients 
with Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's disease, in these HD patients glucose 
utilization typically was normal throughout the rest of the brain, regardless of 
the severity of symptoms and despite apparent shrinkage of brain tissue. Our 
results indicate that the caudate is hypometabolic in some asymptomatic persons 
who are carriers of the autosomal-dominant gene for HD.

PMID: 3161165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1985 Mar;33(3):167-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1985.tb04886.x.

A case-control study of maternal age in Alzheimer's disease.

English D, Cohen D.

A case-control study of maternal age as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease 
was conducted in Washington state. Clinically diagnosed cases of Alzheimer's 
disease (n = 64) were identified from two sources, an outpatient clinic at the 
University of Washington and an organization of relatives of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease. Controls were spouses of the Alzheimer's disease cases and 
spouses of 87 patients with Parkinson's disease, also identified at the 
University of Washington. Mail questionnaires were sent to all subjects; 
responses were received for 90 cases and 96 controls, although nine of those 
cases, whose medical records of diagnostic evaluations were incomplete, were 
excluded. Among the 69 cases and 94 controls whose mothers' ages were known, 
there was no evidence that the mothers of cases were significantly older than 
the mothers of controls (chi-square test for trend, P = 0.82). These findings do 
not support the theory that persons born to older mothers are at increased risk 
of developing Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1985.tb04886.x
PMID: 3973334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Neurol Sci. 1985 Mar;67(3):345-50. doi: 10.1016/0022-510x(85)90159-5.

Brain glutamate decarboxylase and cholinergic enzyme activities in scrapie.

Iqbal K, Somerville RA, Thompson CH, Wisniewski HM.

C57BL/6J mice, age 6-8 weeks were inoculated intracerebrally with brain 
homogenate from mice previously infected with the 139A strain of scrapie; 
control mice were identically treated with brain homogenate from non-infected 
normal mice. The activities of choline acetyltransferase (CAT), acetyl 
cholinesterase (AChE), and glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) were determined in 
the forebrain and hindbrain of these animals after 67, 126 and 151 days 
post-inoculation. There were no significant differences in the activities of CAT 
and GAD between scrapie and control mice at early, middle or late stages of the 
disease in the scrapie-infected animals; there was an about 20% decline in AChE 
activity in the scrapie brain.

DOI: 10.1016/0022-510x(85)90159-5
PMID: 4039359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Ann Neurol. 1985 Apr;17(4):337-43. doi: 10.1002/ana.410170406.

Atypical presentation of progressive supranuclear palsy.

Davis PH, Bergeron C, McLachlan DR.

Four pathologically documented cases of progressive supranuclear palsy are 
reported. Two patients exhibited severe dementia and 2 parkinsonism; none had 
the classic ophthalmoplegia. On retrospective analysis, clues to the diagnosis 
included early prominent gait disturbance, apraxia of eyelid opening in 1 
patient, lack of tremor, poor response to levodopa-carbidopa, and severe 
rigidity with a posture of neck extension terminally in 1 patient. The clinical 
presentation of progressive supranuclear palsy, therefore, is not as stereotyped 
as previously thought, and the diagnosis can be overlooked if one adheres 
rigidly to the classic diagnostic criteria.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410170406
PMID: 4004154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Biol Psychiatry. 1985 Jun;20(6):605-10. doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(85)90095-2.

Cholinesterase activity in plasma, erythrocytes, and cerebrospinal fluid of 
patients with dementia of the Alzheimer type.

Marquis JK, Volicer L, Mark KA, Direnfeld LK, Freedman M.

Cholinesterases, including pseudocholinesterase (BChE) of human plasma and 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) of erythrocytes and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), have 
been considered as possible markers in dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT). 
Reported data, however, are widely varied, and no significant pattern emerges 
when total enzyme activity is assayed. In the present studies, we have 
reexamined the relationship of ChE activities in DAT and control patients. ChE 
activity was measured in plasma, erythrocytes, and CSF from DAT patients and 
compared with normal controls as well as with samples from patients with a 
diagnosis other than DAT. Early age onset (presenile) and late age onset 
(senile) DAT were also compared. No significant differences in total enzyme 
activity were found in any of the comparisons. Calculations of AChE/BChE ratios 
in CSF also provided no significant indication of any changes in ChE activities 
in DAT. It is suggested that measurements of total AChE or BChE activity in 
these biological materials do not provide a useful index of alterations in 
central cholinergic function in patients with DAT.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-3223(85)90095-2
PMID: 3995108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Postgrad Med. 1985 Jul;78(1):223-7. doi: 10.1080/00325481.1985.11699069.

Early Alzheimer's disease or dementia from another cause?

Paulson GW.

It is unusual for Alzheimer's disease to present with focal neurologic 
abnormalities. Most patients have generalized and progressive dementia without 
signs of systemic disease. Perhaps the most characterisNtic feature is the 
absence of significant medical or focal neurologic abnormalities in the presence 
of severe dementia.

DOI: 10.1080/00325481.1985.11699069
PMID: 4011519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Environ Health Perspect. 1985 Nov;63:149-53. doi: 10.1289/ehp.8563149.

Relationship of aluminum to Alzheimer's disease.

Perl DP.

Alzheimer's disease is a progressive degenerative brain disease of unknown 
etiology, characterized by the development of large numbers of neurofibrillary 
tangles and senile plaques in the brain. Aluminum salts may be used 
experimentally to produce lesions which are similar, but not identical, to the 
neurofibrillary tangle. Although some studies have reported increased amounts of 
aluminum in the brains of Alzheimer's disease victims, these bulk analysis 
studies have been difficult to replicate and remain controversial. Using 
scanning electron microscopy with X-ray spectrometry, we have investigated this 
question on the cellular level. We have identified abnormal accumulations of 
aluminum within neurons derived from Alzheimer's disease patients containing 
neurofibrillary tangles. Similar accumulations have been detected in the 
numerous neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons seen in the brains of the 
indigenous native population of the island of Guam who suffer from amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism with dementia. Epidemiologic evidence 
strongly suggests a causal role for local environmental conditions relating to 
availability of aluminum, calcium, and magnesium. In view of the fact that a 
major consequence of acid rain is the liberation of large amounts of aluminum in 
bioavailable forms, concerns are raised about possible human health risks of 
this environmental phenomenon.

DOI: 10.1289/ehp.8563149
PMCID: PMC1568482
PMID: 4076080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Semin Nucl Med. 1986 Jan;16(1):2-34. doi: 10.1016/s0001-2998(86)80002-2.

Positron emission tomography imaging of regional cerebral glucose metabolism.

Alavi A, Dann R, Chawluk J, Alavi J, Kushner M, Reivich M.

The (F-18) fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) technique to measure local cerebral 
metabolic rate for glucose (LCMRglu) is well accepted and widely used by many 
institutions around the world. A large number of studies has been carried out in 
normal volunteers and patients with a variety of CNS disorders. Several 
investigators have noted that no significant age-related changes in cerebral 
glucose use occur with normal aging. Some important and interesting findings 
have been revealed following sensory, motor, visual, and auditory stimulations. 
Functional imaging with FDG in certain neurologic disorders has dramatically 
improved our understanding of their underlying pathophysiologic phenomena. Some 
abnormalities detected on the positron emission tomography (PET) images have no 
corresponding changes on either x-ray computed tomograms (XCT) or magnetic 
resonance images (MRI). In patients with Alzheimer's disease, primary 
sensorimotor, visual, and cerebellar metabolic activity appears relatively 
preserved. In contrast, parietal, temporal, and to some degree, frontal glucose 
metabolism is significantly diminished even in the early stages of the disease. 
Patients with Huntington's disease and those at risk of developing this disorder 
have a typical pattern of diminished CMRglu in the caudate nuclei and putamen. 
In patients with stroke, PET images with FDG have demonstrated abnormal findings 
earlier than either XCT or MRI and with a wider topographic distribution. FDG 
scans have revealed interictal zones of decreased LCMRglu in approximately 70% 
of patients with partial epilepsy. The location of the area of hypometabolism 
corresponds to the site of the epileptic focus as determined by 
electroencephalography and microscopic examination of the resected tissue. Ictal 
scans during partial seizures demonstrate areas of hypermetabolism corresponding 
to the sites of seizure onset and spread. Several investigators have reported 
relative hypofrontal CMRglu in patients with schizophrenia. In our center, FDG 
scans from patients with schizophrenia were succeYssfully differentiated from 
those obtained in normal controls. Finally, our preliminary data (using PET, 
XCT, and MRI) in patients with CNS disorders indicate that MRI provides 
excellent delineation of the structural abnormalities. It may prove to be 
superior to XCT in the evaluation of certain diseases such as cerebral ischemia 
and infarcts, head injury, tumors, and white matter lesions. Metabolic imaging 
with FDG provides functional information not obtainable with either MRI or NMR 
spectroscopy. Therefore, PET studies will play a complementary role to the 
anatomic imaging in the management of patients with CNS disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/s0001-2998(86)80002-2
PMID: 2935938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1986;22:119-28.

Nosography of Parkinson's disease.

Gerstenbrand F, Ransmayr G.

Mean-age of onset of Parkinson's disease is 56 years. The older the patient is 
the more rapid is on average the progression of disability. In the early phase 
the motor symptoms respond well to therapy. Later, variations of response to 
therapy and side-effects of therapy occur (wearing-off, end-of-dose akinesia, 
end-of-dose dystonia, dopaminergic abnormal involuntary movements, pharmacogenic 
psychoses etc.). Due to the modern pharmacologic treatment of Parkinson's 
disease with dopaminergic substances disabling stages of the disease occur mean 
3 to 5 years later than before levodopa-substitution was initiated. The 
incidence of depression, distinct cognitive deficits (impairment of memory, 
visuospatial deficits) and dementia increases in the course of the disease. The 
tremulous form of Parkinson's disease generally leads to less motor impairment 
than the rigid-akinetic form. Parkinson's disease of early onset (onset before 
the age of 40), may be regarded as a subtype of Parkinson's disease. Benign and 
malignant types of Parkinson's disease may be distinguished, as well as overlaps 
with multisystem atrophies.

PMID: 3465866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Ann Neurol. 1986 Apr;19(4):365-72. doi: 10.1002/ana.410190410.

Long-term follow-up of early dopa treatment in Parkinson's disease.

Markham CH, Diamond SG.

A group of 19 patients with Parkinson's disease, who began dopa therapy 1 to 3 
years after onset of symptoms, were followed for 12 years. They were evaluated 
every 3 to 4 months on the UCLA disability scale and the Hoehn and Yahr 
functional classification scale. This present group was compared to two other 
historical groups reported on earlier [8], one that began treatment with dopa 4 
to 6 years after onset of symptoms and the other that began dopa treatment 7 to 
9 years after onset of symptoms. Results on both scales showed that the mean 
disability scores of the three groups did not differ significantly when duration 
of disease was matched, even though duration of dopa therapy among the groups 
varied from 1 to 12 years. The highly significant differences between the groups 
prior to dopa treatment continued throughout the study. These longitudinal data 
support the conclusion that the worsening over time is the result of progression 
of Parkinson's disease and not a result of the duration of dopa treatment. Early 
treatment improves the beginning years of the disease and has no adverse effect 
on later years. Twelve years after beginning dopa therapy, 32% of the present 
group had died at a mean age of 76.0, in contrast to 50% (mean age, 74.7) and 
57% (mean age, 71.5) in the groups who began dopa increasingly later in the 
course of their disease. Incidence of dementia increased with disease duration 
regardless of treatment duration.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410190410
PMID: 3707088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Am J Epidemiol. 1986 Oct;124(4):643-56. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a114437.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam: a 25-year 
prospective case-control study.

Plato CC, Garruto RM, Fox KM, Gajdusek DC.

Familial and genetic studies of high-incidence amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 
parkinsonism-dementia among the Chamorro people of Guam were initiated in 1958 
with the establishment of a prospective case-control registry. The major 
objective of this registry was to determine if first-degree relatives and 
spouses of patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or parkinsonism-dementia 
had an increased risk of developing disease compared with relatives of 
nonaffected controls individually matched for age, sex, and village. At the time 
of its closing in 1963, the registry included 126 patients (77 with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, 42 with parkinsonism-dementia, and seven with both 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia) and an equal number of 
controls; 994 living first-degree relatives (parents, siblings, and offspring) 
of patients and 1,218 of controls; and 88 living spouses of patients and 101 of 
controls. The present analysis of the 25-year follow-up study (1958-1983) 
demonstrated a significantly increased risk of developing amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis or parkinsonism-dementia among parents, siblings, and spouses of 
patients, but not among relatives of controls. Offspring of both patients and 
controls showed no significantly increased risk of developing disease. The 
increased risk among spouses of patients and the lack of increase among their 
offspring, together with recent histochemical findings, support the contention 
that exogenous factors are strong contributors to the etiology of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia. The present results also 
demonstrate a declining incidence of both diseases.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a114437
PMID: 3752057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


50. West J Med. 1986 Oct;145(4):488-92.

Features of potentially reversible dementia in elderly outpatients.

Larson EB, Reifler BV, Sumi SM, Canfield CG, Chinn NM.

A standardized evaluation was carried out in two separate groups of patients 
with dementia to determine the features that characterize those with potentially 
reversible or treatable dementia. In both groups, Alzheimer's-type dementia was 
the most common diagnosis (65% and 70%); the most common cause of potentially 
reversible cognitive impairment was medication toxicity. In both groups, 
patients with potentially reversible dementia had a shorter duration of 
symptoms, less severe dementia and used more prescription drugs. Because of this 
association, these features may be considered risk factors but are not 
distinguishing or diagnostic features of patients with potentially reversible 
dementia. Other, previously undetected, treatable illnesses not often considered 
in the differential diagnosis of potentially reversible or treatable dementia 
were also prevalent in these patients.

PMCID: PMC1306979
PMID: 3788133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Can J Neurol Sci. 1986 Nov;13(4 Suppl):490-7. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100037185.

Lewy body dementia without Alzheimer changes.

Sima AA, Clark AW, Sternberger NA, Sternberger LA.

Three patients with clinical Alzheimer's disease were found at postmortem 
examination to have Lewy-bodies and Lewy-like bodies in the cerebral cortex and 
the pigmented brainstem nuclei. Neuritic plaques were found in neocortical areas 
but no neurofibrillary tangles. The distribution of cortical neuronal inclusions 
correlated with the proposed projection of dopamine terminals. Neuronal cell 
loss was marked in the ventral tegmental area (paranigral nucleus) and the basal 
nucleus of Meynert, suggesting a defect in dopaminergic and cholinergic 
innervation of the cerebral cortex. Immunohistochemical investigations revealed 
positive staining of cortical Lewy- and Lewy-like bodies for monoclonal 
antibodies to phosphorylated neurofilaments (03-44, 06-17, 04-7). Also cerebral 
neurons containing no inclusions showed positivity, suggesting an early 
neurofilament abnormality, preceding the formation of Lewy-type inclusions.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100037185
PMID: 3024794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Lancet. 1986 Nov 8;2(8515):1067-70. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(86)90469-1.

Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and motoneurone disease: abiotrophic 
interaction between ageing and environment?

Calne DB, Eisen A, McGeer E, Spencer P.

The hypothesis is that Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease (PD), and 
motoneurone disease are due to environmental damage to specific regions of the 
central nervous system and that the damage remains subclinical for several 
decades but makes those affected especially prone to the consequences of 
age-related neuronal attrition. This proposal is based on the association 
between environmental factors and certain neurodegenerative diseases (eg, 
methylphenyltetra-hydropyridine and parkinsonism, poliovirus infection and 
post-poliomyelitis syndrome, chickling pea ingestion and lathyrism, an 
unidentified environmental factor and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-PD complex 
of Guam, and trauma and pugilist's encephalopathy) and on the long latent period 
between exposure to environmental factor and the appearance of symptoms in some 
of these disorders. The practical implications of this hypothesis are that 
epidemiological attention should be focussed on the environment in early rather 
than late life, prevention may be a realistic goal if the cause of subclinical 
damage can be identified, a search should be undertaken for causal mechanisms 
linking subclinical neuronal damage due to an environmental factor and the 
normal ageing process, and (4) better understanding of the regional selective 
vulnerability of the nervous system to the ageing process might allow a rational 
approach to treatment.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(86)90469-1
PMID: 2877227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1986 Dec;49(12):1374-7. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.49.12.1374.

Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in the cerebrospinal fluid of patients with 
Parkinson's disease and its relation to dementia.

Jolkkonen J, Soininen H, Halonen T, Ylinen A, Laulumaa V, Laakso M, Riekkinen P.

Acetylcholinesterase, somatostatin-like immunoreactivity, and homovanillic acid 
levels were measured in the cerebrospinal fluid of 36 patients with early stages 
of Parkinson's disease and in 19 control patients. In patients with Parkinson's 
disease the levels of somatostatin-like immunoreactivity were lower than in the 
controls (p less than 0.01); these values were lowest in the demented 
Parkinsonian patients. Concentrations of homovanillic acid were also 
significantly lower in Parkinsonian patients (p less than 0.05). In contrast, no 
changes were observed in the acetylcholinesterase activity of patients with 
Parkinson's disease. The reduced somatostatin-like immunoreactivity in CSF 
agrees with previous post-mortem studies and indicates that Parkinson's disease 
and Alzheimer's disease may have some neurochemical features in common.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.49.12.1374
PMCID: PMC1029121
PMID: 2433403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Can J Psychiatry. 1986 Dec;31(9):865-6. doi: 10.1177/070674378603100916.

Iatrogenic parkinsonism in Huntington's chorea.

Moss JH, Stewart DE.

This case report describes a 63 year old woman with a nineteen year history of 
Huntington's Chorea who had been successfully treated with tetrabenazine for 9 
years. During a hospital admission for an unrelated medical illness, she was 
given two doses of chlorpromazine 25 mg for a vascular headache and within hours 
became mute, extremely rigid, and unable to move or swallow. The consultation 
psychiatrist confirmed the diagnosis of severe drug-induced parkinsonism by 
intramuscular injection of benztropine mesylate which resulted in a dramatic 
immediate improvement. Both chlorpromazine and tetrabenazine were discontinued 
and the patient's severe parkinsonian symptoms completely abated on oral 
benztropine mesylate. Tetrabenazine alone, was restarted after 48 hours to 
control her Huntington's Chorea and there was no recurrence of parkinsonism. 
(Past history revealed the patient to have tolerated the same doses of 
chlorpromazine and tetrabenazine when given separately.) Previous literature 
reports concurrent safe use of antipsychotics with tetrabenazine, but this case 
report would suggest caution, and early discontinuance in the event of 
parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1177/070674378603100916
PMID: 2948633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Gerontology. 1987;33(3-4):259-64. doi: 10.1159/000212887.

Present state of hemorheology.

Lechner H(1), Ott E, Schmidt R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, University of Graz, Austria.

Hemorheological disturbances are present in more than 50% of cerebrovascular 
disease (CVD). An inverse relationship between cerebral blood flow (CBF) and 
viscosity has been established. There also exists an interaction of vessel wall 
changes, whole blood viscosity, and plasma fibrinogen. The acute ischemic 
episode is associated with hyperaggregability of the blood platelets, increased 
blood viscosity, hyperaggregability of the red cells and an increase in plasma 
fibrinogen. Hemorheological changes to a certain extend may occur not only in 
CVD but also in senile dementia of Alzheimer type (SDAT) and certain cases of 
Parkinson's disease. This fact allows to differentiate between idiopathic 
parkinsonism and Parkinson's disease with high hemodynamic risk.

DOI: 10.1159/000212887
PMID: 3308646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


56. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1987;24:109-29.

Neuropathological substrates of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

Jellinger K(1).

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Lainz Hospital, Vienna, 
Austria.

The pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) is 
characterized by degeneration of certain vulnerable neuronal populations that 
display several types of cytoskeletal abnormalities (Alzheimer-type lesions and 
Lewy bodies, respectively). These may serve as diagnostic markers, although they 
can be found in both types of disorders and, less frequently, in brains of 
normal aged individuals. AD pathology shows a preponderance for hippocampal, 
neocortical, and forebrain cholinergic systems; the hallmark of PD is damage to 
the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system. Both disorders show frequent involvement 
of subcortical projection systems that can be similar in quality and 
distribution, with similar multiple neuromediator dysfunction. The results of 
morphometric studies of some subcortical nuclei in AD and PD are reported and 
related with neurochemical data. In addition to classical forms of AD and PD, 
both types of lesions can coexist suggesting an increased risk of PD in patients 
with AD and vice versa. The basis for an association between the two disorders 
is unknown. Many AD cases with signs of PD have additional PD pathology, while 
cortical Alzheimer lesions may be seen in demented PD patients. However, 
dementia in PD does not imply coexistent cortical AD pathology; prominent 
subcortical lesions alone, or in combination with cortical AD pathology, may 
occur. AD and PD may show some differences in the primary locus of degenerative 
changes in specific cortical and subcortical neuronal systems, but the causative 
factors, mutual relations, and relative contributions to the clinical syndromes 
remain to be elucidated.

PMID: 3316494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mov Disord. 1987;2(2):73-91. doi: 10.1002/mds.870020201.

Young onset Parkinson's disease.

Quinn N(1), Critchley P, Marsden CD.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry, London, England.

We describe a personal series of 60 cases of parkinsonism with onset under the 
age of 40 years. Known causes for early onset of secondary parkinsonism, such as 
Wilson's disease or encephalitis, were excluded in every case. Two groups were 
identified: those with onset after the age of 21 in whom no hereditary factors 
could be ascertained (56 cases), and those with onset before 21 years all of 
whom had familial parkinsonism. In neither group have we found any association 
with prematurely grey hair, hypertension, diabetes, pernicious anaemia, or 
thyroid disorder. Among their families, we have not found any association with 
diabetes, pernicious anaemia, or thyroid disorder. We propose that cases of 
apparent idiopathic Parkinson's disease beginning between age 21-40 years should 
be called "young onset Parkinson's disease." Twenty percent of such patients in 
our series had at least one first- or second-degree relative in the same or 
antecedent generations with parkinsonism, but only 1.5% of their relatives at 
risk had parkinsonism, which is similar to the prevalence in the general 
population. Ten percent of these patients had at least one relative with 
essential tremor, but only 1.6% of their relatives at risk had tremor, which 
again was similar to the prevalence in the population in general. These patients 
with young onset Parkinson's disease responded well to levodopa therapy. 
However, dyskinesias and response fluctuations occurred early and frequently. 
The prevalence of dyskinesias and response fluctuations was strongly correlated 
with the duration of levodopa treatment, but not with the duration (or probably 
the severity) of the disease before levodopa therapy was commenced. The 
involuntary movements often were severe and frequently were diphasic. Despite 
long disease duration, the incidence of dementia in young onset patients aged 
less than 65 years was negligible. We believe that most, if not all, patients in 
this group have degenerative Lewy body idiopathic Parkinson's disease, 
representing the lower end of a skewed deviation for age of onset of this 
disease. We have so far failed to identify any additional environmental factor 
which may have accelerated disease onset in these patients. In contrast, cases 
of parkinsonism beginning before age 21 years were invariably familial. We 
proposed that they should be called "juvenile parkinsonism." All affected 
relatives with parkinsonism also had young disease onset, and all but one were 
siblings. None of four such patients seen by us has demented, and computed 
tomography (CT) scan has been normal in all four. We believe that most such 
patients have some form of genetically determined secondary parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870020201
PMID: 3504266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1987;229:241-69.

Animal models of degenerative neurological disease.

Cork LC, Kitt CA, Struble RG, Griffin JW, Price DL.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), Parkinson's disease (PD), and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) are human neurological disorders which occur in middle and late 
life. These three diseases share certain features: they are slowly progressive; 
transmitter-specific groups of neurons are selectively affected by disease 
processes; and affected nerve cells exhibit cytoskeletal pathology. The causes 
and mechanisms of cell injury are unknown, and there are no treatments which 
directly affect the disease process. Dysfunction and death of these specific 
cell groups account for different clinical syndromes. In ALS, patients become 
paralyzed, at-risk cholinergic motor neurons in the spinal cord develop 
neurofilamentous swellings of proximal axons, and distal axons atrophy. In PD, 
affected individuals show slowed movements, tremor, and rigidity. These clinical 
findings are attributed to regeneration of dopaminergic neurons of the 
substantia nigra, a cell group showing abnormal accumulations of neurofilament 
antigens in the form of Lewy bodies. In AD, patients develop dementia (a 
syndrome of cognitive and memory impairment), and cholinergic neurons of the 
basal forebrain and certain other populations of nerve cells develop 
abnormalities of the cytoskeleton. These include perikaryal neurofibrillary 
tangles and enlarged distal axons which appear as neurites in senile plaques. 
Certain features of ALS, PD, and AD are recapitulated in three animal models 
described in this review. Hereditary Canine Spinal Muscular Atrophy (HCSMA), a 
dominantly inherited motor neuron disease, shows many clinical and pathological 
features in common with ALS. Affected dogs are clinically weak, have denervation 
atrophy of muscles, and develop neurofilamentous swellings of proximal axons, 
atrophy of distal axons, and degeneration of motor neurons. These abnormalities 
of axonal caliber are associated with impaired transport of the neurofilament 
triplet proteins and a maldistribution of phosphorylated neurofilaments. 
Intoxication of macaques with 1-methyl-4-]henyl-1,2,3,6,tetrahydropyridine 
(MPTP) produces a Parkinsonian syndrome due to selective injury of dopaminergic 
neurons in the substantia nigra and associated denervation of the striatum. 
Finally, aged rhesus monkeys (older than 23 years of age) show cognitive and 
memory deficits and exhibit senile plaques whose neurites are derived from 
cholinergic and other transmitter systems. Although these macaques do not have 
AD, they do provide a model for examining the relationships between 
age-associated cognitive deficits and pathological changes occurring in certain 
transmitter systems of primates.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 3601987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Epidemiol. 1987 Jan;125(1):92-100. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a114515.

A cohort study of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on 
Guam and Rota.

Reed D, Labarthe D, Chen KM, Stallones R.

A prospective study of the incidence of new cases of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia was conducted by follow-up of 899 Chamorros 
in the Mariana Islands who participated in a baseline medical examination and 
interview in 1968. During a 15-year follow-up period, 28 new neurologically 
confirmed cases occurred, including 23 with parkinsonism-dementia and five with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. The low incidence of amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis was consistent with the reported disappearance of this disease from 
the Mariana Islands. However, the continuing high incidence of 
parkinsonism-dementia was not in agreement with a similarly reported 
disappearance nor with the hypothesis of a common cause of both diseases. Of 23 
selected baseline examination variables, only the preference for traditional 
Chamorro food was significantly associated with an increased risk of 
parkinsonism-dementia. A review of the accumulated epidemiologic data on these 
neurologic diseases in the Mariana Islands did not support the current 
hypothesis that a chronic nutritional deficiency of calcium is a cause of both 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a114515
PMID: 3788958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Adv Neurol. 1987;45:413-6.

Predictive factors for cognitive deterioration and dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Portin R, Rinne UK.

PMID: 3825718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Adv Neurol. 1987;45:421-4.

Neuropsychological profile of primary parkinsonism among Filipinos.

Ledesma LK, Nicdao ST, Dantes MB, Perez MC.

In summary then, the neuropsychological profile of Filipino parkinsonians 
reveals deficits in visuospatial processing, social judgment, attention and 
mental tracking, recent memory and word retrieval, aside from predicted 
difficulty in fine motor activities which would result in a deterioration of 
their penmanship. The frequency of dementia with this sample is comparable to 
that reported in other studies. Possibly due to the small sample size, no 
significant correlations were obtained between the severity of illness and 
dementia. Why two of the ten subjects seen for follow-up improved their scores 
on neuropsychological testing cannot be ascertained at this time. However, it 
underscores the importance of long-term monitoring to gain a better 
understanding of the relationship between Parkinson's disease and higher mental 
processes. We intend to continue conducting follow-up studies and hope that, 
with a larger sample, we can establish trends that will assist us in the 
holistic management of this condition.

PMID: 3825720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Acta Neurol Scand. 1987 Feb;75(2):87-94. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1987.tb07900.x.

Dopamine receptor properties in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's chorea 
evaluated by positron emission tomography using 11C-N-methyl-spiperone.

Hägglund J, Aquilonius SM, Eckernäs SA, Hartvig P, Lundquist H, Gullberg P, 
Långström B.

Dopaminergic receptor properties in the striatum of patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and Huntington's chorea (HD) were studied by positron emission 
tomography (PET), using 11C-N-methyl-spiperone as a dopamine D2 receptor ligand. 
The time-dependent regional radioactive uptake in the caudate nucleus and the 
putamen was measured and fitted to a 3-compartment pharmacokinetic model. The 
rate constant k3 for specific binding to the receptor compartment in the 
striatum was determined in relation to the binding in regions with a low density 
of specific binding sites, such as the cerebellum and the frontal cortex . k3, 
which is a measure of the receptor density, was reduced in one patient with HD 
but less affected in PD in comparison with healthy controls. The pattern of k3 
values calculated from the 6 PD patients is discussed in relation to any 
side-to-side differences in dopamine receptor densities in hemiparkinsonism and 
to possible "hypersensitivity" of dopamine receptors in the early stage of the 
disease and down-regulation in more advanced disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1987.tb07900.x
PMID: 2953165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Neurosci. 1987 Feb;32(3-4):710-4.

Alzheimer's disease and the pivotal role of the hypothalamus and the intrinsic 
opioid system.

Iacono RP, Sandyk R.

Although the "cholinergic hypothesis" of the pathophysiology of Alzheimer's 
disease has received great attention during the past years, it has recently come 
under increasing criticism specifically owing to failure of therapeutic 
endeavors based on this premise. As the potential broad role of the intrinsic 
opioids in the neurochemical modulation of diverse brain functions emerges, the 
realization that these data may be reconciled to a unifying hypothesis 
underlying the nature of some chronic dementing diseases (including Alzheimer's 
disease, Korsakoff disease and Parkinson's disease) occurs. Certain specific 
characteristics of the known pathologic changes and neurotransmitter deficits of 
Alzheimer's disease may be explained based on an early vulnerability of the 
hypothalamus combined with derangements of endorphinergic functions which 
follow. The latter may be implicated in the subsequent degeneration of 
structures receiving projections from the arcuate nucleus of the hypothalamus. 
This is based on the known role of endorphins in the modulation of central 
neurotransmitters and specifically acetylcholine activity. In addition, the 
reciprocal neuroendocrine and neuroimmunologic interactions mediated through the 
hypothalamus, may be of further importance in the evolution of Alzheimer's 
disease.

PMID: 3036727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Neurology. 1987 Feb;37(2):226-32. doi: 10.1212/wnl.37.2.226.

A case-control study of smoking habits, dementia, and other illnesses in 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Rajput AH, Offord KP, Beard CM, Kurland LT.

From 1967 to 1979, 118 incident cases of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) 
and 236 age- and sex-matched controls from Rochester, MN, were identified. 
Medical records on patients and controls for 40 years preceding the diagnosis of 
IPD were reviewed. The relative risk (RR) for ever-smoked and IPD was not 
significantly different from unity (RR = 0.7, 95% confidence interval = 0.4 to 
1.2). The mean age at diagnosis of IPD was significantly younger (p = 0.007) in 
the ever-smokers (68.8 years) compared with never-smokers (73.8 years), although 
this needs to be interpreted cautiously. It is concluded that smoking had no 
effect on the development of IPD. Within 5 years after the index date, a new 
diagnosis of dementia was made more often in cases than in controls (p = 0.01). 
Relative risk of IPD significantly increased when prior diagnosis of 
psychoneurosis and psychosomatic illness had been made.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.37.2.226
PMID: 3808303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Neurology. 1987 Feb;37(2):307-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.37.2.307.

Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism with extensive brain calcification and persistent 
neurologic dysfunction.

Friedman JH, Chiucchini I, Tucci JR.

Idiopathic hypoparathyroidism is an uncommon cause of movement disorders. The 
following case illustrates the persistence of a parkinsonian gait 2 years after 
the restoration of normal serum calcium levels. The extensive calcifications in 
the brain presumably account for this as well as for the persistent mild 
dementia. The importance of identifying hypoparathyroidism early in the course 
is graphically illustrated.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.37.2.307
PMID: 3808313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Yale J Biol Med. 1987 Mar-Apr;60(2):119-22.

Progressive supranuclear palsy: a brief personalized history.

Daroff RB.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) was originally described in 1964. Although 
some contended it was merely a variant of Parkinson's disease, a specific 
electron microscopic finding of straight, rather than twisted, filaments in the 
neurofibrillary tangles established PSP as a distinct entity. The almost 
pathognomonic early clinical finding of paralysis of downward gaze is due to 
lesions involving the lateral portions of the rostral interstitial nucleus of 
the medial longitudinal fasciculus. Recent neurochemical studies have identified 
both a decrease in central dopamine and acetylcholine. The etiology of PSP is 
unknown, and the therapy is generally ineffective.

PMCID: PMC2590314
PMID: 3577208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Brain. 1987 Jun;110 ( Pt 3):585-612. doi: 10.1093/brain/110.3.585.

Impairment of rapid movement in Huntington's disease.

Hefter H, Hömberg V, Lange HW, Freund HJ.

Patients with Huntington's disease (HD) and relatives at risk were examined with 
respect to their capacity to produce rapid voluntary motor activity. For this 
purpose, the fastest possible self-paced single isometric forefinger extensions 
and the fastest alternating forefinger movements were tested. In addition to 
these fastest voluntary performances, the time course of spontaneous 
hyperkinetic finger movements and the peak frequency of finger and hand tremor 
were analysed as a measure of the temporal characteristics of involuntary 
movements. Comparison of these parameters in HD patients and individuals at risk 
with age and sex-matched normal controls revealed a significant slowing of all 
types of contractions or movements in the majority (up to 95%) of the patients 
and in up to 40% of the relatives at risk. Reaction times were only slightly 
prolonged, and the abnormalities of the movement parameters showed no 
correlation with detailed psychometric data. Hence it is unlikely that the 
disturbance in the execution of rapid motor acts is due to dementia. Tremor was 
also slower than normal and the hyperkinesias were still slower than the fastest 
voluntary contractions. It appears from this study that slowness of motor 
performance is not only evident in Parkinson's disease but may represent a more 
general dysfunction in basal ganglia disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/110.3.585
PMID: 2953406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Can J Neurol Sci. 1987 Aug;14(3 Suppl):448-51. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100037896.

Cerebral glucose and dopa metabolism in movement disorders.

Martin WR(1), Hayden MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology), University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

The development of positron emission tomography (PET) has enabled us to perform 
in vivo measurements of certain aspects of regional cerebral function. Regional 
cerebral glucose metabolism may be readily quantified with [18F] 
fluoro-2-deoxyglucose (FDG) and presynaptic dopaminergic function may be studied 
with the labelled dopa analog 6-[18F] fluoro-L-dopa. We have applied a model to 
the analysis of 6-FD/PET data with which in vivo age-related changes in 
dopaminergic function may be demonstrated in normal subjects. With this 
technique, we have studied a series of asymptomatic MPTP-exposed subjects and 
have shown evidence of subclinical nigrostriatal pathway damage. Studies of 
regional cerebral glucose metabolism with FDG in early Huntington's disease have 
shown a characteristic impairment in caudate function which precedes the 
development of caudate atrophy. In addition, some asymptomatic individuals who 
are at risk for HD have caudate hypometabolism. We feel that, at the present 
time, PET provides information which is complementary to the clinical 
examination in establishing a diagnosis of HD. In the future these studies may 
also help in the investigation of at risk individuals.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100037896
PMID: 2960430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Can J Neurol Sci. 1987 Aug;14(3 Suppl):547-54.

Progressive supranuclear palsy.

Duvoisin RC(1), Golbe LI, Lepore FE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 
Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick 08903.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) was first recognized as a distinct morbid 
entity by Richardson, Steele and Olszewski a quarter century ago. Subsequent 
experience has confirmed and extended their original observations. PSP has 
become familiar as a chronic progressive disorder with extrapyramidal rigidity, 
bradykinesia, gait impairment, bulbar palsy, dementia and a characteristic 
supranuclear ophthalmoplegia. It is an important cause of parkinsonism. Its 
etiology remains obscure. Familial concentrations have not been observed. Some 
cases exhibit no oculomotor dysfunction. Dementia is usually mild. Recent 
neuropsychological studies have defined features consistent with frontal lobe 
cortical dysfunction. Seizures and paroxysmal EEG activity may occur. CT and MRI 
scans show midbrain atrophy early and later atrophy of the pontine and midbrain 
tegmentum and the frontal and temporal lobes. PET scans have shown frontal 
hypometabolism and loss of striatal D-2 dopamine receptors. Postmortem studies 
have documented involvement of both dopaminergic and cholinergic systems. 
Treatment remains palliative and unsatisfactory.

PMID: 3315157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Am J Prev Med. 1987 Sep-Oct;3(5):293-9.

Pilot survey of the prevalence of neurologic disorders in the Parsi community of 
Bombay.

Bharucha NE(1), Bharucha EP, Dastur HD, Schoenberg BS.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Department, Bombay Hospital, India.

There is a paucity of trained neurologists in developing countries. We designed 
a questionnaire to rapidly screen a community of 851 people (Parsis living in a 
colony in Bombay, India) for possible neurologic diseases. This questionnaire 
was pretested and found to have a sensitivity of 100 percent for detecting 
epilepsy, febrile seizures (only in children), completed stroke, peripheral 
neuropathy, movement disorders, cerebral palsy, mental retardation, and severe 
dementia. The screening questionnaire was administered by trained lay health 
workers. One hundred and sixty-three people were identified by this 
questionnaire as possibly having neurologic disease. Neurologists later examined 
these 163 people and found that 80 of them actually suffered from at least one 
of the neurologic diseases of interest (positive predictive value = 48 percent). 
The most common neurologic disorders were peripheral neuropathy (32 cases), 
essential tremor (13 cases), stroke (12 cases), Parkinson's disease (six cases), 
and epilepsy (four cases).

PMID: 3330662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Neurol. 1987 Oct;235(1):16-21. doi: 10.1007/BF00314191.

Comparison of DSIP- (delta sleep-inducing peptide) and P-DSIP-like 
(phosphorylated) immunoreactivity in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with senile 
dementia of Alzheimer type, multi-infarct syndrome, communicating hydrocephalus 
and Parkinson's disease.

Ernst A(1), Cramer H, Strubel D, Kuntzmann F, Schoenenberger GA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University Clinics, Kantonsspital Basel, Switzerland.

The concentrations of delta sleep-inducing peptide (DSIP)-like (DSIP-LI) and 
P-DSIP-like (phosphorylated, Ser7) immunoreactivity (P-DSIP-LI) were measured by 
specific radioimmunoassay in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with 
senile dementia of the Alzheimer type [SDAT, subdivided into early (S1), middle 
(S2) and late dementia (S3)], multi-infarct dementia (MD), Parkinson's disease 
(PD), vascular disease (VD) and communicating hydrocephalus (H), as well as in 
control patients (C1, C2). Mean DSIP-LI and P-DSIP-LI concentrations were found 
to be significantly higher in the elderly control group (C1, mean age 83 +/- 5 
years) than in the middle-aged control group (C2, mean age 40 +/- 16 years). 
DSIP-LI and P-DSIP-LI were positively correlated with age in both control 
groups. Significant decreases of DSIP-LI compared with age-matched controls (C1) 
were observed for S2, S3, MD, PD, VD and H. In contrast, no significant 
differences corresponding to pathology were found for P-DSIP-LI.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00314191
PMID: 2448424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Brain. 1987 Oct;110 ( Pt 5):1131-53. doi: 10.1093/brain/110.5.1131.

Clinical and pathological features of diffuse cortical Lewy body disease (Lewy 
body dementia).

Gibb WR(1), Esiri MM, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, National Hospitals for Nervous Diseases, Maida 
Vale, London.

Four patients with severe dementia and a parkinsonian syndrome are described. 
Dysphasia, dyscalculia, dyspraxia, visual and verbal memory disturbance and 
psychosis, usually of depressive type, occurred early in the course of the 
illness. Pathologically they were characterized by the presence of numerous Lewy 
bodies throughout both the cerebral cortex and brainstem. Three cases also had 
severe neurofibrillary tangle change or senile plaques in the neocortex, 
compatible with Alzheimer's disease, but the cortical tangle distribution did 
not always match that of the Lewy bodies. This disorder may form part of the 
spectrum of pathology in Parkinson's disease, where it may be one possible cause 
of dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/110.5.1131
PMID: 2823957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Hum Pathol. 1988 Jan;19(1):27-31. doi: 10.1016/s0046-8177(88)80312-5.

Colloid (hyaline) inclusion bodies in the central nervous system: their presence 
in the substantia nigra is diagnostic of Parkinson's disease.

Pappolla MA(1), Shank DL, Alzofon J, Dudley AW.

Author information:
(1)New York Medical College, Valhalla.

Intracytoplasmic "colloid" inclusions have been described within neurons of 
several discrete central nervous system nuclei in a variety of entities. 
Although they lack specificity for any particular disease, they are believed to 
represent one of the morphologic changes of neuronal aging. Because premature 
aging of the substantia nigra has been one of the claimed mechanisms occurring 
in Parkinson's disease, the prevalence of colloid inclusions was studied within 
the substantia nigra in 15 patients with Parkinson's disease, 15 age-matched 
controls, 50 "normal" individuals, 10 patients with dementia of Alzheimer's 
type, and two patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Colloid bodies were 
found in the substantia nigra of all patients with Parkinson's disease and were 
virtually absent in the other populations. Histochemical and ultrastructural 
analyses showed that colloid bodies differ from early and mature Lewy bodies. 
They may represent the "pale" inclusions rarely mentioned in the literature and 
often mistaken for early Lewy bodies. "Colloid" bodies in the substantia nigra 
are diagnostic of Parkinson's disease. These findings support the theory of 
"premature" aging of the substantia nigra in this disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0046-8177(88)80312-5
PMID: 2447008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1988 Jan;36(1):13-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1988.tb03428.x.

Computerized history and self-assessment questionnaire for diagnostic screening 
among patients with dementia.

Rogers RL(1), Meyer JS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Houston, Texas.

In order to standardize and quantify diagnostic information derived from medical 
histories and case reports given by demented patients, their families or 
care-providers, a questionnaire has been developed containing 94 questions. The 
output is categorized by computer into graphic clinical scales which correlate 
and weigh information relating to seven of the most common causes of dementia. 
The present investigation assesses the validity of predictive diagnostic 
classifications derived from the clinical scales tested on admission by 
correlating them later with final diagnoses determined independently by thorough 
clinical evaluation including standard diagnostic tests, computed tomography and 
nuclear magnetic resonance scans. Results of 101 healthy, neurologically normal, 
age-matched volunteers and 140 patients representative of the more common forms 
of dementia indicate that correct diagnostic identification was: 75% for 
dementia secondary to Parkinson's disease, 100% for Huntington's disease, 90.2% 
for Alzheimer's disease, 82.4% for multi-infarct dementia, 90.0% for 
posttraumatic dementia, 77.8% for normal-pressure hydrocephalus and 85.7% for 
Wernicke-Korsakoff dementia. Correct diagnostic assignment was highly 
significant (P less than .0005). The screening questionnaire may prove to be a 
useful and standard diagnostic tool for clinicians and investigators concerned 
with epidemiology, prevention and treatment of dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1988.tb03428.x
PMID: 2961795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Int J Psychiatry Med. 1988;18(3):211-21. doi: 10.2190/fu3d-eku1-4wxx-jvc9.

Diagnosis and treatment of depression in the elderly.

Kim KY(1), Hershey LA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, State University of New York, Buffalo.

Depression and suicide are significant problems in the elderly, both in terms of 
their severity and their prevalence. It is particularly difficult to distinguish 
depression from early dementia, since elderly depressed patients often deny mood 
disorder and focus on their memory problems. This differential diagnostic 
dilemma is further complicated by the fact that 20 percent of Alzheimer-type 
dementia patients have moderate to severe depression. An even higher prevalence 
of depression can be seen in elderly patients with stroke or Parkinson's 
disease. Most all of the depressive disorders of the elderly are amenable to one 
form or combination of therapies: pharmacologic, electro-convulsive, or 
psychotherapy. Tricyclic antidepressants are often associated with adverse drug 
reactions in the elderly, so alternatives such as MAO inhibitors, alprazolam, 
bupropion and psychostimulants are currently being explored in this patient 
population.

DOI: 10.2190/fu3d-eku1-4wxx-jvc9
PMID: 3063674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1988;144(8-9):508-11.

[Alzheimer's disease with early association of a hemi-parkinsonian syndrome].

[Article in French]

Lechevalier B(1), Brandel JP, Eustache F, Schupp C, Chapon F, Viader F.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, CHU, Caen.

A 66 year-old woman presented with severe memory disorders followed several 
months later with tremor of Parkinsonian type of the right upper limb totally 
relieved by treatment with levodopa-benserazide. Four years later she was 
admitted with memory disturbances, temporospatial disorientation, constructional 
and ideatory apraxia, dressing apraxia and language difficulties. Eight years 
later she had become bed-ridden, with deviation of head and eyes towards the 
left, hypertonus tremor and stereotyped movements. Neuropathologic examination 
showed neuronal loss in substantia nigra and left locus ceruleus, dorsal nucleus 
of the pneumogastric nerve and Meynert's basal nuclei on both sides. 
Neurofibrillary tangles affected the peri-aqueductal grey matter and Lewy's 
bodies were observed in the substantia nigra. Neurofibrillary tangles and 
granulovacuolar degeneration together with senile plaques were numerous in the 
hippocampus, but senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles were rare in the 
remainder of the cortex. Combined Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease 
could be due to simple coincidence, one of the diseases possibly predisposing to 
the appearance of the other.

PMID: 3187306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1988 Feb;51(2):244-9. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.51.2.244.

The effect of age of disease onset on neuropsychological performance in 
Parkinson's disease.

Hietanen M(1), Teräväinen H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Helsinki, Finland.

One hundred and eight noninstitutionalized patients with Parkinson's disease 
were studied to find out whether the age of disease onset affects patients' 
cognitive, memory and psychomotor performance. "Early onset" patients (whose 
disease began before 60 years of age) showed a wide spectrum of impairments in 
neuropsychological performance compared with age-matched normal subjects. 
However, only one (2%) of these patients was demented according to DSM III 
criteria. Dementia was more frequent in patients with equivalent disease 
duration, but with late onset of disease (over 60 years); 13 of such patients 
(25%) were demented. The present study supports previous findings which show 
that dementia increases with advancing age in Parkinson's disease. It also 
suggests that cognitive changes are also found in patients with early onset of 
disease.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.51.2.244
PMCID: PMC1031537
PMID: 3346689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Ann Otol Rhinol Laryngol. 1988 Mar-Apr;97(2 Pt 1):164-72. doi: 
10.1177/000348948809700214.

Acoustic analysis of voices of patients with neurologic disease: rationale and 
preliminary data.

Ramig LA(1), Scherer RC, Titze IR, Ringel SP.

Author information:
(1)Dept of Communication Disorders and Speech Science, University of Colorado, 
Boulder 80309.

This paper presents a rationale for acoustic analysis of voices of 
neurologically diseased patients, and reports preliminary data from patients 
with myotonic dystrophy, Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, as well as from individuals at risk for 
Huntington's disease. Noninvasive acoustic analysis may be of clinical value to 
the otolaryngologist, neurologist, and speech pathologist for early and 
differential diagnosis and for documenting disease progression in these various 
neurologic disorders.

DOI: 10.1177/000348948809700214
PMID: 2965542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Age Ageing. 1988 Mar;17(2):111-5. doi: 10.1093/ageing/17.2.111.

Pressure sores: effect of Parkinson's disease and cognitive function on 
spontaneous movement in bed.

Nicholson PW(1), Leeman AL, O'Neill CJ, Dobbs SM, Deshmukh AA, Denham MJ, 
Royston JP, Dobbs RJ.

Author information:
(1)Middlesex Hospital Medical School, London.

It has previously been shown that the incidence of pressure sores is related 
inversely to the amount of movement made during the night. The present study of 
30 in-patients of geriatric units suggests that the measurement of mean lateral 
displacement of the centre of gravity may better characterize those at risk than 
the total amount of movement. The mean displacement was reduced in Parkinson's 
disease and in dementia. The prevalence of pressure sores was markedly increased 
where Parkinson's disease and dementia coexisted.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/17.2.111
PMID: 3369336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Brain. 1988 Apr;111 ( Pt 2):223-44. doi: 10.1093/brain/111.2.223.

The coexistence of bradykinesia and chorea in Huntington's disease and its 
implications for theories of basal ganglia control of movement.

Thompson PD(1), Berardelli A, Rothwell JC, Day BL, Dick JP, Benecke R, Marsden 
CD.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Neurology, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.

Investigation of motor function in a group of 17 patients with Huntington's 
disease reveals that, in addition to the chorea that many patients exhibit, 
defects in voluntary motor performance also are evident. Fast simple wrist 
flexion movements to 15 degrees or 60 degrees were slower, and individual 
movements showed greater variability than seen in normal subjects. This 
bradykinesia was most pronounced in those patients who were akinetic and rigid, 
but also was seen in those with chorea alone; bradykinesia was independent of 
the drug treatment that the patients were receiving (and was therefore not due 
to drug-induced parkinsonism). The electromyographic activity of the agonist 
muscles during such simple but slow movement differed from that seen in 
Parkinson's disease. The performance of complex movements revealed further 
deficits. Some patients were unable to combine two movements in a simultaneous 
or sequential movement task of squeezing the hand and flexing the elbow. Those 
who could perform these complex movements exhibited slowing of the velocity of 
the movement and prolongation of the interval between movements. These 
abnormalities were present in patients with chorea who were not taking 
neuroleptic drugs. It is argued that they represent an abnormality of motor 
programming of complex movements, over and above the defect in executing simple 
movements. The long latency stretch reflexes in wrist flexor muscles and flexor 
pollicis longus were reduced or absent, but this did not correlate with changes 
in motor performance, or with the reduced size of the early components of 
cortical sensory evoked potentials. Bradykinesia is thus shown to be an integral 
component of the motor disorder of Huntington's disease, in addition to the 
chorea. The coexistence of bradykinesia and chorea in this illness is compatible 
with current theories of the role of the basal ganglia in the control of 
movement.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/111.2.223
PMID: 2967729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Can J Neurol Sci. 1988 May;15(2):106-13. doi: 10.1017/s031716710002744x.

Idiopathic Parkinson's disease: revised concepts of cognitive and affective 
status.

Taylor AE(1), Saint-Cyr JA, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Playfair Neuroscience Unit, Department of Anatomy, University of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada.

Assumptions regarding increased risk of dementia in Parkinson's disease and of 
depression mimicking the endogenous form are reviewed and challenged from the 
perspectives of recent findings in both the neuropsychological and anatomical 
domains. Evidence suggests that depression, while frequent, behaviourally 
resembles the reactive variety and that selective impairment of cognitive 
functions considered to depend upon the integrity of the frontal lobes 
accompanies this disorder. In this regard, it is speculated that the cognitive 
alterations seen in non-demented parkinson patients are the consequences of 
dysfunction of the caudate nucleus which contributes significantly to the normal 
activities processed through the frontostriate "complex loop".

DOI: 10.1017/s031716710002744x
PMID: 3289704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Jpn J Psychiatry Neurol. 1988 Jun;42(2):265-76. doi: 
10.1111/j.1440-1819.1988.tb01977.x.

Clinical and neuropathological study of a familial case of juvenile 
parkinsonism.

Inose T(1), Miyakawa M, Miyakawa K, Mizushima S, Oyanagi S, Ando S.

Author information:
(1)National Center Hospital for Mental, Nervous and Muscular Disorders, National 
Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan.

This is a detailed autopsy case of rare juvenile parkinsonism with dominant 
heredity. The patient displayed parkinsonian symptoms which began at the age of 
24, and expired in a state of quadriplegia-in-flexion at 35. In the later stage, 
myoclonic jerks, epileptiform convulsions and dementia appeared. L-dopa was 
effective only in the early stages. The autopsy revealed severe degeneration and 
the formation of atypical Lewy bodies in the cerebral cortex, as well as typical 
lesions of idiopathic parkinsonism with a Lewy body formation in the brain stem. 
This case was considered to belong essentially to idiopathic parkinsonism. The 
pathology of juvenile parkinsonism is reviewed briefly.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1819.1988.tb01977.x
PMID: 2853802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Brain. 1988 Jun;111 ( Pt 3):695-718. doi: 10.1093/brain/111.3.695.

A comparative study of visuospatial memory and learning in Alzheimer-type 
dementia and Parkinson's disease.

Sahakian BJ(1), Morris RG, Evenden JL, Heald A, Levy R, Philpot M, Robbins TW.

Author information:
(1)Section of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, London, UK.

Groups of patients with dementia of Alzheimer type (DAT) and idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease, together with age and IQ-matched normal controls, were 
compared on several computerized tests of visuospatial memory and learning. Two 
different groups of parkinsonian patients were studied: (1) a newly diagnosed 
group, early in the course of the disease, not receiving medication (NMED) PD) 
and (2) a group later in the course of the disease, receiving medication (MED 
PD). The DAT and MED PD group were significantly impaired in both spatial and 
visual pattern recognition memory. The DAT group exhibited a delay-dependent 
deficit (over 0-16 s) in a delayed matching-to-sample procedure, but were not 
impaired at simultaneous-matching-to-sample. By contrast, the MED PD group 
showed delay-independent deficits in the delayed matching-to-sample test and 
both the MED PD and the NMED PD group were also significantly impaired in 
simultaneous matching. In a form of delayed response test, the subjects were 
required first to memorize and then to learn the locations of several abstract 
visual stimuli which varied progressively in number from 1 to 8. The DAT group 
were severely impaired in this conditional associative learning task. A 
significant proportion of patients, but none of the controls, in the NMED and 
MED PD group also failed the test at the levels of 6 or 8 items. There was a 
significant correlation between the performance on the first trial, memory score 
in the delayed response task and indices of clinical disability and disease 
duration in the patients with Parkinson's disease. The results are discussed in 
terms of the utility of the comparison between DAT and PD in characterizing the 
nature of the cognitive deficits in these conditions and their relation to those 
findings from animal neuropsychology which use comparable paradigms.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/111.3.695
PMID: 3382917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Neurobiol Aging. 1988 Jul-Aug;9(4):399-403. doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(88)80087-3.

Olfactory tests as possible probes for detecting and monitoring Alzheimer's 
disease.

Kesslak JP(1), Cotman CW, Chui HC, Van den Noort S, Fang H, Pfeffer R, Lynch G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychobiology, University of California, Irvine 92717.

One of the characteristics of Alzheimer's disease is the early loss of neurons 
in pathways involved in processing olfactory information. Olfactory function was 
assessed in subjects with Alzheimer's disease using a conventional Smell 
Identification Test and a simple three odor match-to-sample problem. The 
patients exhibited a diminished capacity to identify common odors but were 
severely impaired in their ability to use novel odors in a match-to-sample task. 
Subjects with Parkinson's disease had a severe deficit for identifying common 
odors with the majority scoring as anosmic. Multiple sclerosis was not 
accompanied by detectable changes in olfactory functioning. The results of the 
Alzheimer's group are similar to recent animal studies that have shown lesions 
of the piriform-entorhinal cortex produce a variety of memory deficits that are 
particularly acute in tasks involving novel odors.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(88)80087-3
PMID: 3185859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Brain. 1988 Aug;111 ( Pt 4):941-59. doi: 10.1093/brain/111.4.941.

Procedural learning and neostriatal dysfunction in man.

Saint-Cyr JA(1), Taylor AE, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Playfair Neuroscience Unit, University of Toronto, Canada.

Patients with early stage Parkinson's disease are shown to be selectively 
impaired in a cognitive task of procedural learning while remaining intact in 
recall and recognition tests of declarative memory. In contrast, amnestic 
patients showed the opposite set of deficits, thus demonstrating a double 
dissociation. Patients with early Huntington's disease were either comparable to 
the parkinsonian patients or to amnestics. In the advanced Huntington's group, 
both procedural learning and declarative memory were impaired. It is argued that 
cognitive procedural learning depends on the establishment of heuristic 
strategies through the action of a circuit which involves the neostriatum and 
the prefrontal cortex.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/111.4.941
PMID: 2969762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Ann Neurol. 1988 Aug;24(2):282-4. doi: 10.1002/ana.410240221.

Cerebrospinal fluid homovanillic acid and parkinsonism in Huntington's disease.

Kurlan R(1), Goldblatt D, Zaczek R, Jeffries K, Irvine C, Coyle J, Shoulson I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and 
Dentistry, NY 14642.

In Huntington's disease (HD), normal or decreased levels of homovanillic acid 
(HVA) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) have been reported but have not been analyzed 
with respect to severity of parkinsonism, which in certain cases may be a 
predominant feature of the illness. We obtained CSF by lumbar puncture from four 
groups of nonmedicated subjects: (1) those with HD in the earliest stages of 
illness (n = 51), (2) those with parkinsonism, including idiopathic (n = 10) and 
atypical forms (n = 4), (3) those with nonparkinsonian movement disorders (n = 
19), and (4) normal volunteers (n = 4). HVA was determined by high-pressure 
liquid chromatography with electrochemical detection, and motor signs were 
assessed in standardized fashion. The parkinsonian group had reduced levels of 
CSF HVA, but the other groups showed no significant differences. For those with 
HD, no correlation was found between HVA level and severity of parkinsonism, and 
there were no differences in HVA level between those subjects with (n = 14) or 
without (n = 37) prominent parkinsonism or between subjects whose age at illness 
onset was 30 years or less (n = 16) and those whose age at onset was over 30 (n 
= 35). Our findings indicate that in early, untreated HD, CSF HVA is in the 
normal range and does not correlate with the severity of parkinsonism. This 
observation supports neuropathological findings suggesting that parkinsonian 
features in HD are largely related to the loss of postsynaptic striatal dopamine 
receptors rather than to presynaptic nigral degeneration.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410240221
PMID: 2972251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Age Ageing. 1988 Nov;17(6):397-400. doi: 10.1093/ageing/17.6.397.

Bringing gait analysis out of the laboratory and into the clinic.

Klenerman L(1), Dobbs RJ, Weller C, Leeman AL, Nicholson PW.

Author information:
(1)Orthopaedic Department, Northwick Park Hospital.

The potential value of objective assessment of gait in geriatric medicine cannot 
be explored fully whilst gait analysis remains a laboratory research tool, 
imposing special conditions which often preclude its use in the elderly. We 
describe a method of gait analysis suitable for the geriatric clinic and 
illustrate its use in documenting the response to interventions in three 
patients presenting with falls due to parkinsonism. Irregularity between gait 
cycles was noted, a finding previously described in Parkinson's disease, 
dementia and normal old men at a fast walking speed. Such irregularity may prove 
to be a major risk factor for falls. Where multiple pathologies which disturb 
gait coexist, measurement of changes in gait in response to treatment may 
provide a much needed means of audit.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/17.6.397
PMID: 3239499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Arch Neurol. 1988 Dec;45(12):1350-3. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1988.00520360068014.

Case-control study of early life dietary factors in Parkinson's disease.

Golbe LI(1), Farrell TM, Davis PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey, 
New Brunswick 08903.

Studies of the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis parkinsonism dementia complex of 
Guam direct suspicion to a heat-labile component of vegetables found in greatest 
concentration in seeds. We therefore surveyed patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) regarding early adult consumption of fruits and vegetables usually eaten 
raw, with seeds that are swallowed or scraped with the teeth. We administered a 
pretested questionnaire by telephone to 81 nondemented patients with PD and to a 
same-sex married sibling without PD. The patients and their siblings were asked 
whether they or their spouse (as an internal standard) had been more likely to 
eat each of 17 food items between marrying and age 40 years. No item was 
associated with the presence of PD. Unexpectedly associated with the absence of 
PD were preference for nuts (odds ratio, 0.39), salad oil or dressing (pressed 
from seeds) (odds ratio, 0.30), and plums (odds ratio, 0.24). These three items 
have higher vitamin E content than the other 14 items in our questionnaire. Our 
data are consistent with the hypothesis that vitamin E, as an antioxidant, may 
have prophylactic value against PD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1988.00520360068014
PMID: 3196195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Schweiz Arch Neurol Psychiatr (1985). 1989;140(2):147-57.

[Movement patterns of demented and non-demented nursing home patients using the 
Involuntary Movements and Extrapyramidal Scale. Effects of pharmacotherapy].

[Article in German]

Schönenberger PM(1), Noser A, Christinat S, Wettstein A.

Author information:
(1)Städtisches Krankenheim Käferberg, Zürich.

We applied the involuntary movements and extrapyramidal scale in 54 patients (41 
with dementia, 13 without dementia) of the Käferberg nursing home. Increased 
severity of parkinsonism was negatively correlated with Mini-Mental State scores 
(mnestic function r = 0.479, p less than 0.001/spatial function r = -0.617, p 
less than 0.001) and with activities of daily living scores (r = 0.635, p less 
than 0.001). Increased severity of parkinsonism and impaired memory are 
associated with poor performance in activities of daily living.

PMID: 2470143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 1989 Spring;1(2):154-8. doi: 
10.1176/jnp.1.2.154.

Neuropsychological impairments associated with severity of Parkinson's disease.

Huber SJ(1), Freidenberg DL, Shuttleworth EC, Paulson GW, Christy JA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ohio State University, College of Medicine, Columbus 
43210.

Intellectual impairment and disease severity tend to parallel one another in 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD), but the pattern of development of the 
neuropsychological impairments contributing to the overall intellectual decline 
is unknown. This problem was addressed by comparing neuropsychological 
performance in the early and later stages of PD. Impairment of recent memory, 
impairment of cognition, and somatic features of depression were seen early and 
worsened with more advanced disease. Impairment of visuospatial skills, remote 
memory, language, and mood were observed only in the later stages of PD. These 
findings suggest that neuropsychological impairments do not develop in a uniform 
manner with progression of PD.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.1.2.154
PMID: 2521056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1989;145(8-9):587-95.

Oculomotor abnormalities in diseases of the basal ganglia.

Kennard C(1), Lueck CJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, London Hospital, United Kingdom.

Disorders of eye movements have been described in diseases of the basal ganglia 
for over a century. Recent neurophysiological and clinical work has greatly 
clarified the oculomotor role of these structures: their major involvement 
appears to be in the generation of "voluntary" saccades, and in the suppression 
of "reflex" saccades. The observed abnormalities of saccadic eye movements in 
Huntington's (HD) and Parkinson's (PD) diseases conform very well to predictions 
based on a combination of known disease pathology and recent neurophysiological 
work. This is not quite the case for other types of eye movement, such as smooth 
pursuit, largely because the exact role of the basal ganglia in their generation 
has not been defined neurophysiologically. Several diseases other than HD and PD 
both involve the basal ganglia and have effects on eye movements; such diseases 
include progressive supranuclear palsy and Wilson's disease. Unfortunately, the 
pathological processes in these conditions are too widespread to allow comment 
on how well oculomotor abnormalities fit in with predictions.

PMID: 2530611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Neurology. 1989 Jan;39(1):76-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.39.1.76.

Diagnosis of dementia: clinicopathologic correlations.

Boller F(1), Lopez OL, Moossy J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Veterans Administration Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 1989 Nov;39(11):1559-60.

Based on 54 demented patients consecutively autopsied at the University of 
Pittsburgh, we studied the accuracy of clinicians in predicting the pathologic 
diagnosis. Thirty-nine patients (72.2%) had Alzheimer's disease, while 15 
(27.7%) had other CNS diseases (four multi-infarct dementia; three 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease; two thalamic and subcortical gliosis; three 
Parkinson's disease; one progressive supranuclear palsy; one Huntington's 
disease; and one unclassified). Two neurologists independently reviewed the 
clinical records of each patient without knowledge of the patient's identity or 
clinical or pathologic diagnoses; each clinician reached a clinical diagnosis 
based on criteria derived from those of the NINCDS/ADRDA. In 34 (63%) cases both 
clinicians were correct, in nine (17%) one was correct, and in 11 (20%) neither 
was correct. These results show that in patients with a clinical diagnosis of 
dementia, the etiology cannot be accurately predicted during life.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.39.1.76
PMID: 2642615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Eur Neurol. 1989;29(2):71-6. doi: 10.1159/000116381.

Frontal lobe dysfunction in Parkinson's disease: prognostic value for dementia?

Piccirilli M(1), D'Alessandro P, Finali G, Piccinin GL, Agostini L.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Neurologica dell'Università degli Studi, Perugia, Italy.

The purpose of this longitudinal study was to investigate if the presence of 
frontal motor deficits in parkinsonians without signs of global intellectual 
impairment may have a predictive value for the development of a progressive 
dementing process during the course of the illness. An examination of the higher 
level of motor organization, using skills thought to depend upon the integrity 
of the frontal regions, was performed by 30 parkinsonian patients who did not 
present any signs of general intellectual impairment. According to their 
performance, as compared with controls, they were divided into two subgroups: 
those with and those without frontal dysfunctions. After a mean period of 4 
years, a second neuropsychological examination was carried out to assess any 
eventual change of mental status. The results suggest that frontal dysfunctions 
may be observed several years before the appearance of generalized intellectual 
impairment and may be considered one of the predictive factors for development 
of dementia in Parkinson's disease. Careful consideration of these defects 
during examination of motor abilities may be of value in the clinical management 
of parkinsonian patients.

DOI: 10.1159/000116381
PMID: 2707295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Acta Neuropathol. 1989;78(2):210-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00688211.

Low-calcium, high-aluminum diet-induced motor neuron pathology in cynomolgus 
monkeys.

Garruto RM(1), Shankar SK, Yanagihara R, Salazar AM, Amyx HL, Gajdusek DC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Central Nervous System Studies, National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Long-term epidemiological studies indicate that environmental factors play a 
causative role in high-incidence amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD) in the western Pacific. An increased risk for disease 
is acquired in youth and remains for life. The low concentrations of calcium and 
magnesium and high levels of aluminum in the soil and drinking water, along with 
the relative isolation of these populations, constitute an unusual environmental 
feature common to all three high-incidence foci. Studies of mineral deposition 
in brain tissue of Guamanian ALS and PD patients, as well as of neurologically 
normal Guamanians with neurofibrillary degeneration, demonstrate accumulations 
of calcium, aluminum and silicon in neurofibrillary tangle-bearing neurons. In 
an attempt to duplicate the low calcium and high aluminum and manganese in soil 
and drinking water in these foci, we maintained juvenile cynomolgus monkeys for 
41 to 46 months on a low-calcium diet with or without supplemental aluminum and 
manganese. Experimental animals exhibited mild calcium and aluminum deposition 
and degenerative changes, compatible with those of early ALS and PD, in motor 
neurons of the spinal cord, brain stem, substantia nigra and cerebrum. 
Neuropathological findings included chromatolysis, aberrant perikaryal 
accumulation of phosphorylated neurofilament, neurofibrillary tangles, axonal 
spheroids, and basophilic and hyaline-like inclusions consisting of abnormal 
cytoskeletal elements by electron microscopy. The magnitude and extent of these 
lesions far exceeded those found in normal aged monkeys.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00688211
PMID: 2750490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Neuropsychologia. 1989;27(6):887-92. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(89)90012-2.

Selective visual attention in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's patients: memory- and 
data-driven control.

Cossa FM(1), Della Sala S, Spinnler H.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology Laboratory, Clinica del Lavoro Foundation, Institute of Care 
and Research, Novara, Italy.

An automated visual search experiment was carried out on patients with incipient 
Alzheimer's disease, non-demented Parkinsonians and healthy controls to test for 
selective attention control within the framework of the Norman and Bobrow (1975) 
model. The performances of the Parkinsonians and healthy controls were 
consistent with the predictions of this model but those of the Alzheimer 
patients were not. These patients appeared to be no longer sensitive to the 
facilitation supplied by the stimulus context and to spend most of their 
residual resources on achieving accuracy. The reduction of their attentional 
resources possibly interferes with the control of the speed-accuracy trade-off.

DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(89)90012-2
PMID: 2755597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Am J Hum Biol. 1989;1(3):367-382. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.1310010317.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia of Gaum: Clinical, 
epidemiological, and genetic patterns.

Garruto RM(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Central Nervous System Studies, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The strikingly high incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD), two uniformly fatal neurodegenerative disorders 
which often occur in the same families and occasionally in the same individual, 
was recognized on Guam more than three decades ago. Since the first systematic 
observations began, nearly 800 Guamanian Chamorro patients have been clinically 
diagnosed as having either disease. The original incidence rates for ALS and PD 
accounted for one in five deaths among Chamorros over ago 25. During the past 30 
years, however, the incidence and mortality rates have dramatically declined and 
today the risk to Guamanian chamorros is only several-fold higher than that for 
non-Chamorro residents of the continental United States. The accumulating 
epidemiological and genetic data strongly suggest that environmental factors are 
primarily involved in the etiology and pathogenesis of these disorders. The high 
incidence focus of ALS and PD on Guam and similar, but less well-studied, foci 
in West New Guinea and the Kii Peninsula of Japan represent natural paradigms of 
chronic degenerative disease that have provided new information and insights for 
understanding not only ALS and PD, but other neurological disorders such as 
classical ALS, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, and early neuronal aging, 
insights that might otherwise not have been forthcoming from studies of low 
incidence sporadic disease in large cosmopolitan Western communities.

Copyright © 1989 Wiley-Liss, Inc., A Wiley Company.

DOI: 10.1002/ajhb.1310010317
PMID: 28514087


97. J Nucl Med. 1989 Feb;30(2):150-6.

Regional dynamics of N-isopropyl-(123I)p-iodoamphetamine in human brain.

Nishizawa S(1), Tanada S, Yonekura Y, Fujita T, Mukai T, Saji H, Fukuyama H, 
Miyoshi T, Harada K, Ishikawa M, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Kyoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

Regional cerebral dynamics of N-isopropyl-(123I)p-iodoamphetamine (IMP) in the 
human brain were studied using a multi-detector single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) scanner in 35 subjects both normal and with a variety of 
neurological conditions. Distribution of IMP in the brain was also compared with 
regional cerebral blood flow (CBF) measured by positron emission tomography 
(PET) in 15 of these 35 cases. A significant regional difference in temporal 
changes of radioactivity was observed among normal brain structures. A rapid 
increase with early washout of the tracer was shown in the cerebellum and the 
occipital cortex, while the basal ganglia revealed a relatively slow increase 
and prolonged retention, indicating the regional difference in extraction and/or 
retention of IMP among the cerebral tissues. In cases with unilateral 
hypoperfusion, the percentage of the activity in the lesion to that in the 
contralateral normal cortex on the early SPECT was correlated well with that on 
CBF measured by PET (r = 0.870, p less than 0.001). However, the contrast on the 
SPECT image decreased with time after injection; 84.0 +/- 7.4% on the SPECT at 
5-20 min scan, 87.6 +/- 7.6% at 35-50 min scan and 96.2 +/- 6.3% at 5 hr scan. 
In a case with a brain tumor having high blood flow documented by PET, increased 
accumulation of IMP was observed in the tumor on the early images obtained 
within 20 min followed by a rapid washout. These findings suggested altered 
extraction and/or retention of IMP in normal and diseased tissues, and these 
factors should be considered for the assessment of distribution and 
redistribution of IMP.

PMID: 2786930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1989 Apr;12(2):98-105. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-198904000-00003.

Falls and Parkinson's disease.

Koller WC(1), Glatt S, Vetere-Overfield B, Hassanein R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kansas University Medical Center, Kansas City 66103.

One hundred patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and five patients with 
progressive supranuclear palsy were questioned about the frequency, 
circumstances, and consequences of falling. Parkinsonian symptoms were scored 
using the unified rating scale. Thirty-eight percent of parkinsonian patients 
fell, and 13% fell more than once a week. Broken bones (13%), hospitalization 
(18%), confinement to wheelchair (3%), and fear of walking occurred. Postural 
hypotension was uncommon and did not correlate to falling. Sensory loss, 
dementia, heart disease, and the use of antihypertensive medications were not 
related to falling. Falling did correlate with postural instability, 
bradykinesia, and rigidity but not with tremor. Falling was also related to age 
and duration of disease. The frequency of falling was correlated only to the 
severity of one parkinsonian symptom, postural instability. Progressive 
supranuclear palsy patients fell often and had marked postural instability. 
Factor analysis of parkinsonian characteristics yielded three groups, with 
tremor being an independent symptom. Frequent fallers and postural instability 
were not changed by dopaminergic therapy. Some fallers with gait difficulties 
and bradykinesia were improved with levodopa. Physical therapy was also of 
benefit to some patients. It is concluded that falling is a common problem in PD 
and may cause serious disability. Falling may be related to all the major motor 
signs except for tremor. Frequent falling is caused by postural instability, 
which is not reversible with dopaminergic therapy.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-198904000-00003
PMID: 2720700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1989 Apr;37(4):303-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1989.tb05495.x.

Familial aggregation of multiple myeloma and central nervous system diseases.

Grufferman S(1), Cohen HJ, Delzell ES, Morrison MC, Schold SC Jr, Moore JO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North 
Carolina.

Degenerative central nervous system diseases such as Alzheimer's disease and 
lymphoreticular malignancies such as multiple myeloma occur with increased 
frequency with advancing age. Relatives of early-onset Alzheimer's disease 
patients may have an increased risk of lymphoreticular malignancies. This led us 
to evaluate the family history of central nervous system diseases in a 
case-control study of multiple myeloma. Thirteen of 439 multiple myeloma cases 
had one or more first-degree relatives with degenerative or demyelinating 
central nervous system disease. In comparison, there were nine "positive" family 
histories in 1,317 matched hospital controls (relative risk = 4.4, 95% 
confidence interval = 1.9-10.3). Relative risks for the component categories of 
Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and miscellaneous degenerative central 
nervous system diseases were 3.0, 4.0 and 11.9, respectively. Our findings 
suggest that the degenerative and demyelinating central nervous system diseases 
and the lymphoreticular malignancies may comprise an etiologically related group 
of "protean diseases." These diseases may have a shared genetic susceptibility, 
possibly an immunologic abnormality. The varied disease manifestation in family 
members suggests a second necessary etiologic step of a variable and possibly 
environmental nature.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1989.tb05495.x
PMID: 2921451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Ann Neurol. 1989 May;25(5):485-93. doi: 10.1002/ana.410250511.

Assessment of genetic risk for Alzheimer's disease among first-degree relatives.

Farrer LA(1), O'Sullivan DM, Cupples LA, Growdon JH, Myers RH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston University School of Medicine, MA 02118.

Life table methods were used to determine the relative risk of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) in relatives of index cases with AD. Risk of AD was assessed in 967 
first-degree relatives of 128 probands with clinically diagnosed AD and 572 
first-degree relatives of a control group consisting of 84 subjects with 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Using a method that weights likelihood of correct 
diagnosis of AD, cumulative risk among AD relatives by age 93 was 24%, whereas 
relatives of the PD probands had a weighted risk of 16% by age 90. Overall, the 
total lifetime risk of developing dementia was similar among first-degree 
relatives of patients with AD and those of patients with PD. The age-specific 
risks were much different, however; from the age of 65 years to the age of 80 
years, relatives of patients with AD had a twofold to fourfold increased risk of 
dementia. Equal risks were found for parents and siblings and for male and 
female relatives after adjustment for sex-specific patterns of survivorship. 
Relatives of probands with early-onset (less than or equal to 67 years) and 
late-onset (greater than 67 years) AD had equivalent risks of developing 
illness. Because onset age was found to cluster in families, the apparent 
increase in cumulative incidence for dementia in relatives of early-onset cases 
was likely due to relatives of the late-onset cases dying before developing 
illness.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410250511
PMID: 2774490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


