1101. Brain Res Bull. 2004 Mar 1;63(1):45-55. doi: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2003.12.004.

Regional and progressive changes in brain expression of complexin II in a mouse 
transgenic for the Huntington's disease mutation.

Freeman W(1), Morton AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Tennis Court Road, 
Cambridge CB2 1PD, UK.

Changes in mRNA expression of soluble NSF-attachment protein receptors (SNAREs) 
and SNARE-associated proteins have been shown to occur in a number of disorders 
such as schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease. We have 
shown previously that there is a decrease in protein levels of the 
SNARE-associated protein, complexin II (CPLXII) in Huntington's disease brain 
and in the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease. In the current study, we 
used quantitative in situ hybridisation to examine mRNA expression of SNAREs (25 
kDa synaptosome-associated protein (SNAP-25), syntaxin-1A and synaptobrevin-2) 
and SNARE-associated proteins (alpha-SNAP, CPLXI and CPLXII) in brain of R6/2 
mice and their wild type littermates between 3 and 15 weeks of age. We found an 
early and progressive decrease of CPLXII expression in R6/2 mice brains. In 
contrast, no changes in SNARE expression were seen in R6/2 brains compared with 
wild type brain. Further, while decreased expression of alpha-SNAP and CPLXI was 
seen, this was not until 15 weeks of age and even then the changes were small. 
We suggest that downregulation of expression of mRNA encoding SNARE-associated 
proteins, first CPLXII and later CPLXI and alpha-SNAP, contributes to the 
progressive neuropathology of the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2003.12.004
PMID: 15121238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1102. Brain. 2004 Jul;127(Pt 7):1641-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh179. Epub 2004 May 6.

Familial clustering and genetic risk for dementia in a genetically isolated 
Dutch population.

Sleegers K(1), Roks G, Theuns J, Aulchenko YS, Rademakers R, Cruts M, van Gool 
WA, Van Broeckhoven C, Heutink P, Oostra BA, van Swieten JC, van Duijn CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus Medical Cetre, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Despite advances in elucidating the genetic epidemiology of Alzheimer's disease 
and frontotemporal dementia, the aetiology for most patients with dementia 
remains unclear. We examined the genetic epidemiology of dementia in a recent 
genetically isolated Dutch population founded around 1750. The series of 191 
patients ascertained comprised 122 probable Alzheimer's disease patients with 
late onset and 17 with early onset, and 22 with possible Alzheimer's disease. It 
further included 10 patients with vascular dementia, nine with Lewy body 
dementia and six with frontotemporal dementia. All patients, except those with 
vascular dementia, were more closely related than healthy individuals from the 
same area. Clustering was strongest for patients with early-onset Alzheimer's 
disease or Lewy body dementia. Although 14% of late-onset Alzheimer's disease 
patients had evidence of autosomal dominant disease, consanguinity was found in 
three late-onset Alzheimer's disease patients, suggesting a recessive or 
polygenic model underlying the trait. We found no clustering of vascular 
dementia, implying a difference in genetic risk for late-onset Alzheimer's 
disease and vascular dementia. Mutations in known genes could not explain the 
occurrence of dementia, but the population attributable proportion of 
apolipoprotein E gene (APOE*4) was high (45%) due to a high frequency of APOE*4 
carriers. Earlier identified regions on chromosomes 10 and 12, nor the effect of 
the alpha-2-macroglobulin (A2M) I/D polymorphism on Alzheimer's disease could be 
confirmed in our study. We did find evidence for association between the A2M 
D-allele and Lewy body dementia. Our data showed a strong familial clustering of 
various forms of dementia in this isolated Dutch population. A high percentage 
of late-onset Alzheimer's disease could be explained by APOE*4, but 55% of its 
origin is still unknown.

Copyright 2004 Guarantors of Brain

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh179
PMID: 15130954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1103. Psychopharmacol Bull. 2003;37(4):116-32.

Risperidone in the management of psychiatric and neurodegenerative disease in 
the elderly: an update.

DeVane CL(1), Mintzer J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston, 
SC 29425, USA. devanel@musc.edu

Neuropsychiatric disorders are common among elderly patients in long-term care 
facilities. Although dementia is most common, schizophrenia and schizoaffective 
disorder, delusional disorder, bipolar disorder, and Parkinson's disease, as 
well as other psychiatric and neurodegenerative disorders, can also occur in 
this population. Our objective was to review the literature pertaining to the 
safety and efficacy of risperidone in elderly patients, the atypical 
antipsychotic with the longest history of use in this population. We identified 
original studies of risperidone in elderly patients through MEDLINE and CURRENT 
CONTENTS database searches. Additional material was identified via abstracts 
presented at national and international conferences. Published data from 
controlled and uncontrolled trials in elderly patients support the efficacy of 
risperidone in controlling behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia, as 
well as treating psychotic symptoms associated with schizophrenia and other 
disorders with psychotic features. Limited data suggest that risperidone might 
also be useful for management of patients with delirium and Huntington's 
disease. Risperidone was well tolerated in the elderly and associated with a low 
risk of movement disorders and anticholinergic effects. A recent change in the 
product information described an increased incidence of cerebrovascular events 
in some elderly and suggests the need for further investigations in this 
population. There is a substantial published database supporting safe and 
effective use of risperidone for treatment of psychosis, agitation, and 
aggression in elderly patients.

PMID: 15131522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1104. J Neurol Sci. 2004 May 15;220(1-2):105-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.02.018.

Cardiac 123I-MIBG scintigraphy can assess the disease severity and phenotype of 
PD.

Saiki S(1), Hirose G, Sakai K, Kataoka S, Hori A, Saiki M, Kaito M, Higashi K, 
Taki S, Kakeshita K, Fujino S, Miaki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kanazawa Medical University, 1-1 Daigaku, Uchinada, 
Kahoku, Ishikawa 920-0923, Japan. saibon@kanazawa-med.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: Cardiac (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy studies of 
patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) found decreased uptake. 
Whether this decrease is associated with clinical severity as assessed by the 
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and the phenotypes of PD has 
not been determined.
METHODS: Cardiac MIBG scintigraphy was performed on 34 patients with PD, 7 with 
multiple system atrophy (MSA), 4 with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and 11 
normal controls (NCs). Early and delayed MIBG heart/mediastinum (H/M) ratios 
were evaluated. PD severity was assessed by the Hoehn and Yahr (H-Y) stage and 
UPDRS. Patients were grouped in two phenotypes, tremor and postural instability 
gait difficulty (PIGD)-dominant groups based on UPDRS components. Associations 
between MIBG uptake and age at onset, UPDRS, and disease phenotype were analyzed 
in each group.
RESULTS: The early H/M ratio was significantly lower in patients with PD 
(1.45+/-0.207) than in the NCs (2.08+/-0.231), and in those with MSA 
(1.99+/-0.284), but not in those with DLB (1.29+/-0.0435). The delayed H/M ratio 
for PD (1.33+/-0.276) also was significantly decreased as compared to the ratios 
for NCs (2.17+/-0.286) and MSA (2.16+/-0.414) but not DLB (1.16+/-0.0949). The 
early H/M ratio was significantly correlated with both UPDRS score and age at 
onset, whereas the delayed H/M ratio only was significantly correlated with age 
at onset. The PIGD-dominant group had significantly higher UPDRS scores and 
lower H/M ratios than the tremor-dominant group.
CONCLUSION: Cardiac MIBG scintigraphy can be used to differentiate PD from MSA 
and NC, and to determine the disease severity and phenotypes of PD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.02.018
PMID: 15140615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1105. J Clin Invest. 2004 May;113(10):1384-7. doi: 10.1172/JCI21746.

Amyloid at the cutting edge: activation of alpha-secretase prevents 
amyloidogenesis in an Alzheimer disease mouse model.

Lichtenthaler SF(1), Haass C.

Author information:
(1)Adolf-Butenandt-Institut, Laboratory for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease 
Research, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universit√§t, Munich, Germany. 
Stefan.Lichtenthaler@med.uni-muenchen.de

Comment on
    J Clin Invest. 2004 May;113(10):1456-64.

The amyloid beta-peptide (A beta peptide) is assumed to play a crucial and early 
role in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer disease. Thus, strategies for a 
pharmacotherapy aim at reducing A beta peptide generation, which proteolytically 
derives from the amyloid precursor protein (APP). The main targets so far have 
been beta- and gamma-secretase, the two proteases that cleave APP at the N- and 
C-terminus of the A beta peptide and are thus directly responsible for A beta 
peptide generation. A different strategy, namely the activation of 
alpha-secretase, has barely been investigated for its therapeutic potential. 
alpha-Secretase cleaves within the A beta peptide domain and thus precludes A 
beta peptide generation. Now, new results demonstrate that activation of 
alpha-secretase indeed reduces A beta peptide generation and toxicity in vivo.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI21746
PMCID: PMC406534
PMID: 15146234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1106. Rev Neurol. 2004 May 1-15;38(9):801-7.

[Dementia and cognitive impairment pattern: its association with epsilon4 allele 
of apolipoprotein E gene].

[Article in Spanish]

Rosich-Estrag√≥ M(1), Figuera-Terr√© L, Mulet-P√©rez B, Arrufat-Card√∫s MT, Pascual 
San Emeterio A, Arbeola-Rigau I, Labad-Alqu√©zar A, Vilella-Cuadrada E.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Psiqui√†tric, Universitari Institut Pere Mata, Reus, Tarragona, 
Spain. rosichm@peremata.com

INTRODUCTION: The APOE epsilon4 allele is a well-established risk factor for 
Alzheimer's disease. This disease is characterized by a typical progressive 
cognitive impairment pattern, different from that of other primary dementias 
such as dementia with Lewy bodies or frontotemporal and vascular dementias, for 
which there are no conclusive results on the influence of the APOE genotype.
OBJECTIVE: Our aim is to study how the APOE genotype associates with different 
dementia types, and the association of this genotype with mild cognitive 
impairment and age related cognitive decline, which might be stages in a 
continuum between normality and dementia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: From a group of 1,022 people we selected 733 patients with 
different dementia diagnosis and 205 controls. APOE genotype for each 
participant in the study was determined.
RESULTS: As it was already known, the epsilon4 allele is associated to senile 
Alzheimer's disease (OR= 5.6; 95% CI= 3.6-8.9; p< 0.001) and presenile 
Alzheimer's disease (OR= 5.4; 95% CI= 2.1-13.8; p< 0.001). It is also associated 
to mild cognitive impairment (OR= 3.7; 95% CI= 2.3-6.0; p< 0.001) and to age 
related cognitive decline (OR= 3.0; 95% CI= 1.2-7.3; p< 0.01). Female Alzheimer 
patients with at least one epsilon4 allele present significantly an earlier age 
at onset (epsilon4+= 73.4 +/- 5.4; epsilon4- = 76.9 +/- 5.5; p< 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The APOE genotype is associated to Alzheimer's disease and to its 
cognitive impairment pattern. This association has a growing value according to 
the degree of clinical impairment. The APOE genotype could be used in 
differential diagnostic of cognitive impairment.

PMID: 15152345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1107. Ageing Res Rev. 2004 Jan;3(1):105-20. doi: 10.1016/j.arr.2003.08.005.

Infectious agents and age-related neurodegenerative disorders.

Mattson MP(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging, Gerontology 
Research Center, 5600 Nathan Shock Drive, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. 
mattsonm@grc.nia.nih.gov

Erratum in
    Ageing Res Rev. 2004 Apr;3(2):349.

chlamdAs with other organ systems, the vulnerability of the nervous system to 
infectious agents increases with aging. Several different infectious agents can 
cause neurodegenerative conditions, with prominent examples being human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1) dementia and prion disorders. Such infections of 
the central nervous system (CNS) typically have a relatively long incubation 
period and a chronic progressive course, and are therefore increasing in 
frequency as more people live longer. Infectious agents may enter the central 
nervous system in infected migratory macrophages, by transcytosis across 
blood-brain barrier cells or by intraneuronal transfer from peripheral nerves. 
Synapses and lipid rafts are important sites at which infectious agents may 
enter neurons and/or exert their cytotoxic effects. Recent findings suggest the 
possibility that infectious agents may increase the risk of common age-related 
neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and stroke. While scenarios 
can be envisioned whereby viruses such as Chlamydia pneumoniae, herpes simplex 
and influenza promote damage to neurons during aging, there is no conclusive 
evidence for a major role of these pathogens in neurodegenerative disorders. In 
the case of stroke, blood vessels may be adversely affected by bacteria or 
viruses resulting in atherosclerosis.

DOI: 10.1016/j.arr.2003.08.005
PMCID: PMC7172323
PMID: 15163105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1108. EMBO Rep. 2004 Jun;5(6):620-5. doi: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400166. Epub 2004 May 28.

Expression of the Alzheimer protease BACE1 is suppressed via its 5'-untranslated 
region.

Lammich S(1), Sch√∂bel S, Zimmer AK, Lichtenthaler SF, Haass C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Laboratory for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
Disease Research, Adolf Butenandt Institute, Ludwig Maximilians University, 
Schillerstrasse 44, 80336 Munich, Germany.

The aspartyl protease BACE1 has a pivotal role in the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease. Recently, it was shown that in Alzheimer's disease 
patients, BACE1 levels were elevated although mRNA levels were not changed 
compared with controls. Here, we demonstrate that the 5'-untranslated region 
(5'UTR) of BACE1 controls the rate of BACE1 translation. In the presence of the 
5'UTR, we observed more than 90% reduction of BACE1 protein levels in HEK293, 
COS7 and H4 cells, and a similar reduction of BACE1 activity in vitro. mRNA 
levels were not affected, demonstrating that the 5'UTR repressed the translation 
but not the transcription of BACE1. The 3'UTR did not affect BACE1 expression. 
An extensive mutagenesis analysis predicts that the GC-rich region of the 5'UTR 
forms a constitutive translation barrier, which may prevent the ribosome from 
efficiently translating the BACE1 mRNA. Our data therefore demonstrate 
translational repression as a new mechanism controlling BACE1 expression.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.embor.7400166
PMCID: PMC1299076
PMID: 15167888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1109. Acta Neuropathol. 2004 Sep;108(3):213-23. doi: 10.1007/s00401-004-0882-7. Epub 
2004 May 28.

alpha-Internexin aggregates are abundant in neuronal intermediate filament 
inclusion disease (NIFID) but rare in other neurodegenerative diseases.

Cairns NJ(1), Uryu K, Bigio EH, Mackenzie IR, Gearing M, Duyckaerts C, Yokoo H, 
Nakazato Y, Jaros E, Perry RH, Arnold SE, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 3600 Spruce 
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4283, USA. cairns@mail.med.upenn.edu

Abnormal neuronal aggregates of alpha-internexin and the three neurofilament 
(NF) subunits, NF-L, NF-M, and NF-H have recently been identified as the 
pathological hallmarks of neuronal intermediate filament (IF) inclusion disease 
(NIFID), a novel neurological disease of early onset with a variable clinical 
phenotype including frontotemporal dementia, pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs. 
alpha-Internexin, a class IV IF protein, a major component of inclusions in 
NIFID, has not previously been identified as a component of the pathological 
protein aggregates of any other neurodegenerative disease. Therefore, to 
determine the specificity of this protein, alpha-internexin immunohistochemistry 
was undertaken on cases of NIFID, non-tau frontotemporal dementias, motor neuron 
disease, alpha-synucleinopathies, tauopathies, and normal aged control brains. 
Our results indicate that class IV IF proteins are present within the 
pleomorphic inclusions of all cases of NIFID. Small subsets of abnormal neuronal 
inclusions in Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body diseases, and motor neuron disease 
also contain epitopes of alpha-internexin. Thus, alpha-internexin is a major 
component of the neuronal inclusions in NIFID and a relatively minor component 
of inclusions in other neurodegenerative diseases. The discovery of 
alpha-internexin in neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions implicates novel mechanisms 
of pathogenesis in NIFID and other neurological diseases with pathological 
filamentous neuronal inclusions.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-004-0882-7
PMCID: PMC3516855
PMID: 15170578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1110. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2004;17(4):298-301. doi: 10.1159/000077158.

The tau R406W mutation causes progressive presenile dementia with bitemporal 
atrophy.

Ostojic J(1), Elfgren C, Passant U, Nilsson K, Gustafson L, Lannfelt L, Froelich 
Fabre S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Public Health and Caring Science, Division of Molecular 
Geriatrics, Rudbecklaboratory, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) are two frequent 
causes of dementia that share both clinical and neuropathological features. 
Common to both disorders are the neurofibrillary tangles consisting of 
aggregations of hyperphosphorylated tau protein. Recently, a number of different 
pathogenic mutations in the tau gene have been identified in families with FTD 
and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). In the present study, a 
Swedish family with presenile degenerative dementia with bitemporal atrophy was 
screened for mutations in the tau gene. As a result, the R406W mutation in exon 
13 was identified in all affected cases. This mutation has previously been 
reported in two different FTDP-17 families of Dutch and Midwestern American 
origin. Common features to these two kindreds and our family are the late age at 
onset and long duration of the disease. Our pedigree as well as the American one 
show early memory impairment and pronounced temporal lobar atrophy similar to 
AD, while the Dutch cases show more FTD features. This further illustrates the 
large clinical variability among cases with tau mutations and stresses the 
importance of genetic classification in addition to the traditional clinical 
classification of neurodegenerative disorders.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000077158
PMID: 15178940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1111. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2004;17(4):350-4. doi: 10.1159/000077170.

Total and phosphorylated tau proteins: evaluation as core biomarker candidates 
in frontotemporal dementia.

Hampel H(1), Teipel SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Alzheimer Memorial Center and Geriatric Psychiatry 
Branch, Ludwig-Maximilian University, Munich, Germany. 
hampel@psy.med.uni-muenchen.de

An ever increasing number of patients with neurodegenerative disorders calls for 
the evaluation of potential diagnostic markers that allow an early diagnosis and 
an early initiation of specific therapy. Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), the most common neurodegenerative disorder, reaches 80-90% 
accuracy upon autopsy in specialized clinical centers. Diagnosis of AD in early 
clinical or preclinical stages is far less accurate, as is the differential 
diagnosis between AD and other primary dementias, such as frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD). Microtubule-associated tau protein is abnormally phosphorylated 
in AD and aggregates as paired helical filaments in neurofibrillary tangles. 
Recently, immunoassays have been developed detecting tau phosphorylated at 
specific epitopes in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Four years of clinical research 
consistently demonstrate that CSF phosphorylated tau (p-tau) is highly increased 
in AD compared to healthy controls and may differentiate AD from its most 
relevant differential diagnoses. Tau phosphorylated at threonine 231 
(p-tau(231)) shows excellent differentiation between AD and FTD, whereas serine 
181 (p-tau(181)) enhances accurate differentiation between AD and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. Moreover, p-tau(231) levels decline with disease progression, 
correlating with cognitive performance at baseline. Total tau (t-tau) is 
regarded as a general marker of neurodegeneration for evaluation in future 
population-based studies. p-tau(231) and p-tau(181) yield excellent 
discrimination between AD and non-AD dementias including FTD, exceeding the 
differential diagnostic and prognostic accuracy of t-tau. Therefore, p-tau is a 
core biological marker candidate for future evaluation in large national and 
international multicenter networks.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000077170
PMID: 15178952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1112. FASEB J. 2004 Aug;18(11):1315-7. doi: 10.1096/fj.03-1346fje. Epub 2004 Jun 4.

A strategy for designing inhibitors of alpha-synuclein aggregation and toxicity 
as a novel treatment for Parkinson's disease and related disorders.

El-Agnaf OM(1), Paleologou KE, Greer B, Abogrein AM, King JE, Salem SA, Fullwood 
NJ, Benson FE, Hewitt R, Ford KJ, Martin FL, Harriott P, Cookson MR, Allsop D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK. 
o.el-agnaf@lancaster.ac.uk

Convergent biochemical and genetic evidence suggests that the formation of 
alpha-synuclein (alpha-syn) protein deposits is an important and, probably, 
seminal step in the development of Parkinson's disease (PD), dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and multiple system atrophy (MSA). It has been reported that 
transgenic animals overexpressing human alpha-syn develop lesions similar to 
those found in the brain in PD, together with a progressive loss of dopaminergic 
cells and associated abnormalities of motor function. Inhibiting and/or 
reversing alpha-syn self-aggregation could, therefore, provide a novel approach 
to treating the underlying cause of these diseases. We synthesized a library of 
overlapping 7-mer peptides spanning the entire alpha-syn sequence, and 
identified amino acid residues 64-100 of alpha-syn as the binding region 
responsible for its self-association. Modified short peptides containing 
alpha-syn amino acid sequences from part of this binding region (residues 
69-72), named alpha-syn inhibitors (ASI), were found to interact with 
full-length alpha-syn and block its assembly into both early oligomers and 
mature amyloid-like fibrils. We also developed a cell-permeable inhibitor of 
alpha-syn aggregation (ASID), using the polyarginine peptide delivery system. 
This ASID peptide was able to inhibit the DNA damage induced by Fe(II) in 
neuronal cells transfected with alpha-syn(A53T), a familial PD-associated 
mutation. ASI peptides without this delivery system did not reverse levels of 
Fe(II)-induced DNA damage. Furthermore, the ASID peptide increased (P<0.0005) 
the number of cells stained positive for Bcl-2, while significantly (P<0.05) 
decreasing the percentage of cells stained positive for BAX. These short 
peptides could serve as lead compounds for the design of peptidomimetic drugs to 
treat PD and related disorders.

DOI: 10.1096/fj.03-1346fje
PMID: 15180968 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1113. J Affect Disord. 2004 Jul;81(1):1-16. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2003.08.003.

Geriatric depression and vascular diseases: what are the links?

Camus V(1), Kraehenb√ºhl H, Preisig M, B√ºla CJ, Waeber G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, University Hospital, Lausanne CH-1011, 
Switzerland. V.Camus@chu-tours.fr

BACKGROUND: The term "vascular depression" has been proposed to describe a 
subset of depressive disorders that occurs in old age as a consequence of 
cerebrovascular disease. However, depression has been shown to result from other 
cardiovascular diseases such as coronary heart diseases, as well as to 
precipitate, worsen or precede vascular diseases. Depression also increases the 
likelihood of the incidence of vascular risk factors such as diabetes.
AIMS: To review clinical and epidemiological evidence linking geriatric 
depression and vascular diseases, and to discuss the potential mechanisms that 
could underlie this association.
METHOD: Systematic review of the literature of the last 5 years through Medline 
database search.
RESULTS: Papers report the following potential ways of association: (1) there is 
a direct influence of vascular disease, in particular, arteriosclerosis, on the 
incidence of depression; (2) depressive disorders have a direct impact on the 
cardiovascular system; (3) depression and vascular disease share either a common 
pathophysiological process or genetic determinants.
DISCUSSION: Depression can be understood as the direct consequence of brain 
damage in neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's or Huntington's 
diseases. Similarly, vascular depression is mostly considered to be the 
consequence of microvascular lesions on prefrontal and subcortical regions. 
However, this functional neuroanatomical model offers no explanation for cases 
where depression has been shown to precede vascular diseases. Since 
cardiovascular diseases develop in a context of acquired environmental factors 
together with genetically determined disease, it may be postulated that 
geriatric depression could both result from brain lesions of vascular origin and 
also share some pathogenic or genetic determinants.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2003.08.003
PMID: 15183594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1114. Neurology. 2004 Jun 8;62(11):2005-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000128089.53030.ac.

Apolipoprotein E controls the risk and age at onset of Parkinson disease.

Li YJ(1), Hauser MA, Scott WK, Martin ER, Booze MW, Qin XJ, Walter JW, Nance MA, 
Hubble JP, Koller WC, Pahwa R, Stern MB, Hiner BC, Jankovic J, Goetz CG, Small 
GW, Mastaglia F, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA, Vance JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. yiju.li@duke.edu

BACKGROUND: Similarities between Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease 
(PD) suggest a possible role for apolipoprotein E (APOE) in PD. Most previous 
studies seeking to establish such a link used case-control datasets and results 
have been inconsistent.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate APOE's role in PD using family-based association 
analyses.
METHODS: APOE functional polymorphisms were genotyped for 658 PD affected 
families, including 282 multiplex and 376 singleton families. The pedigree 
disequilibrium test (PDT) and the genotype-PDT were used to test the risk effect 
of APOE. The Monks-Kaplan test was used to evaluate the effect of APOE on age at 
onset of PD.
RESULTS: APOE was significantly associated with risk of developing PD. 
Stratified analysis revealed that APOE was most strongly associated with 
families with a positive PD family history (global p = 0.003). Like AD, the 
APOE-4 allele increases disease risk while the APOE-3 allele decreases risk. We 
detected a positive association of APOE-3 (p = 0.019) and a negative association 
of APOE-4 (p = 0.015) with age at onset in PD.
CONCLUSIONS: The APOE-4 allele increases risk and decreases age at onset of PD, 
an association that may not be dependent upon cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000128089.53030.ac
PMID: 15184605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1115. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 13;279(33):34873-81. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M405131200. Epub 
2004 Jun 9.

Promotion of hyperphosphorylation by frontotemporal dementia tau mutations.

Alonso Adel C(1), Mederlyova A, Novak M, Grundke-Iqbal I, Iqbal K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, New York State Institute for Basic Research in 
Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, New York, NY 10314-6399, USA.

Mutations in the tau gene are known to cosegregate with the disease in 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). 
However, the molecular mechanism by which these mutations might lead to the 
disease is not understood. Here, we show that four of the FTDP-17 tau mutations, 
R406W, V337M, G272V, and P301L, result in tau proteins that are more favorable 
substrates for phosphorylation by brain protein kinases than the wild-type, 
largest four-repeat protein tau4L and tau4L more than tau3L. In general, at all 
the sites studied, mutant tau proteins were phosphorylated faster and to a 
higher extent than tau4L and tau4L > tau3L. The most dramatic difference found 
was in the rate and level of phosphorylation of tau4L(R406W) at positions 
Ser-396, Ser-400, Thr-403, and Ser-404. Phosphorylation of this mutant tau was 
12 times faster and 400% greater at Ser-396 and less than 30% at Ser-400, 
Thr-403, and Ser-404 than phosphorylation of tau4L. The mutated tau proteins 
polymerized into filaments when 4-6 mol of phosphate per mol of tau were 
incorporated, whereas wild-type tau required approximately 10 mol of phosphate 
per mol of protein to self-assemble. Mutated and wild-type tau proteins were 
able to sequester normal tau upon incorporation of approximately 4 mol of 
phosphate per mol of protein, which was achieved at as early as 30 min of 
phosphorylation in the case of mutant tau proteins. These findings taken 
together suggest that the mutations in tau might cause neurodegeneration by 
making the protein a more favorable substrate for hyperphosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M405131200
PMID: 15190058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1116. Sci Aging Knowledge Environ. 2004 Jun 9;2004(23):pe26. doi: 
10.1126/sageke.2004.23.pe26.

Neurodegeneration in normal brain aging and disease.

Thal DR(1), Del Tredici K, Braak H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, University of Bonn Medical Center, Sigmund 
Freud Strasse 25, D-53105 Bonn, Germany. Dietmar.Thal@uni-bonn.de

Normal "healthy" aging is defined as aging without disease. Many aged people do 
not exhibit symptoms of disease and lead normal lives, but nonetheless display 
pathological changes that are characteristic of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and/or 
cerebrovascular disease (CVD). These changes are restricted to distinct brain 
regions and might represent preclinical stages of these disorders. This 
Perspective discusses arguments in favor of and against the hypothesis that 
pathological changes related to AD, PD, DLB, and CVD in the brains of 
nondemented elderly people represent early stages of these diseases rather than 
healthy aging. We conclude that early pathological disease-related changes do 
indeed constitute the beginning of AD, PD, DLB, and CVD rather than normal 
concomitants of aging, even in the absence of any clinical symptoms. Aging is, 
therefore, a major risk factor for these diseases but does not necessarily lead 
to age-related diseases.

DOI: 10.1126/sageke.2004.23.pe26
PMID: 15190177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1117. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2004 May-Jun;27(3):119-23. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-200405000-00006.

Frequency, reasons, and risk factors of entacapone discontinuation in Parkinson 
disease.

Parashos SA(1), Wielinski CL, Kern JA.

Author information:
(1)Struthers Parkinson's Center, Minneapolis, Minnesota 55427, USA. 
paras001@tc.umn.edu

OBJECTIVES: To determine the rate of and identify reasons for discontinuation of 
entacapone treatment in Parkinson disease patients.
METHODS: A retrospective study design was used, including medical record reviews 
and telephone call to the patient as needed.
RESULTS: Two hundred and twenty-two Parkinson disease patients were started on 
entacapone over a period of 3 years. One hundred and twenty-two patients (56%) 
had discontinued the medication by the end of the follow up period. Reasons for 
discontinuation included lack of efficacy (46%), worsening of parkinsonian 
symptoms (28%), worsened cognition (20%), dyskinesia (17%), nausea (11%), 
diarrhea (9%), cost (4%), other side effect (8%), and other, non-medication 
related reasons (19%). Presence of wearing off at the time of initial treatment 
and male sex were associated with decreased dropout rates, while the presence of 
orthostatic hypotension increased the likelihood of discontinuation. Patient 
age, disease duration, Hoehn and Yahr stage, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale section II score, presence of dementia, hallucinations, dyskinesias, or 
depression, number of daily L-dopa doses, and concomitant treatment with 
dopamine agonists did not affect dropout rate.
CONCLUSIONS: Lack of efficacy seems to be the main reason for entacapone 
discontinuation. Male patients with wearing off and no orthostatic hypotension 
seem to tolerate the medication better. Advanced disease stage, presence of 
cognitive dysfunction, and presence of dyskinesia should not necessarily 
preclude patients from being treated with entacapone, when otherwise indicated.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-200405000-00006
PMID: 15190234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1118. Brain Pathol. 2004 Apr;14(2):137-47. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2004.tb00046.x.

Early-onset dementia with Lewy bodies.

Takao M(1), Ghetti B, Yoshida H, Piccardo P, Narain Y, Murrell JR, Vidal R, 
Glazier BS, Jakes R, Tsutsui M, Spillantini MG, Crowther RA, Goedert M, Koto A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, 635 Barnhill Drive, B029D, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

The clinical and neuropathological characteristics of an atypical form of 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are described. The proband experienced 
difficulties in her school performance at 13 years of age. Neurological 
examination revealed cognitive dysfunction, dysarthria, parkinsonism and 
myoclonus. By age 14 years, the symptoms had worsened markedly and the proband 
died at age 15 years. On neuropathological examination, the brain was severely 
atrophic. Numerous intracytoplasmic and intraneuritic Lewy bodies, as well as 
Lewy neurites, were present throughout the cerebral cortex and subcortical 
nuclel; vacuolar changes were seen in the upper layers of the neocortex and 
severe neuronal loss and gliosis were evident in the cerebral cortex and 
substantia nigra. Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites were strongly immunoreactive for 
alpha-synuclein and ubiquitin. Lewy bodies were composed of filamentous and 
granular material and isolated filaments were decorated by alpha-synuclein 
antibodies. Immunohistochemistry for tau or beta-amyloid yielded negative 
results. The etiology of this atypical form of DLB is unknown, since there was 
no family history and since sequencing of the exonic regions of alpha-Synuclein, 
beta-Synuclein, Synphilin-1, Parkin, Ubiquitin C-terminal hydrolase L1 and 
Neurofilament-M failed to reveal a pathogenic mutation. This study provides 
further evidence of the clinical and pathological heterogeneity of DLB.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2004.tb00046.x
PMCID: PMC8095855
PMID: 15193026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1119. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004 Jul;75(7):966-71. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2003.023812.

Carotid sinus syndrome is common in dementia with Lewy bodies and correlates 
with deep white matter lesions.

Kenny RA(1), Shaw FE, O'Brien JT, Scheltens PH, Kalaria R, Ballard C.

Author information:
(1)MRC Institute for Ageing and Health, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
anne.harrison@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Carotid sinus syndrome (CSS) is a common cause of syncope in older 
persons. There appears to be a high prevalence of carotid sinus hypersensitivity 
(CSH) in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) but not in Alzheimer's 
disease.
OBJECTIVE: To compare the prevalence of CSH in DLB and Alzheimer's disease, and 
to determine whether there is an association between CSH induced hypotension and 
brain white matter hyperintensities on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).
METHODS: Prevalence of CSH was compared in 38 patients with DLB (mean (SD) age, 
76 (7) years), 52 with Alzheimer's disease (80 (6) years), and 31 case controls 
(73 (5) years) during right sided supine carotid sinus massage (CSM). CSH was 
defined as cardioinhibitory (CICSH; >3 s asystole) or vasodepressor (VDCSH; >30 
mm Hg fall in systolic blood pressure (SBP)). T2 weighted brain MRI was done in 
45 patients (23 DLB, 22 Alzheimer). Hyperintensities were rated by the Scheltens 
scale.
RESULTS: Overall heart rate response to CSM was slower (RR interval = 3370 ms 
(640 to 9400)) and the proportion of patients with CICSH greater (32%) in DLB 
than in Alzheimer's disease (1570 (720 to 7800); 11.1%) or controls (1600 (720 
to 3300); 3.2%) (p<0.01)). The strongest predictor of heart rate slowing and CSH 
was a diagnosis of DLB (Wald 8.0, p<0.005). The fall in SBP during carotid sinus 
massage was greater with DLB (40 (22) mm Hg) than with Alzheimer's disease (30 
(19) mm Hg) or controls (24 (19) mm Hg) (both p<0.02). Deep white matter 
hyperintensities were present in 29 patients (64%). In DLB, there was a 
correlation between magnitude of fall in SBP during CSM and severity of deep 
white matter changes (R = 0.58, p = 0.005).
CONCLUSIONS: Heart rate responses to CSM are prolonged in patients with DLB, 
causing hypotension. Deep white matter changes from microvascular disease 
correlated with the fall in SBP. Microvascular pathology is a key substrate of 
cognitive impairment and could be reversible in DLB where there are exaggerated 
heart rate responses to carotid sinus stimulation.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2003.023812
PMCID: PMC1739106
PMID: 15201351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1120. Arch Gerontol Geriatr Suppl. 2004;(9):387-91. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2004.04.049.

Cognitive rehabilitation in Parkinson's disease.

Sinforiani E(1), Banchieri L, Zucchella C, Pacchetti C, Sandrini G.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuropsychology and Parkinson's and Movement Disorders Center, 
IRCCS C. Mondino, I -27100 Pavia, Italy. elena.sinforiani@mondino.it

A rehabilitation program of 6 weeks, including both motor and cognitive 
training, was applied to 20 patients affected by Parkinson's disease (PD) in the 
early stages, presenting with mild cognitive deficits, but no dementia. 
Cognitive rehabilitation has been performed by utilizing a software elaborated 
for neuropsychological training (TNP). At the end of the scheduled sessions, the 
patients showed a significant improvement at verbal fluency, logic memory and 
Raven's matrices tests, as compared to baseline. These results remained stable 
over the time. We hypothesize that rehabilitative training exerts its positive 
effects by reinforcing cognitive strategies, in particular, by enhancing frontal 
function, which are typically impaired in PD, and suggests that this instrument 
could be implemented in nonpharmacological treatment of this pathology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2004.04.049
PMID: 15207437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1121. Arch Neurol. 2004 Jun;61(6):865-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.865.

Elevated plasma homocysteine level in patients with Parkinson disease: motor, 
affective, and cognitive associations.

O'Suilleabhain PE(1), Sung V, Hernandez C, Lacritz L, Dewey RB Jr, Bottiglieri 
T, Diaz-Arrastia R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center 
at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390, USA. Padraig.osuilleabhain@UTSouthwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: An elevated plasma homocysteine (Hcy) level has been prospectively 
associated with an increased risk of vascular and degenerative dementias. An Hcy 
elevation is prevalent in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) in part because 
levodopa metabolism produces Hcy. The clinical relevance of an elevated Hcy 
level in patients with PD is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if hyperhomocysteinemia in patients with PD is 
associated with depression or with cognitive or physical impairments.
DESIGN: Ninety-seven people with a mean (SD) PD duration of 3.6 (1.6) years 
completed the Beck Depression Inventory, a battery of 11 cognitive tests, and 
the motor and function components of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale. Normalized scores for the affective, cognitive, and physical measures 
were compared between those with a normal Hcy level (n = 66) and those with 
hyperhomocysteinemia (n = 31) (Hcy level, >1.89 mg/L [>14 micro mol/L]), 
controlling for age, sex, disease duration, and treatment.
RESULTS: Subjects with an elevated Hcy level were slightly older (68 vs 62 
years), but had similar plasma concentrations of vitamin B(12) and folate. 
Hyperhomocysteinemic patients were more depressed (P =.02) and had worse 
cognition (P<.01), but the physical measure did not differ.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with PD and hyperhomocysteinemia are more likely to be 
depressed and to perform worse on neuropsychometric tasks compared with 
normohomocysteinemic patients. Further research is warranted to see if 
hyperhomocysteinemia is a reversible risk factor for neuropsychiatric burden in 
patients with PD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.865
PMID: 15210523 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1122. Arch Neurol. 2004 Jun;61(6):886-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.886.

Postmenopausal estrogen use affects risk for Parkinson disease.

Currie LJ(1), Harrison MB, Trugman JM, Bennett JP, Wooten GF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of Virginia Health 
System, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. ljc3u@virginia.edu

BACKGROUND: Although estrogen therapy has been associated with improved 
cognitive functioning, a reduced risk of dementia in women with Parkinson 
disease (PD), and a decreased risk of Alzheimer disease, estrogen therapy has 
not affected the risk of PD per se.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether postmenopausal women with PD differed from 
control subjects with regard to estrogen exposure.Design, Setting, and Patients 
A case-control design was used, abstracting questionnaire data obtained via 
interview from 133 female PD cases and 128 female controls during routine 
outpatient clinic visits in 1999 at a mid-Atlantic tertiary care referral 
center. There were 140 subjects (68 PD cases and 72 controls) who met the 
inclusion criteria. Main Outcome Measure Use of postmenopausal estrogen therapy.
RESULTS: More women in the control group than in the PD group took 
postmenopausal estrogen (36 [50%] of 72 women vs 17 [25%] of 68 women; P<.003), 
and women who had taken postmenopausal estrogen were less likely to develop PD 
than those who had not (odds ratio, 0.40 [95% confidence interval, 0.19-0.84]; 
P<.02). Among PD cases only, postmenopausal estrogen use was not associated with 
age of onset.
CONCLUSION: Postmenopausal estrogen therapy may be associated with a reduced 
risk of PD in women.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.886
PMID: 15210525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1123. Arch Neurol. 2004 Jun;61(6):919-25. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.919.

Dopamine transporter loss visualized with FP-CIT SPECT in the differential 
diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.

O'Brien JT(1), Colloby S, Fenwick J, Williams ED, Firbank M, Burn D, Aarsland D, 
McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Wolfson Research 
Centre, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, England. 
j.t.o'brien@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a common form of late-life 
dementia that can be difficult to differentiate from other disorders, especially 
Alzheimer disease (AD), during life. At autopsy the striatal dopaminergic 
transporter is reduced.
OBJECTIVES: To examine the extent and pattern of dopamine transporter loss using 
iodine I 123-radiolabeled 
2beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane (FP-CIT) 
with single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) in DLBs compared with 
other dementias and to assess its potential to enhance a differential diagnosis.
DESIGN: Cohort study comparing FP-CIT with criterion standard of consensus 
clinical diagnosis.
SETTING: General hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred sixty-four older subjects (33 healthy older control 
subjects, 34 with NINCDS/ADRDA [National Institute of Neurological and 
Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders 
Association]-confirmed AD, 23 with consensus guideline-confirmed DLB, 38 with 
United Kingdom's Parkinson Disease Society Brain Bank-confirmed Parkinson 
disease [PD], and 36 with PD and dementia).
INTERVENTIONS: Injection of 
(123)I-2beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl) nortropane 
with SPECT scan performed at 4 hours.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Visual ratings of scans and region of interest analysis.
RESULTS: Significant reductions (P<.001) in FP-CIT binding occurred in the 
caudate and anterior and posterior putamens in subjects with DLB compared with 
subjects with AD and controls. Transporter loss in DLBs was of similar magnitude 
to that seen in PD, but with a flatter rostrocaudal (caudate-putamen) gradient 
(P =.001), while the greatest loss in all 3 areas was seen in those who had PD 
and dementia. Both region of interest analysis and visual ratings provided good 
separation between DLBs and AD (region of interest: sensitivity, 78%; 
specificity, 94%; positive predictive value, 90%) but not among subjects with 
DLB, PD, and PD with dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Dopamine transporter loss can be detected in vivo using FP-CIT 
SPECT in DLB. Further studies, especially of subjects with DLB without PD, are 
required to fully establish use in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.6.919
PMID: 15210531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1124. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2004 Jul 1;128B(1):118-22. doi: 
10.1002/ajmg.b.30014.

Identification of families with cortical Lewy body disease.

Harding AJ(1), Das A, Kril JJ, Brooks WS, Duffy D, Halliday GM.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Barker Street, Randwick, Sydney, 
NSW 2031, Australia. A.Harding@unsw.edu.au

Until recently, cortical Lewy body disease (CLB) was considered essentially the 
same as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). It is now known patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) with a later-onset dementia (PD-dementia) have the same 
pattern and extent of cortical Lewy body pathology. Inheritance patterns of CLB 
have not been evaluated previously. To identify genetic influence on CLB, all 
cases with this pathology need to be considered. We selected 180 cases meeting 
clinical and/or pathological criteria for DLB or PD (+/-dementia) from two 
patient groups: a PD and PD-dementia brain donor program, and a case-control 
study of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Cases meeting NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for 
probable AD were excluded and non-demented PD cases used as a comparison group. 
A detailed family history was taken analyzing onset and progression of dementia 
and PD phenotypes and a family tree constructed. The frequency of a positive 
family history of dementia and/or PD and risk of developing CLB in relatives was 
calculated. Fifty-five percent of dementia and 52% of PD cohorts did not have 
relatives with clinical disease. There was no increased frequency of familial 
disease in the CLB cohort compared with PD. However, in half the CLB families, 
rather than a dominant dementia, the clinical presentation varied (dementia 
and/or PD). Unlike PD, there was an increased risk of dementia if CLB was 
present in a parent ( approximately 20% risk) compared with another family 
member ( approximately 5% risk), suggesting CLB is more likely than PD to occur 
in a pattern consistent with autosomal dominant inheritance.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.b.30014
PMID: 15211643 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1125. Brain. 2004 Aug;127(Pt 8):1755-73. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh206. Epub 2004 Jun 23.

On-line motor control in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Desmurget M(1), Gaveau V, Vindras P, Turner RS, Broussolle E, Thobois S.

Author information:
(1)INSERM, U 534. Space and Action, 16 avenue du doyen L√©pine, 69500 Bron, 
France. Desmurget@lyon.inserm.fr

Recent models based, in part on a study of Huntington's disease, suggest that 
the basal ganglia are involved in on-line movement guidance. Two experiments 
were conducted to investigate this idea. First, we studied advanced Parkinson's 
disease patients performing a reaching task known to depend on on-line guidance. 
The task was to 'look and point' in the dark at visual targets displayed in the 
peripheral visual field. In some trials, the target location was slightly 
modified during saccadic gaze displacement (when vision is suppressed). In both 
patient and control groups, the target jump induced a gradual modification of 
the movement which diverged smoothly from its original path to reach the new 
target location. No deficit was found in the patients, except for an increased 
latency to respond to the target jump (Parkinson's disease: 243 ms; controls: 
166 ms). A computational simulation indicated that this response slowing was 
likely to be a by-product of bradykinesia. The unexpected inconsistency between 
this result and previous reports was investigated in a second experiment. We 
hypothesized that the relevant factor was the characteristics of the corrections 
to be performed. To test this prediction, we investigated a task requiring 
corrections of the same type as investigated in Huntington's disease, namely 
large, consciously detected errors induced by large target jumps at hand 
movement onset. In contrast with the smooth adjustments observed in the first 
experiment, the subjects responded to the target jump by generating a discrete 
corrective sub-movement. While this iterative response was relatively rapid in 
the control subjects (220 ms), Parkinson's disease patients exhibited either 
dramatically late (>730 ms) or totally absent on-line corrections. When on-line 
corrections were absent, the initial motor response was completed before a 
second corrective response was initiated (the latency of the corrective response 
was the same as the latency of the initial response). Considered together, these 
results suggest that basal ganglia dependent circuits are not critical for 
feedback loops involving a smooth modulation of the ongoing command. These 
circuits may rather contribute to the generation of discrete corrective 
sub-movements. This deficit is in line with the general impairment of sequential 
and simultaneous actions in patients with basal ganglia disorders.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh206
PMID: 15215215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1126. Klin Oczna. 2004;106(1-2):107-9.

[Coexistence of Alzheimer's disease with pseudoexfoliation syndrome PEX].

[Article in Polish]

Reniewska B(1), Mulak M, Misiuk-Hoj≈Ço M, Kostu≈õ E.

Author information:
(1)Katedry i Kliniki Okulistyki Akademii Medycznej we Wroc≈Çawiu.

Comment in
    Klin Oczna. 2004;106(4-5):720; author reply 721-2.
    Klin Oczna. 2004;106(4-5):720-1; author reply 721-2.

Alzheimer disease is a type of cerebral amyloidosis, which is most frequently 
recognized after the age of 80. In pathophysiology of Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and age-related cataract 
changes in protein aggregation play important role, for that reason they form 
common group of diseases, called conformational diseases. Patients with 
Alzheimer disease have more common pseudoexfoliation syndrome (PEX), 
characterized by the accumulation of an abnormal pathognomonic material in the 
anterior segment of the eye. Regarding common feature of the structure of 
fibrillar pseudoexfoliation and amyloid material, it is considered that eye 
examination could be useful in the early diagnosis of Alzheimer disease.

PMID: 15218778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1127. Brain Inj. 2004 Sep;18(9):889-98. doi: 10.1080/02699050410001671847.

Usefulness of a cube-copying test in outpatients with dementia.

Maeshima S(1), Osawa A, Maeshima E, Shimamoto Y, Sekiguchi E, Kakishita K, Ozaki 
F, Moriwaki H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation, Wakayama Medical 
University, Japan. maeshima@wakayama-med.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To clarify whether a quantitatively scored cube-copying test could 
rapidly assess dementia patients, predicting thier performance in cognitive 
tests.
METHODS: Subjects were 171 outpatients with amnesia who were including 92 with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD); 59 vascular dementia (VD); 17 frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD); and three lewy body disease (DLB) and 32 normal healthy subjects. 
Subjects asked to copy a perspective drawing of a cube. Points of connection and 
plane-orientation errors were scored using Maeshima's method. The Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE), an auditory verbal learning test (AVLT), a word 
fluency test and Raven's Coloured Progressive Matrices (RCPM) were administered. 
Age, clinical disease severity, symptom duration, specific diagnosis and 
neuropsychological scores were evaluated for relationships with constructional 
ability.
RESULTS: The cube-copying test showed errors in most dementia patients and 11 of 
32 normal subjects. Only three patients each with AD and VD copied correctly, 
but 11 patients with 17 FTD drew the cube correctly. Numbers of connections 
completed and plane-orientation errors correlated significantly with MMSE, AVLT, 
word fluency and RCPM scores.
CONCLUSION: The cube-copying test is useful for routine clinical dementia 
screening, however the test examines only one aspect of cognitive function. 
While not an alternative to conventional neuropsychological examinations, 
quantitatively scored cube copying can provide a rough estimate of cognitive 
dysfunction in dementia patients.

Copyright Taylor and Francis Ltd

DOI: 10.1080/02699050410001671847
PMID: 15223741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1128. Acta Neurol Scand. 2004 Aug;110(2):118-23. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.2004.00292.x.

Mortality in Parkinson's disease and its association with dementia and 
depression.

Hughes TA(1), Ross HF, Mindham RH, Spokes EG.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, University of Leeds, 
Leeds, UK. tom.hughes@leedsmh.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Acta Neurol Scand. 2005 Jan;111(1):71; author reply 72.
    Acta Neurol Scand. 2007 May;115(5):367.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the mortality rate in Parkinson's disease (PD) with a 
control group without PD, and to assess the relationship between mortality and 
features of PD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ninety PD patients and 50 controls, mortality ascertained 
at 11 years follow-up.
RESULTS: The hazard ratio (HR) for mortality in PD patients compared with 
controls was 1.64 (95% CI: 1.21-2.23). Multivariate analysis showed age, 
dementia and depression were independent predictors of mortality but age at 
onset of PD and severity of neurological symptoms were not. The HR for age was 
1.09 (95% CI: 1.05-1.13), for dementia 1.94 (95% CI: 1.26-2.99), and for 
depression 2.66 (95% CI: 1.59-4.44).
CONCLUSION: Mortality in PD is increased compared with controls. Psychological 
variables are important predictors of mortality in PD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2004.00292.x
PMID: 15242420 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1129. Curr Opin Neurol. 2004 Aug;17(4):417-23. doi: 
10.1097/01.wco.0000137531.76491.c2.

Olfaction and Parkinson's syndromes: its role in differential diagnosis.

Katzenschlager R(1), Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)The National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, Queen Square, London, 
UK.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Marked olfactory dysfunction (hyposmia) is a frequent and 
early abnormality in Parkinson's disease. We review recent advances related to 
its cause and its clinical relevance with respect to the differential diagnosis 
of Parkinsonian syndromes.
RECENT FINDINGS: Marked olfactory dysfunction occurs in Parkinson's disease and 
dementia with Lewy bodies but is not found in progressive supranuclear palsy and 
corticobasal degeneration. In multiple system atrophy, the deficit is mild and 
indistinguishable from cerebellar syndromes of other aetiologies, including the 
spino-cerebllar ataxias. This is in keeping with evidence of cerebellar 
involvement in olfactory processing, which may also help to explain recent 
findings of mild olfactory dysfunction in essential tremor. Smell testing 
remains, however, a clinically relevant tool in the differential diagnosis of 
indeterminate tremors. Intact olfaction has also been reported recently in 
Parkin disease (PARK 2) and vascular Parkinsonism. The relevance of sniffing 
ability to olfaction and a possible role of increased tyrosine hydroxylase and 
dopamine in parts of the olfactory bulb are issues of current interest with 
respect to pathophysiology. The early or 'pre-clinical' detection of Parkinson's 
disease is increasingly recognized as an area in which olfactory testing may be 
of value.
SUMMARY: Research findings have confirmed a role for olfactory testing in the 
differential diagnosis of movement disorders, and suggest that this approach is 
currently underused in clinical practice. Validated test batteries are now 
available that may prove to be of practical use in the differential diagnosis of 
Parkinsonian syndromes and indeterminate tremors.

DOI: 10.1097/01.wco.0000137531.76491.c2
PMID: 15247536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1130. J Neurol. 2004 Jul;251(7):795-804. doi: 10.1007/s00415-004-0483-3.

Psychiatric aspects of Parkinson's disease--an update.

Schrag A(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Free and University 
College Medical School, London NW3 2PF, UK. a.schrag@medsch.ucl.ac.uk

In patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) disturbances of mental state 
constitute some of the most difficult treatment challenges of advanced disease, 
often limiting effective treatment of motor symptoms and leading to increased 
disability and poor quality of life. This article provides an update on the 
current knowledge of these complications and the use of old and new drugs in 
their management. Mental state alterations in PD include depression, anxiety, 
cognitive impairment, apathy, and treatment-related psychiatric symptoms. The 
latter range from vivid dreams and hallucinations to delusions, manic symptoms, 
hypersexuality, dopamine dysregulation syndrome and delirium. While some of 
these symptoms may be alleviated by anti-parkinsonian medication, especially if 
they are off-period related, treatment-related phenomena are usually exacerbated 
by increasing the number or dosage of antiparkinsonian drugs. Elimination of 
exacerbating factors and simplification of drug regimes are the first and most 
important steps in improvement of such symptoms. However, the advent of atypical 
antipsychotics such as clozapine has dramatically helped the management of 
treatment-related psychiatric complications in PD. In patients with dementia 
associated with PD cognitive functioning and behavioural problems appear to 
respond to cholinesterase inhibitors, such as rivastigmine or donepezil. 
Depression is a common problem in early as well as advanced PD, and selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, reboxetine, and tricyclic antidepressants have 
been reported to be effective and well tolerated antidepressants. Randomised, 
controlled studies are required to assess the differential efficacy and 
tolerability of antidepressants in patients with PD, including the newer 
antidepressants with serotonergic and noradrenergic properties.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-004-0483-3
PMID: 15258780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1131. Arch Neurol. 2004 Jul;61(7):1033-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.7.1033.

Lack of familial aggregation of Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease.

Levy G(1), Louis ED, Mejia-Santana H, C√¥t√© L, Andrews H, Harris J, Waters C, 
Ford B, Frucht S, Fahn S, Ottman R, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Statistical Analysis Center, Department of Biostatistics, Columbia 
University, 630 W. 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2004 Jul;61(7):1007-8.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the risk of Alzheimer disease (AD) in first-degree 
relatives of patients with Parkinson disease (PD) compared with first-degree 
relatives of controls.
DESIGN: Case-control study, family history method, and reconstructed cohort 
approach.
METHODS: Probands with PD without dementia and control probands, matched by age 
strata, sex, and ethnicity, were examined in person and enrolled without 
knowledge of family history of PD and other neurological disorders. Disease 
status in first-degree relatives of probands with PD and control probands was 
ascertained through a structured family history interview administered to the 
proband and a second informant (self-report or another informant). Cox 
proportional hazards models with double-censoring techniques for missing 
information on age of onset of AD were used to analyze the risk of AD in 
first-degree relatives of patients with PD compared with first-degree relatives 
of controls.
RESULTS: Four hundred eighty-seven probands with PD and 409 control probands 
provided family history information on 4819 first-degree relatives older than 30 
years (2534 relatives of probands with PD and 2285 relatives of control 
probands). One hundred thirteen first-degree relatives (2.3%; 61 relatives 
[2.4%] of patients with PD and 52 relatives [2.3%] of controls) were diagnosed 
with AD. The risk of AD was not increased in relatives of patients with PD 
compared with relatives of controls (hazard ratio, 1.1; 95% confidence interval, 
0.7-1.6; P =.65). Similarly, no significantly increased risk of AD was observed 
when comparing relatives of patients with early-onset (< or =50 years) and 
late-onset (>50 years) PD with relatives of controls.
CONCLUSION: The lack of familial aggregation of PD and AD does not support the 
hypothesis of major shared genetic contributions to the etiology of the 2 most 
common neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.7.1033
PMID: 15262733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1132. J Clin Psychiatry. 2004;65 Suppl 11:16-22.

Lewy body dementia: the litmus test for neuroleptic sensitivity and 
extrapyramidal symptoms.

Baskys A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of California at 
Irvine, USA. andrius.baskys@med.va.gov

Lewy body dementia, also referred to as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), is a 
neurodegenerative disorder now considered to be the second most common cause of 
dementia after Alzheimer's disease. Postmortem findings suggest that DLB 
accounts for 20% to 34% of all dementia cases and is often underdiagnosed. 
Salient features of DLB include fluctuations in cognition, perceptual 
abnormalities (e.g., visual hallucinations), and mild parkinsonism. Other 
symptoms include frequent falls, nighttime agitation, and depression. DLB 
symptomatology can be partly explained by the extensive destruction of 
dopaminergic and acetylcholinergic pathways caused by neurodegeneration. For 
this reason, DLB patients are especially vulnerable to the antidopaminergic and 
anticholinergic actions of most conventional antipsychotics, which makes 
treatment of the psychotic symptoms of DLB extremely difficult. Patients are 
particularly sensitive to developing extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) and also to 
the potentially fatal complication of neuroleptic sensitivity, which affects 
approximately 50% of DLB patients. Therefore, a need exists for antipsychotic 
drugs with less propensity to induce EPS and reduced affinity for dopamine and 
acetylcholine receptors. Here we review studies evaluating the efficacy and 
tolerability of atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of psychoses 
associated with DLB. Olanzapine appears to be poorly tolerated, and risperidone 
has been associated with high risk of neuroleptic malignant syndrome. Clozapine 
use remains controversial because of its potent anticholinergic action and risk 
of agranulocytosis. Quetiapine has been shown to reduce psychiatric 
manifestations of DLB without causing neuroleptic sensitivity or increasing EPS. 
Hence, quetiapine is an attractive candidate for the treatment of psychoses in 
DLB and other dementias.

PMID: 15264967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1133. Neurol Res. 2004 Jul;26(5):563-6. doi: 10.1179/016164104225016236.

Nitric oxide pathways in Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative 
dementias.

Togo T(1), Katsuse O, Iseki E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, Japan. 
togo-t@rd6.so-net.ne.jp

Nitric oxide (NO) is an enzymatic product of nitric oxide synthase (NOS). NO has 
significant physiological functions and an increasing body of evidence suggests 
that NO pathways are implicated in a number of neurological disorders, including 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other neurodegenerative dementias. NO is 
continuously released by endothelial cells in the vascular system, whereas 
advanced age in the presence of vascular risk factor causes a decrease in 
cerebral blood flow, involving microvasculopathy with impaired NO release, which 
in turn results in regional metabolic dysfunction. This finding suggests that 
vascular pathology plays a crucial role in the pathogenesis of so-called 
neurodegenerative dementias. Inflammatory responses are commonly found in the 
brain under a variety of neurodegenerative dementias, including AD and dementia 
with Lewy bodies, in which up-regulation of NOS expression, suggesting 
overproduction of NO, is found in neurons and glia. NO is thought to be involved 
in such neuroinflammation due to its free radical properties, which compromise 
cellular integrity and viability via mitochondrial damage. Further studies to 
elucidate NO pathways in neurodegenerative dementias could lead to a better 
understanding of their pathogenesis and improved therapeutic strategies, and 
therefore are certainly warranted.

DOI: 10.1179/016164104225016236
PMID: 15265275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1134. Neurology. 2004 Jul 27;63(2):305-11. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000129841.30587.9d.

No evidence for heritability of Parkinson disease in Swedish twins.

Wirdefeldt K(1), Gatz M, Schalling M, Pedersen NL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2005 Mar 8;64(5):932; author reply 932.

BACKGROUND: Although several genes are implicated in Parkinson disease (PD), 
they explain only a small fraction of cases. The etiology of most cases is yet 
unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate heritability of PD in same-sexed and opposite-sexed twin 
pairs in the Swedish Twin Registry (STR).
METHODS: All twins in the STR born in 1950 or earlier and alive in 1998 (n = 
50,150) were included. The authors screened 33,780 twins in 14,082 pairs for PD 
by telephone interviews and linked the STR to the Swedish Inpatient Discharge 
Register. Two hundred forty-seven twins with self-reported PD or a PD diagnosis 
in the Inpatient Discharge Register (called "possible PD") and 517 twins who 
reported parkinsonian symptoms or use of antiparkinsonian medication ("suspected 
parkinsonism or movement disorder") were identified.
RESULTS: For possible PD, there were only two concordant pairs, both female 
dizygotic. Similarly, concordances were low in all zygosity groups when the 
definition of affected was expanded to include twins with suspected parkinsonism 
or movement disorder in addition to possible PD. Sex differences in the relative 
importance of genetic and environmental effects were indicated with a marginally 
larger familial component in women. The best-fitting structural equation model 
included only environmental components of variance.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that environmental factors are most important 
in the etiology of PD. Compared with other complex diseases, the importance of 
genetic effects in PD is notably low. The preponderance of discordant twin pairs 
provides an ideal material for studying environmental risk factors and potential 
genotype-by-environment interaction.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000129841.30587.9d
PMID: 15277625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1135. Neurology. 2004 Jul 27;63(2):376-8. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000130194.84594.96.

L-dopa responsiveness in dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson disease with and 
without dementia.

Bonelli SB(1), Ransmayr G, Steffelbauer M, Lukas T, Lampl C, Deibl M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, Linz General Hospital, Linz, Austria.

The authors analyzed whether nondemented (PD) and demented Parkinson patients 
(PDD) and patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) respond similarly in the 
levodopa test (LDT). Percentage of motor improvement was similar in the three 
groups; the proportion of patients with 10% and more improvement was greater in 
PD than in PDD and DLB. Positive LDT was predictive for favorable response in 
chronic levodopa treatment, but also some nonresponsive demented patients 
profited from chronic levodopa therapy.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000130194.84594.96
PMID: 15277644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1136. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2004 Aug;19(8):763-72. doi: 10.1002/gps.1159.

A failure of 'pop-out' in visual search tasks in dementia with Lewy Bodies as 
compared to Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Cormack F(1), Gray A, Ballard C, Tov√©e MJ.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, The Henry Wellcome Building For Neuroecology, 
Framlington Place, Newcastle University, Newcastle Upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

OBJECTIVES: The pattern of neural damage in dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) led 
us to hypothesize that patients with DLB would be particularly impaired on 
parallel ('pop-out') search tasks, relative to serial search tasks, and that 
this would serve to distinguish DLB from other forms of neurodegenerative 
disease, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: To explore this possibility we tested four groups of observers (DLB, 
Alzheimer's Disease, Parkinson's Disease and age-matched controls) on parallel 
and serial search tasks, and a choice reaction time task.
RESULTS: The DLB participants performed in a quantitatively and qualitatively 
different manner to the other groups. As predicted, they were particularly 
impaired on the parallel search task relative to the other observer groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This pattern of deficit may reflect damage in the occipital areas 
leading to deficits in figure-ground segregation, and can assist differential 
diagnosis of DLB from other patients groups such as AD.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1159
PMID: 15290700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1137. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2004 Jul;63(7):742-9. doi: 10.1093/jnen/63.7.742.

Lewy body-related alpha-synucleinopathy in aging.

Saito Y(1), Ruberu NN, Sawabe M, Arai T, Kazama H, Hosoi T, Yamanouchi H, 
Murayama S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Gerontology, 
Tokyo, Japan.

To clarify the significance of Lewy body (LB)-related alpha-synucleinopathy in 
aging, we investigated the incidence of LBs in 1,241 consecutive autopsy cases 
(663 males and 578 females). LB pathology was identified histologically in 
sections stained with hematoxylin and eosin and with anti-ubiquitin and 
anti-alpha-synuclein antibodies. Cases without LBs were classified as LB stage 0 
(987 cases). Cases with LBs were classified as follows: LB stage I = incidental 
LBs (149 cases); LB stage II = LB-related degeneration without attributable 
clinical symptoms (47 cases); LB stage III = Parkinson disease without dementia 
(10 cases); LB stage IV = dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) transitional (limbic) 
form (25 cases); and LB stage V = DLB neocortical form (23 cases). The average 
age at death was greater for those cases with LBs. There were no gender 
differences in the LB pathology. G842A polymorphism in the paraoxonase I gene 
was associated with men in LB stage II or above and suggests a gender-specific 
risk factor. LB stage V had higher stages of neurofibrillary tangle and senile 
plaque involvement and also had a higher frequency of apolipoprotein E epsilon4. 
Our findings indicate that LBs are associated with cognitive decline, either 
independently or synergistically with neurofibrillary tangles and senile 
plaques.

DOI: 10.1093/jnen/63.7.742
PMID: 15290899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1138. Am J Clin Pathol. 2004 Jun;121 Suppl:S113-20. doi: 10.1309/0UM2V45M00M69XPX.

Clinical laboratory monitoring of coenzyme Q10 use in neurologic and muscular 
diseases.

Steele PE(1), Tang PH, DeGrauw AJ, Miles MV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center and University of Cincinnati 45229-3039, USA.

Coenzyme Q10 (Q10) is available as an over-the-counter dietary supplement in the 
United States. While its use could be considered a form of alternative therapy, 
the medical profession has embraced the use of Q10 in specific disease states, 
including a series of neurologic and muscular diseases. Clinical laboratory 
monitoring is available for measurement of total Q10 in plasma and tissue and 
for measurement of redox status, ie, the ratio of reduced and oxidized forms of 
Q10. Many published studies have been anecdotal, in part owing to the rarity of 
some diseases involved. Unfortunately, many studies do not report Q10 levels, 
and, thus, the relationship of clinical response to Q10 concentration in plasma 
frequently is not discernible. Consistent laboratory monitoring of patients 
treated with this compound would help ease interpretation of the results of the 
treatment, especially because so many formulations of Q10 exist in the 
marketplace, each with its own bioavailability characteristics. Q10 has an 
enviable safety profile and, thus, is ideal to study as an adjunct to more 
conventional therapy. Defining patient subpopulations and characteristics that 
predict benefit from exogenous Q10 and defining therapeutic ranges for those 
particular applications are major challenges in this field.

DOI: 10.1309/0UM2V45M00M69XPX
PMID: 15298157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1139. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2004 Sep;17(3):146-57. doi: 
10.1177/0891988704267465.

REM sleep behavior disorder in Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Boeve BF(1), Silber MH, Ferman TJ.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of 
Medicine, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. bboeve@mayo.edu

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia 
manifested by vivid, often frightening dreams associated with simple or complex 
motor behavior during REM sleep. Patients appear to "act out their dreams," in 
which the exhibited behaviors mirror the content of the dreams. Management of 
RBD involves counseling about safety measures in the sleep environment; in those 
at risk for injury, clonazepam and/or melatonin is usually effective. In this 
article, the authors present a detailed review of the clinical and 
polysomnographic features, differential diagnosis, diagnostic criteria, 
management strategies, and pathophysiologic mechanisms of RBD. They then review 
the literature and their institutional experience of RBD associated with 
neurodegenerative disease, particularly Parkinson's disease and dementia with 
Lewy bodies. The evolving data suggests that RBD may have clinical diagnostic 
and pathophysiologic significance in isolation and when associated with 
neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988704267465
PMID: 15312278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1140. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2004 Sep;17(3):164-71. doi: 
10.1177/0891988704267463.

Role of cholinesterase inhibitors in Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Aarsland D(1), Mosimann UP, McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Rogaland Central Hospital, Psychiatric Clinic, PO Box 1163, Hillevaag, 4095 
Stavanger, Norway. daa@sir.no

This article reviews the cholinergic changes in Parkinson's disease and dementia 
(PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), their potential clinical 
implications, and the available evidence for cholinesterase inhibitors in the 
treatment of PDD and DLB. Marked neuronal loss of cholinergic nuclei, reduced 
cholinergic markers in the neocortex, hippocampus, and selected thalamic nuclei, 
and receptor changes have been reported. One large and 2 small 
placebo-controlled trials and nearly 20 open-label studies suggest that 
cholinesterase inhibitors have a positive effect on cognition, psychiatric 
symptoms, and global function in patients with DLB and PDD. The treatment is 
well tolerated in most patients without any apparent worsening of extrapyramidal 
motor features. Given the high risk of severe sensitivity reactions and 
increased risk of cerebrovascular incidents during treatment with neuroleptics, 
more clinical trials of cholinesterase inhibitors are encouraged to establish 
their precise role in DLB and PDD.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988704267463
PMID: 15312280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1141. Public Health. 2004 Sep;118(6):426-33. doi: 10.1016/j.puhe.2003.10.007.

Methods and demographic findings of the baseline survey of the NEDICES cohort: a 
door-to-door survey of neurological disorders in three communities from Central 
Spain.

Morales JM(1), Bermejo FP, Benito-Le√≥n J, Rivera-Navarro J, Trincado R, Gabriel 
S R, Vega S; NEDICES Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research, Ministry of Labour and Social Affairs, Madrid, Spain. 
jmmorales@mtas.es

OBJECTIVE: To describe the methods and general results of the baseline 
longitudinal survey in a defined cohort of elderly people from three areas of 
Central Spain (urban and rural). The survey was designed to study dementia, 
essential tremor, Parkinson's disease and stroke.
STUDY DESIGN: A population-based longitudinal study with door-to-door 
interviews.
METHODS: This study was carried out in two phases: Phase 1 (health status 
questionnaire and screening performed by lay interviewers) and Phase 2 
(diagnosis of neurological illnesses by neurologists).
RESULTS: The study flow chart, screening instruments for neurological disorders, 
main demographic data (age, sex, educational attainment, occupation) and general 
health status of the 5,278 screened participants (2,238 men and 3,040 women) are 
given for the two phases. The response rate was 85.3%, and participation was 
higher in men and in the urban area.
CONCLUSIONS: Participation rates were good in both phases of the NEDICES 
baseline study, and this was influenced by age, sex and setting of the 
participants. Educational attainment, occupation and health status data are 
analogous to other Spanish studies performed in the elderly. As the study 
population was large and good participation rates were achieved, precise 
analysis of morbidity of the neurological disorders investigated will be 
possible.

DOI: 10.1016/j.puhe.2003.10.007
PMID: 15313596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1142. Arch Neurol. 2004 Aug;61(8):1273-6. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.8.1273.

Parkinsonian signs in older people in a community-based study: risk of incident 
dementia.

Louis ED(1), Tang MX, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)The Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Mild parkinsonian signs occur in 30% to 40% of community-dwelling 
older people. In a cross-sectional study, the severity of these signs was 
greater in people with dementia than in people without dementia.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether baseline mild parkinsonian signs are a predictor 
of incident dementia.
DESIGN: A prospective, longitudinal study of community-dwelling older people who 
did not have dementia or Parkinson disease at baseline.
METHODS: A neurological examination was performed on 1028 residents aged 65 
years or older in the Washington Height-Inwood community in northern Manhattan, 
NY. Parkinsonian signs were rated with an abbreviated Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale, resulting in a parkinsonian sign score (range, 0-40). The 
risk of incident dementia was assessed using Cox proportional hazards models. In 
some analyses, data from the modified Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale 
were divided into 3 domains: rigidity, axial function, and tremor at rest.
RESULTS: The mean duration of follow-up was 5.6 years, and 224 participants 
(21.8%) developed dementia. In a Cox model, the risk of incident dementia was 
57% higher in participants with a baseline parkinsonian sign score of 2 vs 0 
(relative risk, 1.56; 95% confidence interval, 1.04-2.33; P =.03). In a second 
Cox model, the baseline parkinsonian sign score was associated with incident 
dementia (relative risk, 1.08; 95% confidence interval, 1.01-1.16; P =.02) 
independent of associations with baseline age, education, ethnicity, diabetes 
mellitus, and stroke.
CONCLUSIONS: Baseline mild parkinsonian signs are a predictor of incident 
dementia. Although these signs are mild, they are not prognostically benign. 
Brain imaging and postmortem examinations might further our insight into the 
anatomical and pathological basis for mild parkinsonian signs.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.8.1273
PMID: 15313847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1143. J Mol Neurosci. 2004;24(1):149-53. doi: 10.1385/JMN:24:1:149.

Transforming growth factor-beta signaling pathway as a therapeutic target in 
neurodegeneration.

Wyss-Coray T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA. twc@stanford.edu

Neurodegenerative diseases are becoming an increasing social and economical 
burden as our population ages; but current knowledge of the processes leading to 
these diseases is still limited, and no effective treatments are available. 
Neurodegeneration in Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of 
dementia and afflicts an estimated 4 million people in this country alone. 
Because accumulation of beta-amyloid (Abeta) peptide appears central to AD 
pathogenesis, large efforts have been directed at understanding and interfering 
with Abeta production or aggregation. These efforts have largely identified the 
processes resulting in Abeta production from the larger amyloid precursor 
protein (APP) and have revealed that Abeta peptide is also produced at low 
levels in the healthy brain. Interestingly, Abeta production is rapidly 
increased after neuronal injury, and traumatic brain injury is a known risk 
factor for AD and Parkinson's disease. In contrast, brain injury in young 
individuals does not seem to result in AD, and brain injury in animal models can 
promote Abeta clearance. This suggests that certain factors associated with 
injury might be able to reduce the accumulation of Abeta. Accumulation of Abeta 
peptide might be reduced either directly by stimulating phagocytes or other 
Abeta-degrading processes, or indirectly, by reducing neuronal injury and thus 
lowering the production of Abeta peptide. Directing the brain's natural 
mechanisms for clearing Abeta or increasing neuroprotection might therefore be 
reasonable approaches in interfering with AD pathogenesis.

Copyright 2004 Humana Press Inc.

DOI: 10.1385/JMN:24:1:149
PMID: 15314264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1144. J Intern Med. 2004 Sep;256(3):224-34. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01368.x.

CSF biomarkers for mild cognitive impairment.

Blennow K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Section of Experimental Neuroscience, 
The Sahlgrenska Academy at G√∂teborg University, G√∂teborg, Sweden. 
kaj.blennow@neuro.gu.se

A correct clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) early in the course of 
the disease is of importance to initiate symptomatic treatment with 
acetylcholine esterase inhibitors, and will be even more important when 
disease-arresting drugs, such as beta-sheet breakers or gamma-secretase 
inhibitors, will reach the clinic. However, there is no clinical method to 
determine if a patient with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) has incipient AD, 
i.e. will progress to AD with dementia, or have a benign form of MCI without 
progression. Thus, there is a great clinical need for diagnostic biomarkers to 
identify incipient AD in MCI cases. Three cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers; 
total-tau (T-tau), phospho-tau (P-tau) and the 42 amino acid form of 
beta-amyloid (Abeta42) have been evaluated in numerous scientific papers. These 
CSF markers have high sensitivity to differentiate early and incipient AD from 
normal ageing, depression, alcohol dementia and Parkinson's disease, but lower 
specificity against other dementias, such as frontotemporal and Lewy body 
dementia. However, if the CSF biomarkers are used in the right clinical context, 
i.e. together with the cumulative information from the clinical examination, 
standard laboratory tests and brain-imaging techniques [single photon emission 
tomography (SPECT) and magnetic resonance tomography (MRT) scans], they may have 
a role in the clinical evaluation of MCI cases.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2004.01368.x
PMID: 15324365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1145. Neuroimage. 2004 Sep;23(1):336-43. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.05.026.

Quantitative measurement of neurodegeneration in an ALS-PDC model using MR 
microscopy.

Wilson JM(1), Petrik MS, Grant SC, Blackband SJ, Lai J, Shaw CA.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, University of British Columbia Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Exposure to cycad (Cycas micronesica K.D. Hill) toxins via diet has been shown 
to induce neurodegeneration in vivo that mimics the progressive neurological 
disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis--parkinsonism dementia complex 
(ALS--PDC). In previous studies, specific cortical and subcortical cell loss was 
measured with conventional stained sections. In the present study, magnetic 
resonance (MR) microscopy was used to examine neurodegeneration in three 
dimensions (3D) in isolated intact brains and spinal cords. Mice were fed washed 
cycad for 2 months and showed progressive motor deficits resembling human 
ALS--PDC. CNS tissue was imaged at 17.6 T. T2* scans were acquired on both 
spinal cord and brain samples with an isotropic resolution of 41 microm. Through 
MR volumetrics, cycad-fed mice showed significantly decreased volumes in lumbar 
spinal cord gray matter, substantia nigra, striatum, basal nucleus/internal 
capsule, and olfactory bulb. Cortical measurements of conventionally stained 
sections revealed that cycad-fed mice also showed decreased cortical thickness. 
These results show that MR microscopy (MRM) is sensitive enough to measure 
degeneration in this early stage model of a progressive neurological disease 
with strong correlations to behavioral deficits and histological results and may 
be applicable in vivo to the same model. Similar analysis may be used in the 
future as a diagnostic aid in tracking the early progression of neurological 
disorders in preclinical human subjects.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.05.026
PMID: 15325381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1146. Anesthesiology. 2004 Sep;101(3):703-9. doi: 10.1097/00000542-200409000-00019.

Inhaled anesthetic enhancement of amyloid-beta oligomerization and cytotoxicity.

Eckenhoff RG(1), Johansson JS, Wei H, Carnini A, Kang B, Wei W, Pidikiti R, 
Keller JM, Eckenhoff MF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
Pennsylvania 19104-4283, USA. roderic.eckenhoff@uphs.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: The majority of surgical patients receive inhaled anesthetics, 
principally small haloalkanes and haloethers. Long-term cognitive problems occur 
in the elderly subsequent to anesthesia and surgery, and previous surgery might 
also be a risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders like Alzheimer and 
Parkinson disease. The authors hypothesize that inhaled anesthetics contribute 
to these effects through a durable enhancement of peptide oligomerization.
METHODS: Light scattering, filtration assays, electron microscopy, fluorescence 
spectroscopy and size-exclusion chromatography was used to characterize the 
concentration-dependent effects of halothane, isoflurane, propofol, and ethanol 
on amyloid beta peptide oligomerization. Pheochromocytoma cells were used to 
characterize cytotoxicity of amyloid oligomers with and without the above 
anesthetics.
RESULTS: Halothane and isoflurane enhanced amyloid beta oligomerization rates 
and pheochromocytoma cytotoxicity in vitro through a preference for binding 
small oligomeric species. Ethanol and propofol inhibited oligomerization at low 
concentration but enhanced modestly at very high concentration. Neither ethanol 
nor propofol enhanced amyloid beta toxicity in pheochromocytoma cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhaled anesthetics enhance oligomerization and cytotoxicity of 
Alzheimer disease-associated peptides. In addition to the possibility of a 
general mechanism for anesthetic neurotoxicity, these results call for further 
evaluation of the interaction between neurodegenerative disorders, dementia, and 
inhalational anesthesia.

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-200409000-00019
PMID: 15329595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1147. Clin Ther. 2004 Jul;26(7):980-90. doi: 10.1016/s0149-2918(04)90172-5.

Effects of rivastigmine on behavioral and psychological symptoms of dementia in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Finkel SI(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Chicago Medical School, Chicago, 
Illinois, USA. sandy.finkel@cje.net

BACKGROUND: The presence of certain behavioral and psychological symptoms (eg, 
paranoia, hallucinations, aggression, activity disturbances) in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) may predict faster cognitive and functional decline; therefore, 
such symptoms represent an important treatment target. Behavioral and 
psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) may be caused at least in part by 
cholinergic deficits. Regulatory studies of rivastigmine in AD were not designed 
to evaluate effects on BPSD, but further investigation of rivastigmine in AD was 
prompted by later studies demonstrating behavioral benefits in other types of 
dementia.
OBJECTIVE: The primary aim of this article was to review available data on the 
behavioral benefits of rivastigmine in patients with AD.
METHODS: Relevant data were identified through a MEDLINE search for studies 
published in peer-reviewed journals through January 2004. The search terms were 
Alzheimer, behavior, psychosis, and rivastigmine. Data presented at 
international scientific congresses were also reviewed to ensure that the most 
recent data were considered.
RESULTS: A meta-analysis of three 6-month, placebo-controlled trials of 
rivastigmine in mild to moderate AD indicated that rivastigmine 6 to 12 mg/d may 
improve or prevent disruptive BPSD (P < 0.05 vs placebo). In patients with more 
advanced AD, 2 open-label studies of up to 12 months' duration found that 
improvements in BPSD were accompanied by a decrease in the use of psychotropic 
medications. Rivastigmine demonstrated behavioral benefits in patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) in a double-blind, placebo-controlled study (P < 
0.05). In open-label extension studies, rivastigmine provided sustained effects 
(up to 2 years) in patients with mild to moderate AD or DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: The available dats suggest that rivastigmine may be a 
well-tolerated treatment option for improving or preventing psychotic and 
nonpsychotic symptoms associated with AD. Prospective, double-blind studies are 
needed to evaluate these preliminary findings.

DOI: 10.1016/s0149-2918(04)90172-5
PMID: 15336465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1148. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Sep 9;367(3):336-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.06.027.

Interaction between matrix metalloproteinase 3 and the epsilon4 allele of 
apolipoprotein E increases the risk of Alzheimer's disease in Finns.

Saarela MS(1), Lehtim√§ki T, Rinne JO, Hervonen A, Jylh√§ M, R√∂ytt√§ M, Ahonen JP, 
Mattila KM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Atherosclerosis Genetics, Department of Clinical Chemistry, 
Center for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere University Hospital, PO Box 2000, 
FIN-33521, Finland. masusaar@cc.jyu.fi

Polymorphisms affecting the expression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), i.e. 
proteolytic enzymes that degrade intercellular material, have been found at 
position -1607 (1G/2G) in MMP1 and at -1171 (5A/6A) in MMP3. Interestingly, 
elevated levels of MMP1 and MMP3 have been observed in the brains of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) patients and those of tissue inhibitors of MMPs in the 
cerebrospinal fluid of AD and Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, suggesting a 
role for MMPs in these disorders. The aim was to investigate a possible 
association between the afore-mentioned MMP1 and MMP3 polymorphisms and the risk 
of developing AD or PD. The polymorphisms were genotyped in 97 AD, 52 PD and 101 
control patients. We found an interaction between MMP3*5A and APOE 4 alleles (P 
< 0.0001) which increases the risk of AD (OR: 23.7, 95% CI: 5.8-144.9, P < 
0.0001) compared to those who possess neither MMP3*5A nor APOE 4. In conclusion, 
our finding suggests that the MMP3 gene, especially together with APOE 4, may 
contribute to the development of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.06.027
PMID: 15337261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1149. Ann Neurol. 2004 Sep;56(3):399-406. doi: 10.1002/ana.20203.

Clinicopathological correlates in frontotemporal dementia.

Hodges JR(1), Davies RR, Xuereb JH, Casey B, Broe M, Bak TH, Kril JJ, Halliday 
GM.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, the University of New South 
Wales, Randwick, New South Wales, Australia. john.hodges@mrc-cbu.cam.ac.uk

The term frontotemporal dementia (FTD) encompasses a range of clinical syndromes 
that are believed not to map reliably onto the spectrum of recognized 
pathologies. This study reexamines the relationships between clinical and 
pathological subtypes of FTD in a large series from two centers (n = 61). 
Clinical subtypes defined were behavioral variant FTD (n = 26), language 
variants (semantic dementia, n = 9; and progressive nonfluent aphasia, n = 8), 
and motor variants (corticobasal degeneration, n = 9; and motor neuron disease, 
n = 9), although most cases presented with a combination of behavioral and 
language problems. Unexpectedly, some behavioral cases (n = 5) had marked 
amnesia at presentation. The pathological subtypes were those with 
tau-immunopositive inclusions (with Pick bodies, n = 20; or without, n = 11), 
those with ubiquitin immunopositive inclusions (n = 16), and those lacking 
distinctive histology (n = 14). Behavioral symptoms and semantic dementia were 
associated with a range of pathologies. In contrast, other clinical phenotypes 
had relatively uniform underlying pathologies: motor neuron disease predicted 
ubiquitinated inclusions, parkinsonism and apraxia predicted corticobasal 
pathology, and nonfluent aphasia predicted Pick bodies. Therefore, the 
pathological substrate can be predicted in a significant proportion of FTD 
patients, which has important implications for studies targeting mechanistic 
treatments.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20203
PMID: 15349867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1150. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2004 Sep-Oct;12(5):509-16. doi: 
10.1176/appi.ajgp.12.5.509.

A randomized, double-blind, crossover comparison of risperidone and haloperidol 
in Korean dementia patients with behavioral disturbances.

Suh GH(1), Son HG, Ju YS, Jcho KH, Yeon BK, Shin YM, Kee BS, Choi SK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hallym University Medical Center, Hangang Sacred 
Heart Hospital, 94-200 Yungdungpo-Dong, Seoul 150-030, Korea. suhgh@chollian.net

OBJECTIVE: Behavioral disturbances in dementia are extremely prominent and 
distressful, and often result in serious physical, social, and economic 
consequences. The authors compared the efficacy and tolerability of risperidone 
and haloperidol in the treatment of behavioral and psychological symptoms of 
dementia (BPSD) in institutionalized elderly Korean patients with Alzheimer 
disease, vascular dementia, or mixed dementia.
METHODS: This was an 18-week double-blind, crossover study involving 120 
patients who were randomly assigned to receive flexible doses (0.5-1.5 mg/day) 
of risperidone or haloperidol. BPSD were assessed using the Korean version of 
the Behavioral Pathology in Alzheimer's Disease Rating Scale (BEHAVE-AD-K), the 
Korean version of the Cohen-Mansfield Agitation Inventory (CMAI-K), and the 
Clinical Global Impression of Change scale (CGI-C). Safety and tolerability 
assessments included the Extrapyramidal Symptom Rating Scale and the incidence 
of adverse events.
RESULTS: Both risperidone and haloperidol were efficacious in alleviating BPSD. 
However, when receiving risperidone, patients showed significantly greater 
improvement than when receiving haloperidol in the total and subscale scores of 
the BEHAVE-AD-K, the total and subscale scores of the CMAI-K, and the scores on 
the CGI-C scale. Also, risperidone had an additional benefit on aggressiveness 
and anxieties/phobias. The risk of antipsychotic-induced parkinsonism throughout 
this study was significantly lower with risperidone than with haloperidol.
CONCLUSION: Risperidone had a favorable efficacy and tolerability profile 
compared with haloperidol in the treatment of BPSD in this patient population.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajgp.12.5.509
PMID: 15353389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1151. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Dec;29(12):2242-50. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300554.

Neuropathologic correlates of late-onset major depression.

Sweet RA(1), Hamilton RL, Butters MA, Mulsant BH, Pollock BG, Lewis DA, Lopez 
OL, DeKosky ST, Reynolds CF 3rd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA. sweetra@upmc.edu

Late life major depression (LLMD) is frequently associated with cognitive 
impairment, and increases the risk for subsequent dementia. Cerebrovascular 
disease, Alzheimer's disease (AD), and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) have all 
been hypothesized to contribute to this increased risk, though prospective 
studies have yet to examine these hypotheses with autopsy confirmation of the 
clinical diagnoses. The aim of this study is to examine the rates of 
cerebrovascular, AD, and DLB pathology among the first 10 participants in an 
LLMD brain tissue donation program. Subjects' psychiatric diagnoses and 
cognitive status were prospectively determined during their participation in 
clinical research protocols of the Intervention Research Center for Late Life 
Mood Disorders. After death, final clinical diagnoses were made using all 
clinical information, while blind to neuropathologic diagnoses. Neuropathologic 
assessments were conducted blind to final clinical diagnoses. Rates of 
neuropathology were compared with those in a cohort of subjects with dementia, 
without a history of LLMD, participating in an Alzheimer Disease Research 
Center. Seven (70%) subjects had evidence of onset of a dementia prior to death. 
LLMD with dementia was significantly associated with a neuropathologic diagnosis 
of AD. Cerebrovascular disease and DLB pathology were also frequent in the LLMD 
subjects with dementia, and were found in an LLMD subject without dementia. 
Rates of AD, DLB, and cerebrovascular disease were similar to those in the 
comparison subjects. These preliminary findings suggest that AD is the 
predominant neuropathologic condition in LLMD subjects with dementia. Further 
assessment of the role of comorbid cerebrovascular disease and comorbid DLB is 
needed.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300554
PMID: 15354182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1152. Neurology. 2004 Sep 14;63(5):805-11. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000139870.14385.3c.

Beta-synuclein gene alterations in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Ohtake H(1), Limprasert P, Fan Y, Onodera O, Kakita A, Takahashi H, Bonner LT, 
Tsuang DW, Murray IV, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Ishikawa A, Idezuka J, Murata M, 
Toda T, Bird TD, Leverenz JB, Tsuji S, La Spada AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, 
Niigata, Japan.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2004 Sep 14;63(5):770-1.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether mutations in the genes for alpha-synuclein or 
beta-synuclein are responsible for dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), a disorder 
closely related to Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: The authors ascertained 33 sporadic cases of DLB and 10 kindreds 
segregating DLB. DNA samples from the 43 index cases were screened for 
alterations in the genes for alpha-synuclein and beta-synuclein, as 
alpha-synuclein alterations cause PD and beta-synuclein may modulate 
alpha-synuclein aggregation and neurotoxicity.
RESULTS: Two amino acid alterations were identified in unrelated DLB index 
cases: a valine to methionine substitution at codon 70 (V70M) and a proline to 
histidine substitution at codon 123 (P123H), both in the beta-synuclein gene. 
These amino acid substitutions occur at conserved residues in highly conserved 
regions of the beta-synuclein protein. Screening of at least 660 chromosomes 
from control subjects matched to the patients' population groups failed to 
identify another V70M or P123H allele. Cosegregation analysis of an extended 
pedigree segregating the P123H beta-synuclein alteration suggested that it is a 
dominant trait with reduced penetrance or a risk factor polymorphism. 
Histopathology and immunohistochemistry analysis of index case brain sections 
revealed widespread Lewy body pathology and alpha-synuclein aggregation without 
evidence of beta-synuclein aggregation.
CONCLUSION: Mutations in the beta-synuclein gene may predispose to DLB.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000139870.14385.3c
PMCID: PMC1808539
PMID: 15365127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1153. Neurology. 2004 Sep 14;63(5):886-91. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000137886.74175.5a.

Homocysteine and levodopa: should Parkinson disease patients receive 
preventative therapy?

Postuma RB(1), Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Center, Toronto Western 
Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

Epidemiologic evidence has linked elevation of serum homocysteine to an 
increased risk of coronary artery disease, stroke, and dementia. An increase in 
homocysteine levels in Parkinson disease (PD) recently has been discovered. 
Although B vitamin status and genetic factors are important modifying influences 
determining the degree of this elevation, the main cause appears to be therapy 
with L-dopa. It has been suggested that breakdown of L-dopa by 
catechol-O-methyltransferase results in increased homocysteine formation. 
Therefore, there are reasons to suggest that management of PD may render 
patients at increased risk of stroke, heart disease, dementia, and even 
accelerated nigral degeneration. At present, no controlled prospective studies 
have evaluated this phenomenon, although they are ongoing.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000137886.74175.5a
PMID: 15365141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1154. Neurologia. 2004 Sep;19 Suppl 1:23-30.

[Approach to epidemiological cohort designs].

[Article in Spanish]

Morales Gonz√°lez JM(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicios Sociales y Dependencia, Ministerio de Trabajo y Asuntos Sociales, 
Madrid. jmmorales@mtas.es

In neurological cohort studies participants are those who are "at risk" of 
developing the outcome (i.e., stroke, dementia, parkinsonism) and should be free 
of such event when their follow-up is begun. They are classified and controlled 
at the outset by their risk or "exposition" factors. There are several 
alternatives of selecting the study population, although the most known are 
those of the large population bases (for example, Framingham Heart Study, the 
Rochester MN, etc.). There should be standardized procedures of classification 
and follow-up and the investigator who makes the diagnosis should be blinded to 
the exposure status, when it is possible. In cohort studies, we will consider 
several frequency measures, such as incidence and risk, and the most frequent 
association measures, such as relative risk, risk difference, and rate ratio. 
The advantages of a cohort study in neurology are: a) the exposure is known to 
occur prior to the onset of the outcome and is measured prior to the occurrence 
of the outcome, b) multiple exposures and outcomes (end-points) can be studied 
simultaneously, and they usually have good control, c) it is good for rare 
exposures (if there was adequate sampling), and it is good for common outcomes. 
The disadvantages of a cohort studies are: a) they are expensive and 
time-consuming; b) possibility of change in investigators for very long studies, 
or attrition of participants; c) not good for rare outcomes; d) exposures can 
change, exposures are not independent of other potential causes and prognostic 
factors, and e) knowledge of exposure may alter surveillance for the disease or 
alter the likelihood that a particular diagnostic label will be applied. It is 
useful for the clinical neurologist to know and to understand these terminology 
and concepts.

PMID: 15372332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1155. Mov Disord. 2004 Sep;19(9):1043-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.20216.

Risk and incidence of dementia in a cohort of older subjects with Parkinson's 
disease in the United Kingdom.

Hobson P(1), Meara J.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Geriatric Medicine, University of Wales College of 
Medicine, Glan Clwyd Hospital, Rhyl, North Wales LL18 5UJ, United Kingdom. 
peterhobson@hotmail.com

To determine the incidence and possible risk factors for dementia in patients 
with clinically probable Parkinson's disease (PD), a cohort (n = 86) of 
nondemented patients over 65 years of age with PD fulfilling the PD Brain Bank 
clinical diagnostic criteria were determined from community records. A similarly 
aged group of control subjects (n = 102) were recruited from the same area. Both 
groups were assessed at baseline and approximately 4 years later for cognition, 
mood, and motor function (PD patients only). The presence and severity of 
cognitive impairments was based on subject and informant interview, 
neuropsychological assessment based on the Cambridge Cognitive Examination 
(CAMCOG) and the application of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, 4th edition (DSM-IV). At 4 years, 51 (59%) of the PD and 72 (71%) of 
the control cohort were available for reassessment. Of the PD cohort, 18 (35.3%) 
had developed dementia and 5 (9.4%) had evidence of mild cognitive impairments. 
In the control group, 5 (7%) had developed dementia. The incidence of dementia 
per 1,000 person-years in the PD cohort was 107.1 (95% confidence interval [CI], 
59.9-159.8) and in the control group was 17.9 (95% CI, 5.8-31.9). The relative 
risk of patients developing dementia was 5.1 times that of the controls (95% CI, 
2.1-12.5). Increasing age, later age of onset of PD, longer duration of PD 
symptoms, the presence of hallucinations, and impairment of memory and language 
function were all predictive factors for the development of dementia (P < 0.05). 
Dementia was also found to be a significant predictor for institutional 
placement in the PD group. Compared with similarly aged controls, patients with 
clinically probable PD have a fivefold-increased risk of developing dementia. 
This finding has significant implications for successful clinical management of 
this condition.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20216
PMID: 15372593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1156. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2000 Jan-Feb;30(1):35-46. doi: 
10.1016/s0167-4943(99)00049-7.

Blood pressure and drug treatment in clinically diagnosed Lewy body dementia and 
Alzheimer's disease.

Londos E(1), Passant U, Gustafson L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychogeriatrics, Lund University Hospital, S-221 85 Lund, 
Sweden. elisabet.londos@psykiatr.lu.se

The aim of the study was to investigate arterial blood pressure (BP) and the use 
of pharmacological treatment in patients with Lewy body dementia (cLBD) and 
Alzheimer's disease (cAD) diagnosed on clinical grounds. BP and pharmacological 
treatment was analysed based on the medical records of 200 deceased dementia 
patients. Forty-eight cases with LBD and 45 AD were diagnosed using clinical 
criteria. The patients, who died between 1985 and 1994, were part of a 
prospective longitudinal dementia project. The majority of the cases were 
examined and cared for at the psychogeriatric and psychiatric departments. BP 
levels were very similar at an early stage of dementia but there was a marked 
decrease during the course of dementia in cAD and cLBD. The cLBD cases became 
hypotensive during the course of dementia to a significantly greater extent and 
also had a more pronounced drop in systolic BP at orthostatic testing compared 
to the cAD cases. cLBD and cAD were prescribed neuroleptics and medication 
potentially associated with hypotension to the same extent. The total number of 
these drugs was however higher in cLBD than in cAD. Antiparkinsonian treatment 
was, as expected, more common in cLBD compared to cAD. The findings suggest that 
insufficient BP regulation and drug treatment could affect the clinical picture 
of dementia, particularly in cLBD patients.

DOI: 10.1016/s0167-4943(99)00049-7
PMID: 15374047


1157. Epilepsy Behav. 2004 Oct;5(5):636-44. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2004.07.008.

Is major depression a neurologic disorder with psychiatric symptoms?

Kanner AM(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush Medical College, Rush Epilepsy 
Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA. 
andres_M_kanner@rush.edu <andres_M_kanner@rush.edu>

In the last decade, multiple investigator groups have identified structural 
changes of various neuroanatomic structures in patients with idiopathic major 
depression and bipolar disorders. Using high-resolution MRI of the brain and 
functional neuroimaging studies (i.e., PET, SPECT), researchers have described 
decreases in the volume of hippocampal formation, amygdala, entorhinal cortex, 
various frontal lobe structures, and basal ganglia, in addition to abnormal 
cerebral blood flow and metabolic activity in these structures as well as in 
thalamic nuclei. Similar structural and functional changes have been identified 
in patients with depression associated with a variety of neurologic disorders 
(i.e., stroke, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, Alzheimer's dementia). In 
addition, recent data have shown that depression is a risk factor for the 
development of several neurologic disorders, including epilepsy, stroke, and 
Parkinson's disease and bears a negative impact on the course and outcome of 
most neurologic disorders. This article reviews these data and provides evidence 
that major depressive and bipolar disorders may in fact be neurologic disorders 
with psychiatric symptoms.

DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2004.07.008
PMID: 15380113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1158. Am J Med. 2004 Sep 15;117(6):412-9. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2004.03.032.

Clinical differentiation of parkinsonian syndromes: prognostic and therapeutic 
relevance.

Christine CW(1), Aminoff MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Francisco 94143, USA. corsair@itsa.ucsf.edu

Parkinson disease is the most common cause of parkinsonism, but other causes 
should always be excluded because they have a different prognosis, respond 
differently to medical treatment, and should not be managed by surgical means. 
However, diagnosis, even by experts, is challenging; one autopsy series showed 
an error rate of 24%. Distinction between various diagnostic possibilities 
depends on the history and examination findings. The use of certain medications, 
the rapid rate of disease progression, early onset of falling, the presence of 
certain dysautonomic symptoms, cognitive or behavioral changes, or a history of 
poor response to dopaminergic therapy may suggest an atypical form of 
parkinsonism. Postural hypotension, dementia, supranuclear ophthalmoparesis, or 
early postural instability should alert the examiner to consider an atypical 
cause of parkinsonism. Tests of autonomic function and brain imaging are often 
helpful in distinguishing these diseases.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2004.03.032
PMID: 15380498 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1159. Mov Disord. 2005 Jan;20(1):89-94. doi: 10.1002/mds.20266.

Prevalence of gait disorders in hospitalized neurological patients.

Stolze H(1), Klebe S, Baecker C, Zechlin C, Friege L, Pohle S, Deuschl G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Universit√§tsklinikum Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

The prevalence of gait disorders among neurological inpatients is unknown, 
although disturbed gait is a common symptom. Gait disorders often lead to loss 
of independence with restraints for the patients and caregivers and costs for 
the health system. We designed a prospective study and investigated all patients 
admitted to a neurological hospital during a 100-day period for the presence of 
a gait disorder. Clinical investigation and several disease-specific rating 
scales were carried out for 493 patients. In 60% of the patients, a disturbance 
of gait was diagnosed. Most frequent diagnoses were stroke (21%), Parkinson's 
disease (17%), and polyneuropathy (7%). Within these diagnoses, the rate of 
patients with disturbed gait was high in Parkinson's disease (93%), subcortical 
arteriosclerotic encephalopathy (85%), and motor neuron disease (83%). Advanced 
age, dementia, alcohol abuse, and treatment with antiepileptics, neuroleptics, 
benzodiazepines, and chemotherapeutics were identified as risk factors for a 
gait disorder. A decline of cognitive function was accompanied by a reduction of 
walking speed. According to these results, gait disorders are among the most 
frequent symptoms in neurology.

(c) 2004 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20266
PMID: 15390043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1160. Mov Disord. 2005 Jan;20(1):69-72. doi: 10.1002/mds.20261.

Effects of levodopa and COMT inhibitors on plasma homocysteine in Parkinson's 
disease patients.

Lamberti P(1), Zoccolella S, Iliceto G, Armenise E, Fraddosio A, de Mari M, 
Livrea P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. 
lamberti@neurol.uniba.it

Homocysteine (Hcy) is a risk factor for vascular diseases, cognitive impairment, 
and dementia. Elevated plasma concentrations of Hcy have been found recently in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients treated with levodopa, suggesting that 
levodopa is a cause of hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy). The mechanism underlying 
HHcy in PD is the O-methylation of levodopa catalyzed by 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) that produces S-adenosylhomocysteine, which 
is hydrolyzed rapidly to Hcy. COMT inhibitors (COMT-I) are used currently in the 
treatment of PD; however, no study has assessed the effects of COMT-I 
administration on Hcy concentrations in PD patients. We compared plasma levels 
of Hcy, B12, and folate in 26 PD patients treated with levodopa, 20 PD patients 
treated with levodopa + COMT-I, and 32 controls. No significant differences were 
found in vitamin B12 levels, whereas folate concentrations were significantly 
lower in the levodopa-treated group. Plasma Hcy was increased significantly in 
the two groups of PD patients and was significantly lower in the group treated 
with levodopa + COMT-I. Statistical analysis showed that the difference in mean 
Hcy levels observed among PD patients was related to the addition of COMT-I, 
rather than to folate concentrations. We conclude that levodopa treatment 
increases plasma Hcy and the addition of COMT-I effectively reduces HHcy.

(c) 2004 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20261
PMID: 15390046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1161. Mov Disord. 2004 Dec;19(12):1403-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.20253.

Modest increase in plasma homocysteine follows levodopa initiation in 
Parkinson's disease.

O'Suilleabhain PE(1), Bottiglieri T, Dewey RB Jr, Sharma S, Diaz-Arrastia R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical School, 
Dallas, Texas, USA. padraig.osilleabhain@utsouthwestern.edu

Levodopa, typically ingested chronically at high daily doses, is predictably 
methylated by means of a series of reactions using B vitamins, which convert 
methionine to homocysteine. Elevated total plasma homocysteine (tHcy), a risk 
factor for dementia, has been found in PD patients using levodopa. We 
prospectively measured the effects on plasma tHcy and B vitamins of levodopa 
initiation, and measured the effects of dose changes and of treatment with 
dopamine agonists and entacapone. We collected paired plasma samples, at 
baseline and again after several months treatment, from patients initiating 
levodopa (n = 30), from patients whose levodopa dose was doubled (n = 15), 
halved or stopped (n = 14), from patients starting or stopping entacapone (n = 
15) and from patients initiating or doubling dopamine agonist monotherapy (n = 
16). Vitamin B12, folate, and tHcy concentrations were measured. Baseline tHcy 
concentration of 8.7 (2.8) micromol/L increased to 10.1 (3.1) micromol/L (P = 
0.004) an average of 94 (range 36 to 200) days after initiation of 604 (240 to 
1050) mg/day of L-dopa. Average concentration of vitamin B12 fell from 380 to 
291 pmol/ L (P = 0.01). Patients who doubled their daily levodopa dose 
experienced tHcy elevations from 9.5 to 11.1 micromol/L (P = 0.05). Levodopa 
reduction, agonist treatment, and entacapone treatment did not have significant 
effects. Levodopa elevates tHcy and lowers vitamin B12 concentration to modest 
degrees. The clinical implications, if any, have not yet been determined.

2004 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20253
PMID: 15390053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1162. Neuroscience. 2004;128(1):1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.06.016.

Neuroimmunophilins: a novel drug therapy for the reversal of neurodegenerative 
disease?

Poulter MO(1), Payne KB, Steiner JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Neuroscience Research Institute, Carleton 
University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1S 5B6. 
michael_poulter@carleton.ca

Neuroimmunophilin ligands (NILs) are drugs derived from the immunosuppressant 
FK506 (tacrolimus) that have been shown to have variable efficacy in reversing 
neuronal degeneration and preventing cell death. In a wide range of animal 
models mimicking Parkinson's disease, dementia and even surgical nerve damage 
they induce re-sprouting, are neurotrophic or prevent nerve damage. The 
neurotrophic mechanism of action of these compounds is not known and may be 
dependent on the type of damage and genetic variability at the species or 
cellular level. Some evidence suggests that NILs may act through a family of 
proteins called FK506 binding proteins, some of which may regulate steroid 
hormone receptors. Other evidence suggests that NILs may protect neurons by 
upregulating the antioxidant glutathione and stimulating nerve regrowth by 
inducing the production of neurotrophic factors. Initial clinical trials have 
had mixed success. In one, patients with moderately severe Parkinson's disease 
showed no overall improvement in fine motor skills following 6 months of 
treatment by the neuroimmunophilin GPI 1485. But these patients did exhibit 
decreased loss of dopaminergic nerve terminals with a low dose of GPI 1485 and 
in fact some increase in dopaminergic terminals within 6 months of the higher 
dose of GPI 1485 drug treatment. As a result, a second phase II clinical trial 
using a patient population with less severe degeneration has been initiated 
concurrent with an investigation of GPI 1485 and other neuroprotective therapies 
funded by the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke. Another 
clinical trial ongoing at this time is exploring the use of a neuroimmunophilin 
ligand to prevent nerve degeneration and erectile dysfunction resulting from 
prostatectomy. In summary, neuroimmunophilins show promise to reverse some forms 
of neurodegeneration but exact factors that predict outcome have not been 
identified.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.06.016
PMID: 15450348 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1163. Lancet. 2004 Sep 25-Oct 1;364(9440):1167-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17103-1.

Alpha-synuclein locus duplication as a cause of familial Parkinson's disease.

Chartier-Harlin MC(1), Kachergus J, Roumier C, Mouroux V, Douay X, Lincoln S, 
Levecque C, Larvor L, Andrieux J, Hulihan M, Waucquier N, Defebvre L, Amouyel P, 
Farrer M, Dest√©e A.

Author information:
(1)Unit√© INSERM 508, 1 rue du Pr Calmette, BP 245, 59019 Lille Cedex, France.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2004 Sep 25-Oct 1;364(9440):1105-7.

Genomic triplication of the alpha-synuclein gene (SNCA) has been reported to 
cause hereditary early-onset parkinsonism with dementia. These findings prompted 
us to screen for multiplication of the SNCA locus in nine families in whom 
parkinsonism segregates as an autosomal dominant trait. One kindred was 
identified with SNCA duplication by semiquantitative PCR and confirmed by 
fluorescent in-situ hybridisation analysis in peripheral leucocytes. By contrast 
with SNCA triplication families, the clinical phenotype of SNCA duplication 
closely resembles idiopathic Parkinson's disease, which has a late age-of-onset, 
progresses slowly, and in which neither cognitive decline nor dementia are 
prominent. These findings suggest a direct relation between SNCA gene dosage and 
disease progression.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17103-1
PMID: 15451224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1164. Neurology. 2004 Sep 28;63(6):975-82. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000138440.39918.0c.

Motor signs during the course of Alzheimer disease.

Scarmeas N(1), Hadjigeorgiou GM, Papadimitriou A, Dubois B, Sarazin M, Brandt J, 
Albert M, Marder K, Bell K, Honig LS, Wegesin D, Stern Y.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neuroscience Division, Taub Institute for Research in Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, and Department of 
Neurology, New York, NY 10032, USA. ns257@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Motor signs (MOSIs) are common in Alzheimer disease (AD) and may be 
associated with rates of cognitive decline, mortality, and cost of care.
OBJECTIVE: To describe the progression and identify predictors of individual 
MOSIs in AD.
METHODS: A cohort of 474 patients with AD at early stages was followed 
semiannually for up to 13.1 years (mean 3.6 years) in five centers in Europe and 
the United States. MOSIs were rated using a standardized portion of the Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Overall, 3,030 visits/assessments of MOSIs 
(average 6.4/patient) were performed. Prevalence and incidence rates were 
calculated, and cumulative risk graphs were plotted for individual 
non-drug-induced MOSI domains. Rates of change over time taking into account 
potential covariates were also estimated. With use of each MOSI domain as 
outcome in Cox models, predictors of MOSI incidence were identified.
RESULTS: At least one MOSI was detected in 13% of patients at first examination 
and in 36% for the last evaluation. Total MOSI score increased at an annual rate 
of 3% of total possible score. Rates of annual change for speech/facial 
expression (4%), rigidity (2.45%), posture/gait (3.9%), and bradykinesia (3.75%) 
were of similar magnitude, and their occurrence increased from first (3 to 6%) 
to last (22 to 29%) evaluation. Tremor was less frequent throughout the course 
of the disease (4% at first and 7% at last evaluation) and worsened less (0.75% 
increase/year).
CONCLUSIONS: Most motor signs occur frequently and progress rapidly in Alzheimer 
disease. Tremor is an exception in that it occurs less frequently and advances 
at slower rates.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000138440.39918.0c
PMCID: PMC3028531
PMID: 15452286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1165. Neurology. 2004 Sep 28;63(6):996-1001. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000138432.16676.4b.

Diabetes mellitus and progression of rigidity and gait disturbance in older 
persons.

Arvanitakis Z(1), Wilson RS, Schneider JA, Bienias JL, Evans DA, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, 600 S. 
Paulina, Suite 1020E, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

BACKGROUND: Parkinsonian-like signs, including rigidity, gait disturbance, and 
bradykinesia, are common and progressive in old age and are associated with 
morbidity and mortality. Few risk factors for these signs have been identified. 
Diabetes mellitus, also a common chronic condition in old age and known to be 
associated with physical and neurologic disability, may be associated with 
parkinsonian-like signs.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the relation of diabetes to four parkinsonian-like signs.
METHODS: Participants were 822 older Catholic clergymen and women who were 
without clinically diagnosed Parkinson disease or dementia at baseline. For up 
to 9 years, they had uniform annual evaluations, which included a modified 
version of the motor portion of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, 
from which previously established measures of four specific parkinsonian-like 
signs were derived. Participants were evaluated for the presence of diabetes, 
based on direct medication inspection and history.
RESULTS: Diabetes was present in 128 (15.6%) participants. In random effects 
models controlling for age, sex, and education, diabetes was associated with 
worsening rigidity (p < 0.01) and gait (p < 0.05), over an average of 5.6 years 
of follow-up, but not with change in bradykinesia or tremor. The presence of 
stroke did not substantially affect the association of diabetes with rigidity 
but reduced the association of diabetes with gait to a trend (p = 0.08).
CONCLUSION: Diabetes may be a previously unrecognized risk factor for 
progression of parkinsonian-like signs in older persons.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000138432.16676.4b
PMID: 15452289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1166. Brain. 2004 Nov;127(Pt 11):2441-51. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh265. Epub 2004 Sep 30.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin-only-immunoreactive neuronal 
changes: broadening the clinical picture to include progressive supranuclear 
palsy.

Paviour DC(1), Lees AJ, Josephs KA, Ozawa T, Ganguly M, Strand C, Godbolt A, 
Howard RS, Revesz T, Holton JL.

Author information:
(1)The Sara Koe PSP Research Centre, Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

The frontotemporal lobar degenerations (FTLDs) are a group of disorders in which 
the clinical picture is not necessarily predictive of the underlying 
neuropathology. The FTLD with ubiquitin-only-immunoreactive neuronal changes 
(FTLD-U) subtype is pathologically characterized by ubiquitin-positive, tau and 
alpha-synuclein-negative neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions in the frontotemporal 
cortex and hippocampal dentate fascia. When similar pathological changes are 
accompanied by histological features of motor neuron disease (MND), the term 
FTLD-MND is used. The latter pathological changes may be found in patients with 
or without clinical evidence of MND. We retrospectively reviewed the clinical 
details of three patients with a rapidly progressive, levodopa-unresponsive 
bradykinetic-rigid syndrome and frontal cognitive impairment. A diagnosis of 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) had been considered in all three cases at 
initial presentation. Two of the cases fulfilled clinical diagnostic criteria 
for PSP, which was the final clinical diagnosis during life. Pathological 
analysis showed typical histological appearances of FTLD-MND in two cases and of 
FTLD-U in one case. Semi-quantitative analysis of pathological load seemed to 
correlate with the clinical phenotype. FTLD-U or FTLD-MND should be considered 
in the differential diagnosis of progressive frontal dementia with an akinetic 
rigid syndrome and supranuclear gaze palsy or Steele-Richardson-Olszewski 
disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh265
PMID: 15459024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1167. Nihon Rinsho. 2004 Sep;62(9):1675-8.

[Behavioral impairments in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Kashihara K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Okayama Kyokuto Hospital.

Behavioral impairments in parkinsonian patients include agitation, 
hypersexuality, stereotypic movement, pathological gambling, abuse of 
antiparkinsonian drugs, REM sleep behavioral disorder, and restless legs 
syndrome. Dementia, psychoses, and emotional disorders, such as depression and 
anxiety/panic disorder, also impair behavior. Symptoms may be produced by 
dysfunction of the central nervous system, medication, and/or the psychosocial 
problems associated with Parkinson's disease. Treatment therefore should be 
based on the cause of the symptoms seen. In some cases, the reduction or change 
of antiparkinsonian drugs, or both, may be effective. Treatment of the motor 
symptoms of Parkinson's disease, including motor fluctuations, may reduce the 
risk of panic attacks being evoked in the 'off' period. Use of antidepressants, 
sedatives, and neuroleptics may often be effective. Physicians should identify 
the causes of the symptoms of behavioral impairment and select appropriate 
treatments.

PMID: 15462383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1168. Nihon Rinsho. 2004 Sep;62(9):1701-8.

[Treatment for patients with early Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Kikuchi S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine.

Ad hoc committee of Japanese Neurological Society made a guideline for the 
treatment of Parkinson's disease in 2002. Based on the chapter of treatment for 
early Parkinson's disease, starting drugs were discussed in this article. Three 
points should be considered in initiating the drug treatment, that is, 
neuroprotection, motor complications, and side effects. In order to demonstrate 
neuroprotection of dopamine agonists by using neuroimaging techniques, CALM-PD 
CIT study (pramipexole) and REAL-PET study (ropinirole) were done. There are, 
however, many controversies concerning neuroprotection and no definite 
conclusion was drawn. On the contrary, the inhibitory effects of dopamine 
agonists on the appearance of motor complications were clearly elucidated by 
several large-scale studies. For the present, although the side effects were 
reported more frequently in those treated by dopamine agonists than by levodopa, 
starting the treatment by dopamine agonists were recommended except in patients 
with dementia and in elderly patients, for whom levodopa should be used first.

PMID: 15462388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1169. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2004 Oct;10(7):439-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2004.04.007.

Diabetes mellitus among parkinsonian patients treated chronically with 
clozapine.

Fernandez HH(1), Friedman JH, Lansang MC, Factor SA, Molho ES, Coskun DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA. 
fernandez@neurology.ufl.edu

Clozapine is the gold standard treatment for Parkinson's disease (PD) psychosis 
based on double blinded, placebo controlled trials, and has also been shown to 
alleviate tremor and dyskinesia. There is accumulating data suggesting that 
clozapine may be associated with increased frequency of diabetes mellitus (DM) 
compared to conventional neuroleptic drugs in treating schizophrenia. Forty-four 
predominantly geriatric parkinsonian subjects on clozapine for psychosis, tremor 
or dyskinesia, on an average dose of 50.6 mg/d for a mean duration of 41 months 
were reviewed. The prevalence of DM in this cohort was 18.1% (8/44). This rate 
was similar to that reported in the aged-matched general population (prevalence 
= 19.3% for ages > or = 60 years). In this small study, parkinsonian patients on 
long-term, low dose clozapine were not at increased risk for developing DM. 
Larger controlled prospective studies are needed to confirm this.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2004.04.007
PMID: 15465403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1170. Eur J Neurol. 2004 Oct;11(10):663-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2004.00865.x.

New V272A presenilin 1 mutation with very early onset subcortical dementia and 
parkinsonism.

Jimenez-Escrig A(1), Rabano A, Guerrero C, Simon J, Barquero MS, G√ºell I, 
Ginestal RC, Montero T, Orensanz L.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Universidad de Alcala, Madrid, Spain. 
adriano.jimenez@hrc.es

In this report, we present the clinical and pathological details of a kindred of 
four individuals with a novel missense mutation (V272A) of the presenilin 1 gene 
(PSEN1) that experienced a subcortical dementia. The age of onset of symptoms 
ranged 26-36-year old, with an age at death of 36-46 years. Initial symptom was 
a marked mood disorder, with prominent parkinsonism in one case. The 
neuropsychological study, as well as the neuroimaging and PET in the proband 
were concordant with a subcortical dementia. The cerebral pathology showed in 
this patient, aside from the classical lesions of Alzheimer disease, Lewy bodies 
in cortex and substantia nigra, and widespread subcortical neuritic lesions. 
This clinical pattern and pathology expands the clinical spectrum of familial 
Alzheimer's disease and compel to include mutations of PSEN1 gene in the genetic 
study of subcortical dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2004.00865.x
PMID: 15469450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1171. Arch Neurol. 2004 Oct;61(10):1579-84. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.10.1579.

Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 is a determinant for Alzheimer-type pathologic 
features in tauopathies, synucleinopathies, and frontotemporal degeneration.

Josephs KA(1), Tsuboi Y, Cookson N, Watt H, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
josephs.keith@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVES: To determine if apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 influences the frequency 
of Alzheimer-type pathologic features in tauopathies, synucleinopathies, and 
frontotemporal degeneration and to determine if the frequency of Alzheimer-type 
pathologic features in synucleinopathies is similar to the frequency of such 
features in tauopathies and frontotemporal degeneration.
METHODS: A total of 285 patients with pathologically proven neurodegenerative 
disorders, including diffuse and transitional Lewy body disease, frontotemporal 
degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and 
multiple system atrophy, with a mean age of 75.1 +/- 9.3 years, were suitable 
for genetic and pathological analysis. Disorders were grouped as tauopathies 
(progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration), 
synucleinopathies (Lewy body disease and multiple system atrophy), and 
frontotemporal degeneration. Braak neurofibrillary tangle staging and 
quantitative scores of senile plaques were used to determine the degree of 
concomitant Alzheimer-type pathologic features in each case, and apolipoprotein 
E genotype was determined from DNA isolated from frozen brain tissue. The 
relationship of apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 to Alzheimer-type pathologic features 
was determined.
RESULTS: Across all neurodegenerative disorders, apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 and 
older age independently predicted the co-occurrence of Alzheimer-type pathologic 
features (P<.001), whereas female sex had a lesser effect (P = .03). When 
divided into the 3 subgroups (tauopathies, synucleinopathies, and frontotemporal 
degeneration), apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 had a similar effect, whereas older 
age and female sex were less predictive. There was a significant difference 
between the frequency of Alzheimer-type pathologic features in synucleinopathies 
and the frequency of such features in tauopathies and frontotemporal 
degeneration (P<.001 for both). The frequency of apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 
allele was not significantly different among the 3 groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4, independent of older age and sex, 
contributes to the co-occurrence of Alzheimer-type pathologic features in 
tauopathies, synucleinopathies, and frontotemporal degeneration, but this does 
not explain why Alzheimer-type pathologic features are significantly more likely 
to coexist with synucleinopathies than with either tauopathies or frontotemporal 
degeneration.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.10.1579
PMID: 15477512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1172. Neurology. 2004 Oct 12;63(7):1240-4. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000140706.52798.be.

Incidence of parkinsonism and Parkinson disease in a general population: the 
Rotterdam Study.

de Lau LM(1), Giesbergen PC, de Rijk MC, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the incidence of parkinsonism and Parkinson disease 
(PD) in the general population using in-person screening along with clinical 
data.
METHODS: In the Rotterdam study, a prospective population-based cohort study of 
people aged > or =55 years, the authors assessed age- and sex-specific incidence 
rates of parkinsonism and PD among 6,839 participants who were free of 
parkinsonism at baseline. Case finding involved in-person screening at baseline 
and two follow-up visits, and additional information was obtained through 
continuous monitoring of the cohort by computer linkage to general 
practitioners' and pharmacy records.
RESULTS: After a mean follow-up period of 5.8 years, 132 subjects with incident 
parkinsonism were identified, of whom 67 (51%) had PD. The incidence of 
parkinsonism and PD increased with age, with incidence rates for PD increasing 
from 0.3 per 1000 person-years in subjects aged 55 to 65 years, to 4.4 per 1000 
person-years for those aged > or =85 years. The overall age-adjusted incidence 
rate of any parkinsonism was not different in men and women, but men seem to 
have a higher risk for PD (male-to-female ratio, 1.54; 95% CI, 0.95 to 2.51).
CONCLUSION: Incidence rates for parkinsonism and Parkinson disease were higher 
than those reported by most previous studies, possibly because of the authors' 
intensive case-finding methods involving in-person screening.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000140706.52798.be
PMID: 15477545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1173. Am J Med. 2004 Sep 6;117 Suppl 5A:44S-48S. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2004.07.017.

Management of acid-related disorders in patients with dysphagia.

Howden CW(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Northwestern University, Feinberg School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Dysphagia affects a large and growing number of individuals in the United 
States, particularly the elderly and those who are neurologically impaired. 
Swallowing difficulties may be due to age-related changes in oropharyngeal and 
esophageal functioning as well as central nervous system diseases such as 
stroke, Parkinson disease, and dementia. Among institutionalized individuals, 
dysphagia is associated with increased morbidity and mortality. An appreciation 
of the physiology of swallowing and the pathophysiology of dysphagia is 
necessary for proper patient management. Careful history, physical examination, 
and evaluation of radiologic and endoscopic studies should differentiate 
oropharyngeal and esophageal etiologies of dysphagia and distinguish mechanical 
(anatomic) disorders from functional (motor) disorders. A significant percentage 
of patients with dysphagia have concomitant acid-related disorders that are 
managed best with proton pump inhibitor (PPI) therapy. Three of the currently 
available PPIs are manufactured as capsules containing enteric-coated granules 
that may be mixed with soft foods or fruit juices before oral administration to 
those with swallowing difficulties. In addition, omeprazole and lansoprazole may 
be administered via gastrostomy or nasogastric feeding tubes as suspensions in 
sodium bicarbonate. Novel dosage formulations of lansoprazole that may be 
appropriate for patients with dysphagia include the commercially manufactured 
lansoprazole strawberry-flavored enteric-coated granules for suspension and 
lansoprazole orally disintegrating tablets.

DOI: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2004.07.017
PMID: 15478852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1174. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2004 Oct;111(10-11):1303-15. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-004-0168-1. Epub 2004 Jun 30.

Cognitive dysfunction and dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Bosboom JL(1), Stoffers D, Wolters ECh.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Research Institute Neurosciences Vrije Universiteit, 
VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a slowly progressive neurodegenerative disorder 
mainly characterized by degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia 
nigra and the ventral tegmental area, in combination with a varying loss of 
central noradrenergic (locus coeruleus), cholinergic (nucleus basalis of 
Meynert) and serotonergic (dorsal raphe nuclei) integrity, leading to a 
multitude of motor and non-motor behavioral disturbances. Apart from the 
clinical motor hallmarks, in the early stages of disease, subtle cognitive 
dysfunction might be seen comprising mainly executive dysfunction, with 
secondary visuospatial and mnemonic disturbances. In about 20-40% of patients, 
these problems may eventually proceed to dementia, which constitutes an 
important risk factor for caregiver distress, decreased quality of life and 
nursing home placement. Dementia in PD is typically characterized by a 
progressive dysexecutive syndrome with attentional deficits and fluctuating 
cognition, often accompanied by psychotic symptoms. It is thought to be the 
result of a combination of both subcortical and cortical changes. PD-related 
dopaminergic deficiency in the nucleus caudatus and mesocortical areas (due to 
degeneration of projections from the substantia nigra and ventral tegmental 
area) and cholinergic deficiency in the cortex (due to degeneration of ascending 
projections from the nucleus basalis of Meynert), combined with additional 
Alzheimer-pathology and cortical Lewy bodies, may greatly contribute to 
dementia. Current treatment of dementia in PD is based on compensation of the 
profound cholinergic deficiency. Recent studies with the cholinesterase 
inhibitors galantamine, donepezil and rivastigmine show promising results in 
improving cognition and ameliorating psychotic symptoms, which must further be 
confirmed in randomized controlled trials.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-004-0168-1
PMID: 15480840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1175. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2004 Oct;111(10-11):1447-53. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-004-0209-9.

Antiparkinsonian medication is not a risk factor for the development of 
hallucinations in Parkinson's disease.

Merims D(1), Shabtai H, Korczyn AD, Peretz C, Weizman N, Giladi N.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical 
Center, Sackler School of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. 
merimsd@tasmc.health.gov.il

BACKGROUND: It was commonly assumed that psychotic phenomena in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) are mainly drug related. Accumulating evidence suggests the 
existence of other risk factors for psychosis in PD. Aims. To evaluate the 
contribution of the drug profile of patients with PD to emergence of 
hallucinations.
METHODS: We compared patients with and without hallucinations, using Cox 
proportional hazards model, concerning drug profile at the time of 
hallucinations emergence.
RESULTS: Of 422 consecutive patients, 113 had dementia, while 90 patients 
experienced hallucinations (46 had both dementia and hallucinations). The mean 
levodopa dose for the group of patients with hallucinations was 650 +/- 279 
mg/day at the time of hallucinations onset, which was not significantly 
different from the levodopa dose at last visit for the group without 
hallucinations (621 +/- 326 mg/day). Supplementary treatment with amantadine, 
selegiline, dopamine agonists, entacapone and anticholinergics did not increase 
the risk for the development of hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: We did not confirm drug treatment as a risk factor for 
hallucinations in PD. Our study suggests the existence of "endogenic" factors as 
substantial contributors in the genesis of PD hallucinations. The clinical 
implications may be earlier administration of antipsychotic treatment and not as 
traditionally accepted, dose reduction of antiparkinsonian drugs.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-004-0209-9
PMID: 15480845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1176. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Nov 11;370(2-3):151-4. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.08.016.

Chemokines (RANTES and MCP-1) and chemokine-receptors (CCR2 and CCR5) gene 
polymorphisms in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Huerta C(1), Alvarez V, Mata IF, Coto E, Ribacoba R, Mart√≠nez C, Bl√°zquez M, 
Guisasola LM, Salvador C, Lahoz CH, Pe√±a J.

Author information:
(1)Gen√©tica Molecular-IRSIN/FRIAT, Hospital Central Asturias, Oviedo 33006, 
Spain.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a complex disorder characterized by the progressive 
degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in the midbrain. Late-onset Alzheimer's 
disease (LOAD) is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly, affecting 
about 5% of the population older than 65 years. Several works have demonstrated 
the involvement of inflammation in the pathogenesis of both, PD and LOAD. 
Genetic susceptibility to develop PD and LOAD has also been widely recognised. 
Thus, functional polymorphisms at the genes encoding inflammatory proteins could 
influence the overall risk of developing these neurodegenerative disorders. We 
examined whether DNA-polymorphisms at the genes encoding chemokines MCP-1 (-2518 
A/G) and RANTES (-403 A/G), and chemokine receptors 5 (CCR5, Delta32) and 2 
(CCR2,V64I), were associated with the risk and/or the clinical outcome of LOAD 
and PD. A total of 200 PD, 326 LOAD, and 370 healthy controls were genotyped for 
the four polymorphisms, and genotype frequencies statistically compared. We did 
not find significant differences in the frequencies of the different genotypes 
between both groups of patients and controls. We conclude that the four DNA 
polymorphisms, which have been associated with several immuno-modulated 
diseases, did not contribute to the risk of PD or LOAD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.08.016
PMID: 15488313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1177. Neuroimage. 2004 Oct;23(2):663-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.013.

Voxel-based morphometry detects patterns of atrophy that help differentiate 
progressive supranuclear palsy and Parkinson's disease.

Price S(1), Paviour D, Scahill R, Stevens J, Rossor M, Lees A, Fox N.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Center (UCL), Institute of Neurology, London, UK.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are 
neurodegenerative diseases with distinctive pathological appearances. Early 
clinical diagnosis can be difficult. MRI may help differentiate PSP from PD, but 
the differences are often only obvious with advanced disease. It would be useful 
to have an unbiased assessment of difference to guide visual assessment of MRI 
as an aid to clinical diagnosis. Voxel-based morphometry (VBM) offers nonbiased, 
observer-independent morphometric MRI analysis. Our objectives were to assess 
structural differences between PSP, PD, and normal controls and test the 
clinical utility of the results. T1-weighted MR images in 12 patients with 
clinically diagnosed PSP, 12 with PD, and 12 age- and sex-matched controls were 
normalized to a common stereotaxic space and segmented into gray matter (GM) and 
white matter (WM) then analyzed using VBM. MRI scans were reviewed by a 
neuroradiologist blinded to the clinical diagnosis and assigned to the "non-PSP" 
or "PSP" group based on regional differences highlighted using VBM. VBM revealed 
significant group differences between PSP and PD as well as PSP and controls, 
with tissue reduction demonstrated in the region of the cerebral peduncles and 
midbrain. With these regional differences as a guide, neuroradiological 
diagnosis achieved a sensitivity of 83% and a specificity of 79%. VBM did not 
detect dramatic changes in frontal regions despite significant frontal cognitive 
decline in the PSP group. Pathology in the basal ganglia rather than tissue loss 
in the frontal lobes could be responsible for this. This information may help in 
the differentiation of PSP in clinical practice.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroimage.2004.06.013
PMID: 15488416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1178. Adv Gerontol. 2004;13:94-101.

[Dementia and psychotic disorders in parkinsonism: common origin and new 
perspectives in therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Litvinenko IV.

In this article, we reviewed and analysed the literature of mechanism of 
cognitive and psychotic disorders in schizophrenia, dementia and Parkinson's 
disease. Despite of opposite neurotransmitter disturbances in schizophrenia and 
Parkinson's disease, there is common origin in development of psychotic 
symptoms. The main risk factors in producing psychotic symptoms are age, 
cognitive impairment and general disease severity. The key neurotransmitter 
disturbance of dementia is hypofunction of glutamatergic and cholinergic 
transmitter systems. An hypofunction of the NMDA glutamate receptors can produce 
excessively stimulation corticolimbic dopaminergic and serotonergic neurons and 
appearance of psychosis. We suggest glutamate NMDA receptors can modulate 
activity of dopaminergic, serotonergic and cholinergic transmitter systems. 
Successful pharmacological approaches in therapy of cognitive and psychotic 
disorders in Parkinson's disease may be normalization conditions of 
glutamatergic and cholinergic transmitter systems.

PMID: 15490731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1179. J Pathol. 2004 Nov;204(4):438-49. doi: 10.1002/path.1650.

The cytoskeleton in neurodegenerative diseases.

Cairns NJ(1), Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, and Institute on Aging, University of Pennsylvania School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-4283, USA. cairns@mail.med.upenn.edu

Abundant abnormal aggregates of cytoskeletal proteins are neuropathological 
signatures of many neurodegenerative diseases that are broadly classified by 
filamentous aggregates of neuronal intermediate filament (IF) proteins, or by 
inclusions containing the microtubule-associated protein (MAP) tau. The 
discovery of mutations in neuronal IF and tau genes firmly establishes the 
importance of neuronal IF proteins and tau in the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Multiple IF gene mutations are pathogenic for 
Charcot-Marie-Tooth (CMT) disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)--in 
addition to those in the copper/zinc superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene. Tau 
gene mutations are pathogenic for frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), and tau polymorphisms are genetic risk 
factors for sporadic progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD). Thus, IF and tau abnormalities are linked directly to the 
aetiology and pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. In vitro and 
transgenic animal models are being used to demonstrate that different mutations 
impair protein function, promote tau fibrilization, or perturb tau gene 
splicing, leading to aberrant and distinct tau aggregates. For recognition of 
these disorders at neuropathological examination, immunohistochemistry is 
needed, and this may be combined with biochemistry and molecular genetics to 
properly determine the nosology of a particular case. As reviewed here, the 
identification of molecular genetic defects and biochemical alterations in 
cytoskeletal proteins of human neurodegenerative diseases has facilitated 
experimental studies and will promote the development of assays of molecules 
which inhibit abnormal neuronal IF and tau protein inclusions.

Copyright (c) 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland.

DOI: 10.1002/path.1650
PMCID: PMC3011821
PMID: 15495240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1180. Ulus Travma Acil Cerrahi Derg. 2004 Oct;10(4):250-2.

An evaluation of the underlying causes of fall-induced hip fractures in elderly 
persons.

Akta≈ü S(1), Celik Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopedics and Traumatology, Acibadem Hospital, Istanbul, 
Turkey. saktas@tnn.net

BACKGROUND: Falls are the major cause of hip fractures in elderly patients. The 
aim of this prospective study was to investigate the underlying causes of 
fall-induced hip fractures in the elderly.
METHODS: The study included 32 patients (18 males, 14 females; mean age 78 
years; range 57 to 95 years) who had proximal femoral fractures following an 
unexpected and sudden fall from about a meter height at a moment of lying, 
sitting, or standing position. Underlying causes of falls were sought, including 
previous falls, stroke, polyneuropathy, motion disorders, dementia, vision 
problems, fainting, vestibular pathologies, and cardiac diseases.
RESULTS: Eight patients (25%) had a history of previous falls and 12 patients 
(37.5%) had a history of stroke. Polyneuropathy, Parkinson's Disease, and 
dementia were diagnosed in eight (25%), three (9.4%), and five (15.6%) patients, 
respectively. Twenty-one patients (65.6%) had neurologic diseases, 11 patients 
(34.4%) had cataract or other vision problems, eight patients (25%) had 
osteoarthritis and rheumatoid arthritis, 10 patients (31.3%) had vestibular 
pathologies, and 17 patients (53.1%) had cardiac diseases such as heart failure, 
orthostatic hypotension, ischemic heart disease, and arrhythmia.
CONCLUSION: In order to prevent recurrent falls, risk factors associated with 
falls should be determined and preventive treatment and measures should be put 
into practice in elderly patients who have fall-induced injuries.

PMID: 15497064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1181. Exp Gerontol. 2004 Oct;39(10):1555-61. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2004.07.007.

Increased plasma levels of soluble CD40, together with the decrease of TGF beta 
1, as possible differential markers of Alzheimer disease.

Mocali A(1), Cedrola S, Della Malva N, Bontempelli M, Mitidieri VA, Bavazzano A, 
Comolli R, Paoletti F, La Porta CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pathology and Oncology, University of Florence, 
Florence, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive neurodegenerative illness and the most 
frequent cause of dementia in the elderly. The identification of activated 
microglia within neuritic plaques, coupled with the presence of numerous 
inflammatory proteins, suggests that inflammation is an integral part of the 
pathogenetic process in AD. In the present paper we have investigated the levels 
of circulating inflammatory mediators as potential AD biomarkers concentrating 
essentially on (a) soluble CD40 (sCD40), a member of the tumor necrosis factor 
receptor superfamily lacking the membrane-associated endodomain by alternative 
splicing, and (b) transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1, a cytokine deeply 
involved in AD and playing a protective role on CNS. Decrease of TGF-beta1 in AD 
patients could enhance the effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines produced by 
activated microglia as well as the expression of factors, such as the CD40/CD40 
ligand complex, by microglia and astrocytes. Total venous blood samples were 
obtained from 33 patients with clinical diagnosis of possible late-onset AD, 40 
healthy age-matched and 11 healthy young individuals. A significant increase of 
sCD40 levels plasma of AD patients versus healthy controls was measured, 
concomitantly with a decrease in TGF-beta1 concentration. These variations, 
however, showed no correlation with the expression of ApoE epsilon 4 allele, 
which was determined in order to assess the different frequency of this risk 
factor between AD and control groups. Since no comparable modifications were 
detected in patients affected by Parkinson's disease or non-AD-based dementia, 
we propose that sCD40 and TGF-beta1 plasma levels might represent possible 
differential biomarkers of AD, and be useful pre-mortem to support the clinical 
diagnosis of late-onset AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.exger.2004.07.007
PMID: 15501026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1182. Mov Disord. 2005 Jan;20(1):1-10. doi: 10.1002/mds.20316.

Genetic testing in Parkinson's disease.

McInerney-Leo A(1), Hadley DW, Gwinn-Hardy K, Hardy J.

Author information:
(1)Social and Behavioral Research Branch, National Human Genome Research 
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20952, USA. 
amcinern@mail.nih.gov

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common neurodegenerative disorder of adulthood 
characterized clinically by rigidity, bradykinesia, resting tremor, and postural 
instability. The annual incidence of PD ranges between 16 and 19 individuals per 
100,000 (Twelves et al., Mov Disord 2003;18:19-31). Historically, PD has been 
commonly viewed as an idiopathic or environmentally triggered condition. 
However, as is true with most common conditions, there have been several 
families reported with PD who demonstrate a classic Mendelian pattern of 
inheritance. To date, nine genetic loci have been reported and four pathogenic 
genes have been identified: alpha-synuclein, parkin, DJ1, and PINK1. Families 
with alterations in these genes or linked sites demonstrate either recessive or 
dominant inheritance patterns and may have typical and/or atypical symptoms, 
with an age of onset extending from the second to the sixth decade. Commercial 
tests for parkin and alpha-synuclein mutations are now available. We predict 
that physicians, particularly neurologists, increasingly will be approached for 
information and referrals regarding genetic testing. To assist patients and 
their families, physicians will not only need to know when such testing is 
likely to yield a meaningful result but also be aware of the possible social and 
emotional consequences of testing. The following is a review of what is 
currently known about the genetics of PD within this context. We discuss what is 
known about genetic testing for Huntington's disease, a well-described model for 
genetic testing in a neurodegenerative disorder. We explore the utility, 
appropriateness, and possible implications of genetic testing for diagnostic and 
presymptomatic purposes.

Published 2004 John Wiley & Sons.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20316
PMID: 15503301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1183. Neurology. 2004 Oct 26;63(8 Suppl 3):S35-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.63.8_suppl_3.s35.

Treatment of nocturnal disturbances and excessive daytime sleepiness in 
Parkinson's disease.

Barone P(1), Amboni M, Vitale C, Bonavita V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Napoli Federico II, Via 
Pansini 5, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Nocturnal disturbances are common in Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, with 
almost 70% of these patients reporting nocturnal disturbances. The etiology of 
sleep disturbances in patients with PD is still controversial. They might be 
dependent on dopaminergic drugs, on disease progression, or on a combination of 
these two factors. Nocturnal disturbances can be categorized in four groups: 1) 
PD-related motor symptoms, including nocturnal akinesia, early-morning dystonia, 
painful cramps, tremor, and difficulty turning in bed; 2) treatment-related 
nocturnal disturbances; 3) psychiatric symptoms, including hallucinations, vivid 
dreams, depression, dementia, insomnia, psychosis, and panic attacks; 4) other 
sleep disorders, including insomnia, REM behavioral disorder (RBD), restless 
legs syndrome (RLS), periodic leg movements (PLMS), and excessive daytime 
sleepiness (EDS). Specific treatment options are supplied for every group. A 
global evaluation of nocturnal disturbances would provide clinicians with a 
valuable tool to establish an optimal regimen that could positively influence 
all nocturnal disturbance categories and thus improve PD management on. However, 
it is important to consider that management of some nocturnal disturbances in a 
group may worsen nocturnal symptoms of another group or may increase EDS. 
PD-related symptoms can be treated with long-acting DA agonists to obtain 
continuous DA receptor stimulation during the night. Both treatment-related 
nocturnal disturbances and psychiatric symptoms may be related to drug 
treatment, and therefore, in both cases, drug reduction or discontinuance should 
be considered. Some sleep disorders, such as RLS and PLMS, may be controlled by 
DA agents, and others, such as insomnia and EDS, may be improved by reducing 
dopaminergic stimulation.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.63.8_suppl_3.s35
PMID: 15505142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1184. Ann Nucl Med. 2004 Sep;18(6):453-61. doi: 10.1007/BF02984560.

Significance of 123I-MIBG scintigraphy as a pathophysiological indicator in the 
assessment of Parkinson's disease and related disorders: it can be a specific 
marker for Lewy body disease.

Taki J(1), Yoshita M, Yamada M, Tonami N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biotracer Medicine, Kanazawa University Graduate School of 
Medical Sciences, Japan. taki@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

Recently, reliable and clear evidence for the usefulness of 123I-MIBG 
scintigraphy in the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD) has been accumulated 
and it has become increasingly popular as one of the most accurate means of 
diagnosing the disease. PD, one of the most common neurodegenerative disorders, 
is characterized by resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia or akinesia, and 
postural instability. The disease is characterized pathologically by distinctive 
neuronal inclusions called Lewy bodies in many surviving cells of dopaminergic 
neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta and other specific brain regions. 
Furthermore Lewy body type degeneration in the cardiac plexus has been observed 
in PD. In PD, cardiac MIBG uptake is reduced markedly even in the early disease 
stages; therefore, MIBG imaging can be used as an indicator of the presence of 
PD rather than disease severity. Other parkinsonian syndromes such as multiple 
system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degeneration 
demonstrate normal cardiac MIBG uptake or only mild reduction of MIBG uptake, 
indicating that MIBG imaging is a powerful method to differentiate PD from other 
parkinsonian syndromes. Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) also shows severe 
reduction of MIBG uptake, whereas Alzheimer's disease (AD) demonstrates normal 
MIBG uptake, permitting differentiation of DLB from AD using MIBG scintigraphy. 
In pure autonomic failure, which shares similar pathological findings with PD 
and is thought to be associated with diffuse loss of sympathetic terminal 
innervation, cardiac MIBG uptake also decreases markedly. Considering all the 
data together, marked reduction of cardiac MIBG uptake seems to be a specific 
marker of Lewy body disease and thus extremely useful in the differentiation 
from other diseases with similar symptoms without Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02984560
PMID: 15515743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1185. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2004 Dec;19(12):1173-80. doi: 10.1002/gps.1236.

Selective memory impairment on an adapted Mini-Mental State Examination 
increases risk of future dementia.

Olazar√°n J(1), Trincado R, Bermejo F, Benito-Le√≥n J, D√≠az J, Vega S.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Clinic, CEP Hermanos Sangro, Madrid, Spain. javier@mariawolff.es

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether selective memory impairment (SMI) on an adapted 
Mini-Mental State Examination (aMMSE) test increases risk of future dementia in 
a population-based survey of central Spain.
BACKGROUND: SMI is a strong predictor of dementia in the elderly. However, most 
approaches have used extensive memory batteries, which are not always suitable 
for screening purposes.
METHODS: The basal cohort consisted of 2982 poorly educated individuals aged 65 
or over. Dementia, stroke and parkinsonism cases were previously excluded. At 
entry, participants received a structured interview including an aMMSE. Two 
groups were created according to basal cognitive performance, namely: (1) aMMSE 
> 23 and no word remembered on the aMMSE delayed-recall task (SMI group); and 
(2) aMMSE > 23 and at least one word remembered on the delayed-recall task 
(control group). In a three-year follow-up wave, conversion rate to dementia was 
calculated and logistic regression was performed.
RESULTS: Of a total of 2507 subjects who completed the two evaluations, 280 
qualified for SMI at entry. In the SMI group, 25 subjects (8.9%) developed 
dementia vs 26 subjects (1.2%) in the control group. Taking the two groups 
together, and once demographic and medical variables had been controlled, a low 
delayed-recall score increased dementia conversion rate (OR 0.47, 95% CI 
0.34-0.64). Alzheimer's disease was the main cause of dementia (79.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: Memory impairment is a risk factor for future dementia in the 
neurologically-healthy elderly. This can be observed in a subgroup of subjects 
with SMI defined on the aMMSE delayed-recall subscore. Some other measurements 
should be added to the SMI construct to improve its predictive validity.

Copyright (c) 2004 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1236
PMID: 15526309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1186. Cell Res. 2004 Oct;14(5):347-58. doi: 10.1038/sj.cr.7290235.

Biomarkers of neurodegenerative disorders: how good are they?

Rachakonda V(1), Pan TH, LE WD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Biomarkers are very important indicators of normal and abnormal biological 
processes. Specific changes in pathologies, biochemistries and genetics can give 
us comprehensive information regarding the nature of any particular disease. A 
good biomarker should be precise and reliable, distinguishable between normal 
and interested disease, and differential between different diseases. It is 
believed that biomarkers have great potential in predicting chances for 
diseases, aiding in early diagnosis, and setting standards for the development 
of new remedies to treat diseases. New technologies have enabled scientists to 
identify biomarkers of several different neurodegenerative diseases. The 
followings, for instance, are only a few of the many new biomarkers that have 
been recently identified: the phosphorylated tau protein and aggregated 
Beta-amyloid peptide for Alzheimer's disease (AD), Alpha-synuclein contained 
Lewy bodies and altered dopamine transporter (DAT) imaging for Parkinson's 
disease (PD), SOD mutations for familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
and CAG repeats resulted from Huntington's gene mutations in Huntington's 
disease (HD). This article will focus on the most-recent findings of biomarkers 
belonging to the four mentioned neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.cr.7290235
PMID: 15538967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1187. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Dec 6;372(3):196-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.09.040.

A deletion in DJ-1 and the risk of dementia--a population-based survey.

Arias V√°squez A(1), Sleegers K, Dekker MC, van Gool WA, van Swieten JC, 
Aulchenko YS, Oostra BA, van Duijn CM.

Author information:
(1)Genetic-Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Erasmus MC, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The Netherlands. 
a.ariasvasquez@erasmusmc.nl

The DJ-1 gene is associated with autosomal recessive early-onset Parkinsonism, 
most likely through its role in defense against oxidative stress. Oxidative 
stress is not only involved in Parkinson's disease, but also in other 
neurodegenerative disorders, such as dementia. We assessed the presence of a 14 
kb DJ-1 deletion in 191 patients with dementia, ascertained from the genetically 
isolated population where the first kindred with DJ-1 related Parkinsonism was 
originally identified. The control group consisted of 129 non-demented subjects. 
We found the deletion in two patients and one control. There was no evidence for 
an increased risk of dementia in carriers. All subjects were heterozygous for 
the deletion and related to a common ancestor within eight generations. Our 
results suggest it is unlikely that haploinsufficiency in the DJ-1 gene imparts 
an increased risk for dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.09.040
PMID: 15542239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1188. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004 Dec;75(12):1692-6. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2003.022756.

Apolipoprotein E genotypes do not influence the age of onset in Huntington's 
disease.

Saft C(1), Andrich JE, Brune N, Gencik M, Kraus PH, Przuntek H, Epplen JT.

Author information:
(1)Huntington Center NRW, Department of Neurology, St Josef Hospital, 
Ruhr-University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The epsilon4 allele of the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) gene has been 
defined as a critical factor for early onset neurodegeneration in Pick's, 
Parkinson's, and Alzheimer's disease. Unexpectedly, the epsilon4 allele appeared 
to delay the age of onset in Huntington's disease (HD) patients. Furthermore, 
sex specific effects were reported on earlier age of onset due to the ApoE 
epsilon2epsilon3 genotype in males with HD. The age of onset of HD is known to 
be negatively correlated with increasing lengths of pathogenetic CAG expansions 
in the huntingtin gene.
METHODS: In order to examine the effects of CAG block lengths, we have 
correlated ApoE genotypes with the age of onset in 145 patients symptomatic for 
HD with psychiatric and somatic symptoms (depression, psychosis, dementia, 
choreic, and other movement disorders) harbouring only modestly expanded 
huntingtin alleles (41-45 CAGs).
RESULTS: The negative correlation between age of onset and CAG block length was 
established in our HD cohort. Statistically significant effects of the epsilon4 
allele were not obvious regarding clinical characteristics including age of 
onset, nor were any sex differences for the epsilon2epsilon3 genotype observed.
CONCLUSION: The ApoE genotype does not affect the course of HD significantly.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2003.022756
PMCID: PMC1738834
PMID: 15548484 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1189. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2004 Dec;75(12):1743-5. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2003.031948.

Similar early clinical presentations in familial and non-familial frontotemporal 
dementia.

Piguet O(1), Brooks WS, Halliday GM, Schofield PR, Stanford PM, Kwok JB, 
Spillantini MG, Yancopoulou D, Nestor PJ, Broe GA, Hodges JR.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Univeristy of New South Wales, 
Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.

BACKGROUND: It is unclear whether there are early clinical features that can 
distinguish between patients with familial and non-familial frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD).
OBJECTIVE: To compare the clinical features of FTD cases who have tau gene 
mutations with those of cases with a family history of FTD but no tau gene 
mutation, and with sporadic cases with neither feature.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Comparisons of the behavioural, cognitive, and motor 
features in 32 FTD patients (five positive for tau gene mutations, nine familial 
but tau negative, and 18 tau negative sporadic) showed that age of onset and 
duration to diagnosis did not differ between the groups. Apathy was not observed 
in tau mutation positive cases, and dysexecutive signs were more frequent in 
familial tau mutation negative cases. Memory deficits and behavioural changes 
were common in all groups.
CONCLUSIONS: In comparison with other neurodegenerative conditions such as 
Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease, neither tau gene mutations nor 
strong familial associations confer earlier disease susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2003.031948
PMCID: PMC1738866
PMID: 15548495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1190. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 2004 Dec;27(4):801-25. doi: 10.1016/j.psc.2004.07.001.

The neuropsychiatry of Parkinson's disease and related disorders.

Lauterbach EC(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Adult and Geriatric Psychiatry, Mercer University School of 
Medicine, 655 First Street, Macon, GA 31201, USA. lauterbach_e@mercer.edu

Parkinson's disease is associated with classical Parkinsonian features that 
respond to dopaminergic therapy. Neuropsychiatric sequelae include dementia, 
major depression, dysthymia, anxiety disorders, sleep disorders, and sexual 
disorders. Panic attacks are particularly common. With treatment, visual 
hallucinations, paranoid delusions, mania, or delirium may evolve. Psychosis is 
a key factor in nursing home placement, and depression is the most significant 
predictor of quality of life. Clozapine may be the safest treatment for 
psychotic features, but more research is needed to establish the efficacy of 
antidepressant treatments. Dementia with Lewy bodies, the second most common 
dementia in the elderly, may present in association with systematized delusions, 
depression, or RBD. Early evidence suggests the utility of rivastigmine, 
donepezil, low-dose olanzapine, and quetiapine in treating DLB. Parkinson-plus 
syndromes generally lack a good response to dopaminergic treatment and evidence 
additional features, including dysautonomia, cerebellar and pontine features, 
eye signs, and other movement disorders. MSA is associated with dysautonomia and 
RBD. SND (MSA-P) is associated with frontal cognitive impairments, but dementia, 
psychosis, and mood disorders have not been strikingly apparent unless 
additional pathological findings are present. In SDS (MSA-A), impotence is 
almost ubiquitous; urinary incontinence is frequent; depression is occasional, 
and sleep apnea should be treated to avoid sudden death during sleep. OPCA 
neuropsychiatric correlates await further definition. Progressive supranuclear 
palsy neuropsychiatric features include apathy, subcortical dementia, 
pathological emotionality, mild depression and anxiety, and lack of appreciable 
response to donepezil. CBD usually is recognized by early frontal dementia with 
ideomotor apraxia, often in the right upper extremity, attended later by poorly 
responsive unilateral Parkinsonism, with additional signs including cortical 
reflex myoclonus, limb dystonia, alien limb, oculomotor apraxia when asked to 
look horizontally, depression, personality changes, and, occasionally, 
Kluver-Bucy syndrome. The neuropsychiatry of FTDP-17 involves apraxia, executive 
impairment, personality changes, hyperorality, and occasional psychosis. Future 
research in these Parkinsonian disorders should target the characterization of 
neuropsychiatric sequelae and their treatment.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psc.2004.07.001
PMID: 15550293 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1191. Nervenarzt. 2004 Nov;75(11):1107-11. doi: 10.1007/s00115-003-1641-z.

[Alzheimer's disease with secondary Parkinson's syndrome. Case report of a 
patient with dementia and Parkinson's syndrome after long-term occupational 
exposure to insecticides, herbicides, and pesticides].

[Article in German]

Laske C(1), Wormstall H, Einsiedler K, Buchkremer G.

Author information:
(1)Universit√§tsklinik f√ºr Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie T√ºbingen.

This case report describes long-term occupational exposure to agricultural 
insecticides, herbicides, and pesticides as possible environmental risk factors 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's syndrome in a 59-year-old man. 
Initially the patient complained about disturbances in concentration, mnestic 
deficits, and problems finding words. In the further course of the disease, he 
developed Parkinson's syndrome with predominant hypokinesia and rigor in 
addition to mild-to-moderate dementia. Low levels of beta-amyloid 1-42 were 
found in the CSF. Electroencephalography showed left frontotemporal theta waves. 
Cranial MRI revealed general brain atrophy with a maximum biparietally. In 
cerebral positron emission tomography, general hypometabolism was found with 
maxima biparietally and left frontally. The possible differential diagnosis of 
AD and Parkinson's syndrome is discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-003-1641-z
PMID: 15551110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1192. Mov Disord. 2005 Feb;20(2):190-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.20324.

Sydney Multicenter Study of Parkinson's disease: non-L-dopa-responsive problems 
dominate at 15 years.

Hely MA(1), Morris JG, Reid WG, Trafficante R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Westmead Hospital, Westmead New South Wales, 
Australia. grantfam@hinet.net.au

One-third of the 149 people recruited 15 to 18 years ago in the Sydney 
Multicenter Study of Parkinson's disease have survived. The original study 
compared low-dose levodopa with low-dose bromocriptine. We now report the 
problems experienced by people who survive 15 years from diagnosis. The 
standardized mortality ratio is significantly elevated at 1.86 and is not 
significantly different between treatment arms. Falls occur in 81% of patients, 
and 23% sustained fractures. Cognitive decline is present in 84%, and 48% 
fulfill the criteria for dementia. Hallucinations and depression are experienced 
by 50%. Choking has occurred in 50%, symptomatic postural hypotension in 35%, 
and urinary incontinence in 41%. No patient is still employed, and 40% of 
patients live in aged care facilities. Although approximately 95% have 
experienced L-dopa-induced dyskinesia/dystonia and end of dose failure of 
medication, in the majority, these symptoms are not disabling. Dyskinesia and 
dystonia were delayed by early use of bromocriptine, but end-of-dose failure 
appeared at a similar time once L-dopa was added. The rate of disease 
progression is similar in both arms of the study. We conclude that the most 
disabling long-term problems of Parkinson's disease relate to the emergence of 
symptoms that are not improved by L-dopa. Neuroprotective interventions in 
Parkinson's disease should be judged by their ability to improve 
non-L-dopa-responsive aspects of the disease, rather than just by their capacity 
to delay the introduction of L-dopa or reduce its associated side effects.

Copyright 2004 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20324
PMID: 15551331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1193. Ann Neurol. 2005 Jan;57(1):82-91. doi: 10.1002/ana.20321.

Alpha-synuclein pathology does not predict extrapyramidal symptoms or dementia.

Parkkinen L(1), Kauppinen T, Pirttil√§ T, Autere JM, Alafuzoff I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Neurology, Kuopio University, 70211 Kuopio, 
Finland.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2005 Apr;57(4):605; author reply 605-6.

Intracytoplasmic aggregation of alpha-synuclein protein as Lewy bodies in the 
brainstem neurons is diagnostic for Parkinson's disease, whereas if this process 
also occurs in the cortical neurons, it is considered pathognomonic for dementia 
with Lewy bodies. However, the link between alpha-synuclein incorporation into 
inclusions, neuronal dysfunction, and clinical symptoms needs to be clarified. 
Another important issue of the pathogenetic puzzle is to understand where 
alpha-synuclein pathology begins and how it progresses in the brain. To study 
this, we collected all cases from autopsy material (N = 904) that had 
alpha-synuclein pathology in the dorsal motor nucleus of vagus, substantia 
nigra, and/or basal forebrain nuclei. In this way, our study has a unique design 
because the selection of material is entirely based on the presence of 
alpha-synuclein pathology regardless of clinical phenotype. Retrospective 
clinical assessment then showed that only 32 (30%) of 106 
alpha-synuclein-positive cases were diagnosed with a neurodegenerative disorder. 
The distribution or load of alpha-synuclein pathology did not permit a 
dependable postmortem diagnosis of extrapyramidal symptoms or cognitive 
impairment. Some neurologically unimpaired cases had a reasonable burden of 
alpha-synuclein pathology in both brainstem and cortical areas, suggesting that 
alpha-synuclein-positive structures are not definite markers of neuronal 
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20321
PMID: 15562510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1194. Epilepsia. 2004 Dec;45(12):1613-22. doi: 10.1111/j.0013-9580.2004.17504.x.

The epidemiology of the comorbidity of epilepsy in the general population.

Gaitatzis A(1), Carroll K, Majeed A, W Sander J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurology, University College London and Neuroepidemiology Unit, 
National Hospital for Neurology and Neurosurgery, London, UK.

Comment in
    Epilepsia. 2005 Aug;46(8):1334-5; author reply 1335.

PURPOSE: To describe the epidemiology of somatic and psychiatric conditions in 
adults with epilepsy in the community and compare it to that of people without 
epilepsy.
METHODS: A cross-sectional population-based study extracting data from the UK 
General Practice Research Database for the period 1995-1998. Age- and 
sex-standardized prevalence rates were estimated for selected conditions and 
groups of conditions (categorized by ICD-9 chapters) in adults with epilepsy 
registered with primary care physicians. Results were compared with those in 
adults without epilepsy in the cohort, and prevalence ratios were calculated 
according to two broad age groups (16-64 and older than 64 years).
RESULTS: Conditions common in the general population also were common in adults 
with epilepsy. Psychiatric disorders occurred twice as often, and the risk of 
somatic disorders was increased in people with epilepsy, with the exception of 
musculoskeletal and connective tissue disorders in older adults. The prevalence 
ratio of neoplasia, excluding intracranial tumors, was not increased in 
epilepsy. The prevalence ratio of brain tumors was particularly increased in 
young adults [prevalence ratio (PR), 70.7] and of meningiomas in older adults 
(PR, 91.9). Neurodegenerative conditions, particularly dementias and Alzheimer' 
disease (PR, 6.3 and 8, respectively) and Parkinson' disease (PR, 3.2), appeared 
more frequently in people with epilepsy. Upper gastrointestinal bleed occurred 
more frequently in epilepsy (PR, 4.3), as did cardio- and cerebrovascular 
disorders, fractures, pneumonia and chronic lung diseases, and diabetes. Eczema, 
osteoarthritis, and rheumatoid arthritis did not occur more frequently in 
epilepsy.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence ratio of many common psychiatric and somatic 
conditions is increased in adults with epilepsy who consult a primary care 
physician in the U.K. These findings may have implications in the diagnosis and 
management of epilepsy and coexisting conditions, as well as in health care 
provision.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0013-9580.2004.17504.x
PMID: 15571520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1195. Front Biosci. 2005 Jan 1;10:257-67. doi: 10.2741/1525. Print 2005 Jan 1.

Estrogen and brain: synthesis, function and diseases.

Li R(1), Shen Y.

Author information:
(1)L.J. Roberts Alzheimer Disease's Research Center, Sun Health Research 
Institute, 10515 West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, USA. 
rena.li@sunhealth.org <rena.li@sunhealth.org>

This review summaries recent evidence from clinical and basic science studies on 
estrogen central nervous system. For decades, estrogen was thought of only as a 
"sex hormone" and plays a fundamental role in regulating behavioral and 
physiological events. In recent years, accumulated evidence shows that estrogen 
also plays very important roles in the brain. Recent basic science studies show 
that estrogen treatment decreases the neuronal response to various forms of 
insult through the regulation of both estrogen synthesis and estrogen receptor 
expression in the brain. Some clinical evidence also suggests that estrogen 
deprivation might be implicated as a risk factor in various neurodegenerative 
diseases. Estrogen may play a neuroprotective role through estrogen dependent 
alterations in cell survival, enhancement of synaptic transmission and 
neurogenesis. Some of the mechanisms underlying these effects are independent of 
the classical nuclear estrogen receptors and involve direct modulation of 
neurotransmitter receptor function, or anti-oxidant activities of estrogen. It 
is controversial whether estrogen is indicated in the prevention or treatment of 
various brain disorders such as Alzheimer's disease. The conflicting findings 
suggest that several variables, including age, estrogen dose and formulation, 
the length of treatment, may determine whether the potential benefits of 
estrogen treatment would outweigh the associated risks.

DOI: 10.2741/1525
PMID: 15574366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1196. Mov Disord. 2005 Mar;20(3):271-82. doi: 10.1002/mds.20362.

Challenging conventional wisdom: the etiologic role of dopamine oxidative stress 
in Parkinson's disease.

Ahlskog JE(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. 
eahlskog@mayo.edu

Oxidative stress is well documented in Parkinson's disease (PD) and has been 
attributed to dopamine oxidative metabolism. However, evidence of oxidative 
stress is found in a variety of neurodegenerative disorders, suggesting that 
more general factors are responsible or that cytodestructive processes 
secondarily generate oxyradical products. Increasing evidence points away from 
dopamine metabolism as an important contributor to PD neurodegeneration. 
Predictions from the dopamine oxidative stress hypothesis of PD reveal multiple 
inconsistencies. Although the clinical and therapeutic importance of the 
nigrostriatal dopaminergic system is undeniable, PD neuropathology is much more 
widespread.

2004 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20362
PMID: 15580550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1197. Mov Disord. 2005 Apr;20(4):410-415. doi: 10.1002/mds.20347.

Falls and injuries resulting from falls among patients with Parkinson's disease 
and other parkinsonian syndromes.

Wielinski CL(1), Erickson-Davis C(1), Wichmann R(1), Walde-Douglas M(1), 
Parashos SA(1)(2).

Author information:
(1)Struthers Parkinson's Center, Golden Valley, Minnesota, USA.
(2)The Minneapolis Clinic of Neurology, Ltd., Golden Valley, Minnesota, USA.

We sought to ascertain frequency, type, risk factors of falling, and resulting 
injuries among parkinsonian patients. A survey was mailed to all patients 
treated at our center between 1/1/2000 and 4/30/2002 (N = 1,417). Information 
was collected on falls within the past 2 years, related injuries, and use of 
health care services. A total of 1,131 responses (response rate, 79.8%) were 
received. After the exclusion of nonparkinsonian disorders, statistics for the 
remaining group (n = 1,092) and predictive statistics for those diagnosed before 
1/1/2000 (n = 1,013) were calculated. Outcomes included falls, fractures, 
injuries, surgery, and related use of health care services. Explanatory 
variables included sex, age, age at diagnosis, disease duration, atypical 
parkinsonism, and dementia. Most patients (55.9%) were men; 12.2% had atypical 
parkinsonism; 12.5% had dementia; median age was 74.7 years; median disease 
duration was 7 years; 55.9% had at least one fall in the past 2 years; 65.0% of 
them sustained an injury; 33.0% sustained a fracture; 75.5% of injuries required 
health care services; 40.6% of fractures required surgery. Older age, atypical 
parkinsonism, longer disease duration, and dementia were risk factors for 
falling; female sex and older age were predictors of fractures. Need for health 
care services after an injury was higher among older patients. Further 
prospective studies will be necessary to elucidate the specific prognostic 
outcomes of injuries due to falls among parkinsonian patients, and the impact of 
these injuries on disease progression and quality of life.

Copyright 2004 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20347
PMID: 15580552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1198. Crit Rev Neurobiol. 2004;16(1-2):141-6. doi: 
10.1615/critrevneurobiol.v16.i12.150.

Peripheral markers of glutamatergic dysfunction in neurological diseases: focus 
on ex vivo tools.

Tremolizzo L(1), Beretta S, Ferrarese C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, S Gerardo Hospital and University of Milano-Bicocca, 
Monza, Italy.

Since the proposal that excessive glutamatergic stimulation could be responsible 
for neuronal suffering and death, excitotoxicity and glutamate uptake deficits 
have been repeatedly confirmed to play a key role in the pathogenesis of 
different neurological diseases. Therefore, it is conceivable that assessing the 
glutamatergic system function directly in patients could be extremely useful for 
early diagnosis, prognostic evaluation, and optimization of the therapy. A 
possibility is offered by assessing glutamate levels in biological fluid, such 
as plasma and CSF, where increased levels of this amino acid have been reported 
in patients affected by stroke, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), and AIDS 
dementia complex. However, the metabolic role of this amino acid acts as a 
confounding factor, and the possibility of directly assessing glutamatergic 
functional parameters, such as amino acid reuptake, would probably mirror 
closely the actual excitotoxic damage operative in each patient. Here we will 
describe our findings obtained in peripheral ex vivo cells, such as platelets 
and fibroblasts, both displaying a functional glutamate reuptake system. 
Consistent with a systemic-impairment assumption, glutamate uptake was shown to 
be reduced in peripheral cells of Alzheimer's disease, Down syndrome, 
Parkinson's disease, ALS, and stroke patients. Different systemic factors might 
be responsible for this phenomenon, including genetic predisposition, oxidative 
stress, and inflammatory response, raising new, exciting questions about the 
relevance of their possible interactions for the pathogenesis of neurological 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1615/critrevneurobiol.v16.i12.150
PMID: 15581409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1199. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 18;280(7):5703-15. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M410409200. Epub 2004 
Dec 7.

p25alpha Stimulates alpha-synuclein aggregation and is co-localized with 
aggregated alpha-synuclein in alpha-synucleinopathies.

Lindersson E(1), Lundvig D, Petersen C, Madsen P, Nyengaard JR, H√∏jrup P, Moos 
T, Otzen D, Gai WP, Blumbergs PC, Jensen PH.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Medical Biochemistry and Stereological Research and Electron 
Microscopy Laboratory, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, DK-8000, Denmark.

Aggregation of the nerve cell protein alpha-synuclein is a characteristic of the 
common neurodegenerative alpha-synucleinopathies like Parkinson's disease and 
Lewy body dementia, and it plays a direct pathogenic role as demonstrated by 
early onset diseases caused by mis-sense mutations and multiplication of the 
alpha-synuclein gene. We investigated the existence of alpha-synuclein 
pro-aggregatory brain proteins whose dysregulation may contribute to disease 
progression, and we identified the brain-specific p25alpha as a candidate that 
preferentially binds to alpha-synuclein in its aggregated state. Functionally, 
purified recombinant human p25alpha strongly stimulates the aggregation of 
alpha-synuclein in vitro as demonstrated by thioflavin-T fluorescence and 
quantitative electron microscopy. p25alpha is normally only expressed in 
oligodendrocytes in contrast to alpha-synuclein, which is normally only 
expressed in neurons. This expression pattern is changed in 
alpha-synucleinopathies. In multiple systems atrophy, degenerating 
oligodendrocytes displayed accumulation of p25alpha and dystopically expressed 
alpha-synuclein in the glial cytoplasmic inclusions. In Parkinson's disease and 
Lewy body dementia, p25alpha was detectable in the neuronal Lewy body inclusions 
along with alpha-synuclein. The localization in alpha-synuclein-containing 
inclusions was verified biochemically by immunological detection in Lewy body 
inclusions purified from Lewy body dementia tissue and glial cytoplasmic 
inclusions purified from tissue from multiple systems atrophy. We suggest that 
p25alpha plays a pro-aggregatory role in the common neurodegenerative disorders 
hall-marked by alpha-synuclein aggregates.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M410409200
PMID: 15590652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1200. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2004 Oct-Dec;18(4):214-8.

Motor impairment predicts falls in specialized Alzheimer care units.

Camicioli R(1), Licis L.

Author information:
(1)Glenrose Rehabilitation Hospital, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. 
rcamicio@ualberta.ca

We sought to identify clinical risk factors for falls in people with advanced 
Alzheimer disease (AD) in a prospective longitudinal observational study set in 
specialized AD care units. Forty-two patients with probable or possible AD were 
recruited. Age, sex, Mini-Mental Status Examination, Clinical Dementia Rating 
Scale, Neuropsychiatric Inventory/Nursing Home, Morse Fall Scale (MFS), modified 
Unified Parkinson's Rating Scale (mUPDRS), and gait parameters using a GAITRite 
Gold Walkway System with and without dual-task performance were examined. Time 
to a first fall was the primary outcome measure, and independent risk factors 
were identified. Participating subjects were old (non-fallers age, 82.3 +/- 6.7 
years; fallers: 83.1 +/- 9.6 years; p = 0.76) and predominantly women (36 
female/6 male). Fallers did not differ from non-fallers on any parameter except 
the MFS (non-fallers: 35.6 +/- 26.1; fallers: 54.4 +/- 29.8; p = 0.04), the 
UPDRS (non-fallers: 4.75 +/- 3.98; fallers: 7.61 +/- 4.3, p = 0.03) and cadence 
(steps per minute: non-fallers: 102.3 +/- 12.3; fallers: 91.7 +/- 16, p = 0.02). 
Fallers and non-fallers were equally affected by dual-task performance. The 
hazard ratios for MFS, UPDRS, and cadence were not affected by adjusting for 
age, sex, MMSE, or NPI scores. In conclusion, falls in advanced AD can be 
predicted using simple clinical measures of motor impairment or cadence. These 
measures may be useful for targeting interventions.

PMID: 15592133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


