401. Neurologia. 1997 Mar;12(3):130-5.

[Depressive pseudodementia in early Parkinson's disease: lessons from a case 
with long-term follow-up].

[Article in Spanish]

Giménez-Roldán S(1), Mateo D, Dobato JL.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Madrid.

A common observation in neurological practice is parkinsonism with concomitant 
cognitive decline, an association that usually arises from various underlying 
degenerative or vascular conditions, most of which are untreatable. An elderly 
woman with no history of psychiatric disease presented complaining of memory and 
cognitive impairment serious enough to interfere with daily life activities over 
the preceding year. She soon developed a predominantly left-sided tremor, 
rigidity and bradykinesia. She had had only 2 years of formal education. 
Neuropsychological assessment showed poor performance on Wechsler memory scale 
sub-items, as well as constructional apraxia, dyscalculia, reasoning 
difficulties and gross information deficits. A 3-month trial course of levodopa 
was followed by dramatic improvement in both parkinsonian symptoms and cognitive 
performance, including a 7-point gain in the Mini-Mental Status Examination 
score. At the same time, the Beck Depression Inventory score fell from 27 
(baseline) to 18. Over the 10-year follow-up period the patient developed late 
levodopa syndrome and a persistent but mild dysthymic disorder, but never 
manifested dementia as defined by DSM-III-R criteria. This patient's case 
illustrates three important principles. First, although parkinsonism is known to 
be preceded by depressive episodes, particularly in a subgroup of younger 
patients, the symptoms of the elderly patient whose Parkinson's disease is 
foreshadowed by depression can mimic depressive pseudodementia, potentially 
leading to diagnostic confusion. Second, impaired motivation and disturbances in 
cognitive function are different from mood disorders, as the former involve the 
mesolimbic/mesocortical dopamine system, explaining the beneficial effect of 
levodopa on motivation and cognition in this patient even as mood was 
unaffected. Finally, depressive pseudodementia in Parkinson's disease does not 
necessarily herald the development of organic dementia in the long term.

PMID: 9198454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Neurology. 1997 Apr;48(4):942-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.942.

Lack of overlap in genetic risks for Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's 
disease.

Mickel SF(1), Broste SK, Hiner BC.

Author information:
(1)Marshfield Clinic, Department of Neurosciences, WI 54449, USA.

We explored the question of genetic overlap between Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD) because evidence suggests clinical, pathologic, and 
epidemiologic overlap between the two disorders. We compared the frequency of AD 
and PD between the first-degree relatives of probands with AD and PD and 
first-degree relatives of spouse control subjects. Using life-table methods, we 
found increased risk of AD in first-degree relatives of patients with AD and an 
increased risk of PD in first-degree relatives of patients with PD. The risk of 
PD in first-degree relatives of patients with AD was not increased, nor was the 
risk of AD in first-degree relatives of patients with PD increased. These data 
do not support the hypothesis that important genetic overlap exists between AD 
and PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.942
PMID: 9109882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Neurology. 1997 Apr;48(4):955-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.955.

Talking while walking: the effect of a dual task in aging and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Camicioli R(1), Howieson D, Lehman S, Kaye J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 
97201-3098, USA.

We determined the effects of distraction on gait in healthy elderly subjects and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. The effects of simultaneous performance of a 
verbal fluency task (effect of reciting male or female names) on the time and 
number of steps taken to walk 30 feet were compared using a repeated-measures 
design with between-group comparison between community-dwelling healthy old old 
(oOld; n = 20; mean age +/- SD, 86 +/- 4.4), healthy young old (yOld; n = 23; 
mean age +/- SD, 72 +/- 3.6), and probable AD subjects without parkinsonism (n = 
15; mean age +/- SD, 74 +/- 13). AD patients slowed more than the yOld (p = 
0.005) and the oOld (p = 0.002). The yOld and oOld did not differ from each 
other (p = 0.68). Mean (+/-SD) differences in time were as follows: yOld, -2.2 
+/- 1.9; oOld, -1.6 +/- 2.0; AD, -7.1 +/- 9.2 seconds. The change in steps did 
not differ between groups. Walking speed of AD patients slowed more than that of 
elderly subjects during the dual task. This may contribute to the risk of falls 
in AD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.955
PMID: 9109884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Neurology. 1997 Apr;48(4):959-69. doi: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.959.

Corticobasal degeneration: neuropathologic and clinical heterogeneity.

Schneider JA(1), Watts RL, Gearing M, Brewer RP, Mirra SS.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Decatur, GA 30033, USA.

We investigated clinical and neuropathologic heterogeneity and apolipoprotein E 
(apoE) genotype in 11 cases of neuropathologically diagnosed corticobasal 
degeneration (CBD). Although seven of the 11 patients presented with unilateral 
limb dysfunction, the remaining four patients had less typical presentations 
including memory loss, behavioral changes, and difficulties with speech or gait. 
All 11 patients eventually developed extrapyramidal signs as well as cortical 
features, most commonly apraxia. At autopsy, the brains of seven of the 11 
patients exhibited predominant neuronal loss and gliosis of perirolandic cortex; 
degeneration of more rostral frontal cortex was observed in three of the four 
patients with atypical clinical presentations. All cases displayed ballooned 
neurons, tau-positive neuronal and glial inclusions, threads and grains, and 
nigral degeneration. Six of the 11 cases manifested overlapping neuropathologic 
features of one or more disorders, including Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), Parkinson's disease (PD), and hippocampal 
sclerosis. Interestingly, these six patients all exhibited memory loss early in 
the course of their illness. The 11 CBD cases exhibited increased frequency 
(0.32) of the epsilon 4 allele of apoE, relative to control populations; the 
frequency remained elevated (0.25) even when the three cases with concomitant AD 
were excluded. Beta-amyloid (A beta) deposition in hippocampus or cortex was 
present in five of the seven cases with an epsilon 4 genotype. These 
observations indicate that CBD is a pathologically and clinically heterogeneous 
disorder with substantial overlap with other neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.48.4.959
PMID: 9109885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1997 Apr;62(4):410-3. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.62.4.410.

Impairment in dating and retrieving remote events in patients with early 
Parkinson's disease.

Venneri A(1), Nichelli P, Modonesi G, Molinari MA, Russo R, Sardini C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Aberdeen, UK.

Remote memory has been studied in a group of 25 non-demented patients with 
Parkinson's disease and their performance has been compared with that of 22 
healthy control subjects. Only patients who scored > or = 27 on the mini mental 
state examination and with no anticholinergic treatment were included in the 
sample. A remote memory questionnaire was given, to evaluate memory for public 
events that occurred from 1966 to 1990. Each event was probed with five 
questions concerning its content and one for the date. Compared with healthy 
subjects, patients with Parkinson's disease were significantly impaired both in 
recalling the content and in dating remote events. These results support the 
claim that remote memory in patients with Parkinson's disease is disrupted 
independently of dementia. This impairment might result from a dysfunction at 
the level of the circuit connecting the basal ganglia to the frontal lobes.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.62.4.410
PMCID: PMC1074107
PMID: 9120464 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Baillieres Clin Neurol. 1997 Apr;6(1):147-66.

Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Lennox GG(1), Lowe JS.

Author information:
(1)University of Nottingham, UK.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the recommended term for a common cause of 
dementia characterized by the histological presence of distinctive inclusions 
within neurons, Lewy bodies (McKeith et al, 1996). Following increasing 
pathological recognition, core clinical diagnostic features have been identified 
to allow diagnosis in life. Insights into the biology of this type of 
neurodegeneration suggest that the regional patterns of involvement might allow 
therapeutic intervention. Although Lewy bodies had long been recognized in the 
substantia nigra and other subcortical nuclei in patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), it was only in the 1970s that a significant number of reports 
began to be published from Japan describing patients with dementia and 
parkinsonism associated with the presence of Lewy bodies in cortical neurons 
(reviewed by Kosaka, 1990). Since these reports, different workers have used a 
variety of terms to describe this disease process, including diffuse Lewy body 
disease (Yoshimura, 1983), Lewy body dementia (Gibb et al, 1987), senile 
dementia of Lewy body type (Perry et al, 1990a) and the Lewy body variant of 
Alzheimer's disease (Hansen et al, 1990).

PMID: 9426873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Drugs Aging. 1997 May;10(5):367-83. doi: 10.2165/00002512-199710050-00005.

Neuropsychiatric adverse effects of antiparkinsonian drugs. Characteristics, 
evaluation and treatment.

Young BK(1), Camicioli R, Ganzini L.

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Division, Portland Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Oregon, 
USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurological condition that causes 
considerable disability in the elderly. Drugs used to treat PD, such as 
levodopa, offer symptomatic relief but often have neuropsychiatric adverse 
effects, most prominently psychosis and delirium. Aged patients and those with 
dementia are particularly vulnerable to these adverse effects. Evaluating PD 
patients with drug-induced neuropsychiatric adverse effects is made difficult by 
their complex clinical presentations. The treatment of drug-induced psychosis 
and delirium begins with manipulating the antiparkinsonian drug regimen, but 
this frequently worsens motor function. Atypical antipsychotics such as 
clozapine have been successfully employed to treat the psychosis without 
worsening the motor disability. Patient intolerance of clozapine therapy has 
prompted open-label studies with newer agents such as risperidone, remoxipride, 
zotepine, mianserin and ondansetron.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-199710050-00005
PMID: 9143857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Arch Neurol. 1997 May;54(5):539-44. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550170021010.

Clinical characteristics of a chromosome 17-linked rapidly progressive familial 
frontotemporal dementia.

Basun H(1), Almkvist O, Axelman K, Brun A, Campbell TA, Collinge J, Forsell C, 
Froelich S, Wahlund LO, Wetterberg L, Lannfelt L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Family Medicine, Karolinska 
Institutet, Huddinge University Hospital, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To describe symptoms, signs, neuroimaging results, and 
neuropathologic findings in patients from a family with chromosome 17q21-linked 
autosomal dominant frontotemporal dementia.
DESIGN: Multiple case report with genetic investigations.
SUBJECTS: The disease was observed in a Swedish family and documented in 3 
generations. Four siblings are described in this article.
RESULTS: A rapidly progressive dementia with genetic linkage to chromosome 17q21 
was observed. The mean age of onset was 51 years and the average duration of 
disease to death was 3 years. Two patients started with speech disturbances 
leading to a progressive, nonfluent aphasia, 1 patient had onset symptoms of leg 
apraxia and akinesia and muscular rigidity, and in 1 patient reckless driving 
was the first symptom. Loss of spontaneous speech developed later in all 
patients and emotional bluntness in 3 of the patients. Cerebral perfusion was 
decreased in the frontal areas in all patients. In the person with apraxia as 
the onset symptom, the cerebral blood flow was also diminished in the left 
hemisphere, where a slight atrophy was detected on magnetic resonance imaging 
scans. At the postmortem examination, slight gliosis of the parietal lobes was 
observed in this patient. In all patients there was a frontocentral degeneration 
of the cortex with discrete microvacuolation and gliosis.
CONCLUSION: Clinical features of frontotemporal dementia, parkinsonism, an early 
age of onset, a rapid disease progression, and variable onset symptoms were seen 
in these patients. Two other clinically distinct diseases, dementia with 
pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration and a 
disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy complex, have recently been 
mapped to chromosome 17q21. In the family described in this article, genetic 
linkage was detected to the same region, suggesting the possibility that these 
diseases may originate from pathogenic mutations in the same gene.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550170021010
PMID: 9152110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mov Disord. 1997 May;12(3):302-5. doi: 10.1002/mds.870120307.

Freezing phenomenon in patients with parkinsonian syndromes.

Giladi N(1), Kao R, Fahn S.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Institute, Columbia Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, New 
York, USA.

Freezing is a common symptom in parkinsonian syndromes, but its association with 
different causes of parkinsonism as well as with other symptoms has never been 
investigated. We conducted a database survey of the occurrence of freezing in 
parkinsonism. Of 347 patients with a clinical diagnosis of parkinsonism other 
than idiopathic Parkinson's disease and with specific data regarding freezing, 
158 patients had freezing (46%). Freezing was significantly associated with 
progression of the disease as rated on the Hoehn & Yahr scale [odds ratio (OR), 
1.69; p < 0.004]. Gender was not a risk factor for the development of freezing. 
Patients with drug-induced parkinsonism were at a very low risk for developing 
freezing (p < 0.00001; OR, 0.1). Freezing was found in a high frequency in 
patients with vascular parkinsonism (57%), normal-pressure hydrocephalus (56%), 
and generally in the group of patients who had parkinsonism resulting from 
neurodegenerative diseases (progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system 
atrophy, and corticobasal ganglionic degeneration; 45%). Freezing was 
significantly associated with the presence of dementia, incontinence, and 
tachyphemia (OR, 2.01, 1.7, and 5.09, respectively).

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870120307
PMID: 9159723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Can J Neurol Sci. 1997 May;24(2):127-32. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100021454.

"Familial Parkinson's disease"--a case-control study of families.

Uitti RJ(1), Shinotoh H, Hayward M, Schulzer M, Mak E, Calne DB.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Disorders Centre, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) patients frequently report a family history 
of PD and this may provide etiological clues to PD. It has also been suggested 
that a report of a negative family history is reliable. We studied the 
prevalence of PD in relatives of PD patients to assess the reliability of family 
history and to evaluate possible explanations of "familial PD" (fPD).
METHODS: 81 of 650 (12.5%) PD probands (all PD patients seen at clinic in 4 
years) reported a positive family history of PD. Each fPD proband was matched 
with non-familial PD (nfPD) proband by gender and year of birth. Screening and 
follow-up questionnaires were mailed to relatives to obtain information 
concerning pedigree and presence of neurodegenerative disease. Available family 
members (regardless of disease status) were examined.
RESULTS: On examination, 8 persons, said to be "normal" by probands, relatives 
and themselves, had definite or possible PD (5 fPD, 3 nfPD). The prevalence rate 
of PD among first and second degree living relatives of probands varied 
significantly between fPD and nfPD groups (6269/100,000 versus 1190/100,000; p < 
0.001). The weighted prevalence (taking into account the proportions of fPD and 
nfPD within the clinic) was 1822/100,000, a value more than 5 times higher than 
reported prevalence rates of PD in the general population (p < 0.001). The 
prevalence rate was greater in first degree relatives than second degree.
CONCLUSIONS: "Familial parkinsonism" cannot be explained merely by size of or 
advanced age within families. Significant numbers of previously unrecognized PD 
patients may be identified despite a "negative" family history. That is, the 
patient's report of an absence of familial parkinsonism is frequently 
inaccurate. The prevalence rate in relatives of PD patients appears to be higher 
than the general population-regardless of the family history reported by a PD 
patient. We believe our study suggests that genetic influences or early life 
environmental exposures are likely to be of etiological importance in PD.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100021454
PMID: 9164689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Fortschr Med. 1997 May 20;115(14):45-8.

[Non-motor symptoms of Parkinson disease. Significant impact on quality of 
life--using possible treatments].

[Article in German]

Müller T(1), Kuhn W, Przuntek H.

Author information:
(1)Neurol. Klinik St.-Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-Universität Bochum.

In patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease, not only the motor disorders, 
but also disturbances of the autonomic nervous system and the psyche need to be 
treated. With respect to the autonomic nervous system, such symptoms as 
hypersalivation, seborrhea, dysregulation of the cardiovascular system, 
disturbances of the gastrointestinal tract and bladder motility, as also sleep 
disorders predominate. Also seen in Parkinson's disease are such psychiatric 
complaints as depression, dementia and psychoses, which latter in particular may 
also be a consequence of dopaminergic replacement therapy. A number of 
therapeutic concepts are available for the treatment of these disorders, which 
are often extremely stressful for the patient and therefore require early 
treatment.

PMID: 9264971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Arch Neurol. 1997 Jun;54(6):762-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550180070015.

Dietary antioxidants and Parkinson disease. The Rotterdam Study.

de Rijk MC(1), Breteler MM, den Breeijen JH, Launer LJ, Grobbee DE, van der 
Meché FG, Hofman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherland.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether high dietary intake of antioxidants decreases 
the risk of Parkinson disease (PD).
SETTING: The community-based Rotterdam Study, the Netherlands.
DESIGN: The cross-sectional study formed part of a large community-based study 
in which all participants were individually screened for parkinsonism and were 
administered a semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire. The study 
population consisted of 5342 independently living individuals without dementia 
between 55 and 95 years of age, including 31 participants with PD (Hoehn-Yahr 
stages 1-3).
RESULTS: The odds ratio for PD was 0.5 (95% confidence interval [CI], 0.2-0.9) 
per 10-mg daily dietary vitamin E intake, 0.6 (95% CI, 0.3-1.3) per 1-mg beta 
carotene intake, 0.9 (95% CI, 0.4-1.9) per 100-mg vitamin C intake, and 0.9 (95% 
CI, 0.7-1.2) per 10-mg flavonoids intake, all adjusted for age, sex, smoking 
habits, and energy intake. The association with vitamin E intake was dose 
dependent (P for trend = .03). To assess whether the association was different 
in participants with more advanced disease, we excluded those with PD who had a 
Hoehn-Yahr stage of 2.5 or 3. This did not fundamentally alter the results.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that a high intake of dietary vitamin E may protect 
against the occurrence of PD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550180070015
PMID: 9193212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Can J Psychiatry. 1997 Jun;42(5):476-84. doi: 10.1177/070674379704200503.

A review of continuation and maintenance electroconvulsive therapy.

Rabheru K(1), Persad E.

Author information:
(1)University of Western Ontario, London.

Comment in
    Can J Psychiatry. 1998 Apr;43(3):305-6.

BACKGROUND: Many patients with major psychiatric disorders who are severely ill, 
medication-resistant, or medication-intolerant respond more reliably and quickly 
to a course of electroconvulsive therapy (ECT). The management of such patients 
after successful treatment with ECT is of significant importance given the high 
rate of relapse and recurrence of these disorders. The unmet clinical need to 
maintain the mental health of these seriously ill patients at an optimal level 
has revived the interest in ECT as an alternative prophylactic treatment.
METHOD: We review the historical background of ECT and the literature that 
supports its use as a prophylactic treatment in various disorders and special 
populations. A clinical summary outlining its efficacy, acceptability, risks, 
cost-effectiveness, and medicolegal aspects is followed by a guide for 
prescribing ECT for prophylactic reasons.
RESULTS: Continuation and maintenance ECT (C/MECT) has been found to be 
efficacious, safe, well tolerated, and cost-effective. Its greatest impact has 
been in reducing relapse, recurrence, and rehospitalization, particularly in the 
management of recurrent mood disorders in the elderly. The elderly are usually 
refractory or intolerant to pharmacotherapy but have a good response to ECT 
during the index episode. Parkinson's disease (PD), schizophrenia, and 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), as well as affective disorders coexisting 
with dementia, neurological disorder, or mental retardation, have also been 
reported to respond to C/MECT. The outcome depends greatly on rate of 
compliance. Cognitive risk of C/MECT need to be further studied because the 
literature to date consists mostly of case reports and anecdotal evidence. 
Controlled studies with well-defined outcome measurements are needed.
CONCLUSIONS: When planning a rational approach to the care of patients with 
major psychiatric disorders, clinicians should carefully consider ECT along with 
other alternatives.

DOI: 10.1177/070674379704200503
PMID: 9220110 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J Neurol. 1997 Jun;244(6):341-8. doi: 10.1007/s004150050100.

Advances in the genetics of movement disorders: implications for molecular 
diagnosis.

Gasser T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig Maximilians University, 
Munich, Germany.

Recent developments in molecular genetics have had a profound influence on the 
diagnosis and classification of inherited movement disorders. Huntington's 
disease is caused by the expansion of an unstable trinucleotide repeat sequence. 
Molecular diagnosis can now be performed by a simple PCR-based assay, and the 
study of the effects of the repeat expansion on the function of the encoded 
protein will allow to elucidate the molecular pathogenesis of the disease. 
Wilson's disease is caused by a large number of different mutations, which 
complicates molecular diagnosis. Genes for a number of inherited dystonic 
syndromes have been mapped, one of them, the gene for dopa-responsive dystonia, 
has already been identified. The genetic basis of several other prevalent 
movement disorders, such as essential tremor and the restless-legs syndrome 
however, is still obscure. Current research is also directed at the 
identification of inherited risk-factors in genetically complex movement 
disorders, such as Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s004150050100
PMID: 9249618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr. 1997 Jun;28(3):106-12.

[Electroconvulsive therapy in late life depression: a review].

[Article in Dutch]

Stek ML(1), Beekman AT, Verwey B.

Author information:
(1)Vakgroep Psychiatrie Vrije-Universiteit, Amsterdam.

Electroconvulsive therapy is an important treatment of depressive states in late 
life. However in the Netherlands ECT is not often practiced and mostly indicated 
after a long period of fruitless clinical therapy. The primary aims of this 
literature study were to review the efficacy of ECT in late life depression, to 
identify predictors of good response, to discuss contraindications, side effects 
and finally modifications of technique. Eighteen studies were found addressing 
the topic of efficacy. Outcome ranged between 50%-100% clinically significant 
improvement. Positive predictors are melancholic features and delusional 
depression. Unlike in younger patients hypochondriacal symptoms and anxiety do 
not predict a negative outcome in older patients. ECT has been used successfully 
in depression complicated by dementia, cognitive decline and cerebrovascular 
disease. Depression in Parkinson's disease may be a special indication where ECT 
may have a positive effect on motor symptoms. There are no firm indications of 
long term cognitive decline associated with ECT. Guidelines for practicing ECT 
(unipolar, brief pulse and anaesthesia) are in line with the state of the art in 
the literature. It is concluded that, especially in severe depression associated 
with comorbidity, current Dutch practice in using ECT, often leads to 
unwarranted delay.

PMID: 9381518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Int J Neural Syst. 1997 Jun;8(3):339-57. doi: 10.1142/s0129065797000343.

Static and dynamic state feedback control model of basal ganglia-thalamocortical 
loops.

Lörincz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemical Physics, Hungarian Academy of Sciences, Budapest, 
Hungary. lorincz@iserv.iki.kfki.hu

It is argued that a novel control architecture, the Static and Dynamic State 
(SDS) feedback scheme, which utilizes speed-field tracking, exhibits global 
stability, and allows on-line tuning by any adaptation mechanism without 
canceling stability if certain structural conditions are met, can be viewed as a 
model of basal ganglia-thalamocortical loops since (1) the SDS scheme predicts 
the neuronal groups that fit neuronal classification in the supplementary motor 
area, the motor cortex and the putamen, (2) the structural stability conditions 
require parallel channels, a feature that these loops provide, and (3) the SDS 
scheme predicts two major disorders that can be identified as Parkinson's and 
Huntington's diseases. Simulations suggests that the basal ganglia work outside 
the realm of the stability condition allowed by the robustness of the scheme and 
required for increased computation speeds.

DOI: 10.1142/s0129065797000343
PMID: 9427107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


417. JAMA. 1997 Jun 25;277(24):1933-4. doi: 10.1001/jama.1997.03540480033030.

Predicting progression of Alzheimer disease.

Rabins PV.

Comment on
    JAMA. 1997 Mar 12;277(10):806-12.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.1997.03540480033030
PMID: 9200630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Neurology. 1997 Jul;49(1):62-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.49.1.62.

What are the obstacles for an accurate clinical diagnosis of Pick's disease? A 
clinicopathologic study.

Litvan I(1), Agid Y, Sastry N, Jankovic J, Wenning GK, Goetz CG, Verny M, 
Brandel JP, Jellinger K, Chaudhuri KR, McKee A, Lai EC, Pearce RK, Bartko JJ.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-9130, USA.

Erratum in
    Neurology 1997 Dec;49(6):1755. Sastrj N [corrected to Sastry N].

Comment in
    Neurology. 1998 Apr;50(4):1192-3.

Several studies have evaluated the reliability and validity of the clinical 
diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) using well-defined neuropathologic 
criteria, but none has attempted to evaluate the diagnostic accuracy of Pick's 
disease. We determined the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Pick's by 
presenting 105 autopsy-confirmed cases of Pick's (n = 7) and related disorders 
(non-Pick's, n = 98) as clinical vignettes in randomized order to six 
neurologists who were unaware of the autopsy findings. The group of raters had 
moderate to fair agreement for the diagnosis of Pick's as measured by the kappa 
statistics. The sensitivity for the diagnosis of Pick's for the first visit 
(mean, 53 months after onset) and last visit (mean, 78 months after onset) was 
low (range, 0 to 71%), but specificity was near-perfect. Median positive 
predictive values at both visits were 83 to 85%. False-negative misdiagnoses 
mainly involved AD. False-positive diagnoses were rare and occurred with 
corticobasal degeneration (first visit) and with dementia with Lewy bodies (last 
visit). Pick's was also misdiagnosed by primary neurologists. The best clinical 
predictors for the early diagnosis of Pick's included "frontal" dementia, early 
"cortical" dementia with severe frontal lobe disturbances, absence of apraxia, 
and absence of gait disturbance at onset. However, the first neurologic 
evaluation in some of the Pick's cases took place in advanced stages of the 
disease. Our findings suggest that this disorder is underdiagnosed in clinical 
practice. Although the low sensitivity for the clinical diagnosis of Pick's is 
disappointing, our data suggest that when clinicians suspect Pick's, their 
diagnosis is almost always correct. Absence of awareness of the main features of 
this disorder and of specificity of the frontal lobe syndrome may partially 
explain the low detection of Pick's disease.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.49.1.62
PMID: 9222171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1997 Jul;74(3):225-41. doi: 10.1254/jjp.74.225.

From molecular structure to Alzheimer therapy.

Giacobini E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatrics, University Hospitals of Geneva, University of 
Geneva, Medical School, Switzerland.

Clinical trials in the USA, Japan and Europe have confirmed the hypothesis that 
a steady state increase of acetylcholine resulting from cholinesterase 
inhibition in the brain results in an improvement of cognitive function in mild 
to moderate Alzheimer disease (AD) patients. During the last decade, a 
systematic effort to develop a pharmacological treatment for AD has resulted in 
two drugs being registered for the first time in the USA and Europe for this 
specific indication. Both are cholinesterase inhibitors (ChEI). Based on these 
first positive results, several second generation ChEI are being developed. An 
additional effect of certain ChEI is to maintain cognitive function at a 
constant level during a 6 months to one year period of treatment as compared to 
placebo. It is possible that the drug effect is one of slowing down cognitive 
deterioration. Comparison of clinical effects of 5 ChEI demonstrates a rather 
similar magnitude of improvement. For some drugs, this may represent a limit, 
while for others it may be possible to increase the benefit further. To maximize 
and prolong positive drug effects, it is important to start early and adjust the 
dosage during the treatment. Other strategies may involve combinations with 
other cholinergic drugs such as muscarinic or nicotinic agonists. A second 
important class of drugs which is being developed is that of muscarinic m1 
agonists. However, their clinical use is still limited by side effects. The 
increased knowledge and recognition of the beta-amyloid molecule as a central 
focus of AD pathology has strongly stimulated research with the hope of finding 
ways of influencing its processing and deposition. At this point, no product in 
this line of development has reached clinical trial level. Other pharmacological 
approaches are related to preventive and neuroprotective interventions 
(estrogens, anti-oxidants and anti-inflammatories). In conclusion, given the 
relatively short time of research in this field, results are encouraging.

DOI: 10.1254/jjp.74.225
PMID: 9268083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Neurobiol Aging. 1997 Jul-Aug;18(4 Suppl):S75-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00075-4.

Strategies for improving the postmortem neuropathological diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Trojanowski JQ(1), Clark CM, Schmidt ML, Arnold SE, Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia 19104, USA.

Despite recognition that Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a polygenic and 
heterogeneous dementing neurodegenerative disorder, there is continued merit in 
defining the AD phenotype by the presence of progressive cognitive impairments 
and the pathological brain lesions (senile plaques, neurofibrillary tangles) as 
originally formulated by Alois Alzheimer. This position paper discusses the 
rationale for emphasizing the detection of both beta amyloid-rich plaques and 
tau-rich tangles in the next iteration of the neuropathological criteria for the 
postmortem diagnosis of AD that has been recommended by the Working Group on 
Consensus Criteria for the Postmortem Diagnosis of AD. Further, it also 
underlines the need to exploit continuing advances in understanding the 
pathobiology of plaques and tangles in subsequent iterations of these criteria. 
It is expected that such efforts, now and in the future, will hasten the 
development of strategies for the early and accurate antemortem diagnosis of AD 
as well as the discovery of effective treatments for this common dementing 
illness of the elderly.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00075-4
PMID: 9330990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Neurobiol Aging. 1997 Jul-Aug;18(4 Suppl):S81-4. doi: 
10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00076-6.

Proposal to revise the morphologic criteria for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Perl DP(1), Purohit DP.

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Division, Mount Sinai Medical Center, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Ten years have passed since the drafting of the original National Institute on 
Aging/American Association of Retired Persons or Khatchaturian criteria for the 
neuropathologic diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease. In that time, much progress 
has been made in the study of this disorder. It is clear that although the 
Khatchaturian criteria have been useful, advances in our understanding of the 
morphologic substrate of the disease needs to be incorporated in any newly 
proposed diagnostic criteria. We propose diagnostic criteria to be employed in 
establishing the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease in a research setting. Here, 
we require that a level of density and distribution of senile plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles be identified and that other superimposed conditions, 
such as major cerebral infarcts and/or Parkinson's disease changes, are absent. 
We also propose separate criteria for diagnosing individuals who die in the 
early stages of the disease. These latter cases are of extreme research interest 
and are characterized by a distribution of neurofibrillary tangles that remains 
primarily restricted to the entorhinal cortex and hippocampus.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00076-6
PMID: 9330991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Neurobiol Aging. 1997 Jul-Aug;18(4 Suppl):S85-8. doi: 
10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00062-6.

Diagnostic criteria for neuropathologic assessment of Alzheimer's disease.

Braak H(1), Braak E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, J. W. Goethe University, Frankfurt, Germany.

Prior to any evaluation of morphologic brain changes, a decision must be made 
whether a given alteration is associated with aging or with disease. Patients 
with disease-related lesions may be in a clinically silent phase of a disease or 
show overt symptoms. Neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil threads are the 
hallmarks of Alzheimer's disease. They should not be considered to be 
age-related changes, even when they are present only in small numbers. In 
general, the initial changes consist of neurofibrillary tangles and neuropil 
threads. Plaques (amyloid deposits and/or neuritic plaques) are consistently 
present in the end stage of the disease. Initial neurofibrillary tangles and 
neuropil threads develop at specific cortical predilection sites. The changes 
then spread in a predictable, nonrandom manner across other portions of the 
telencephalic cortex. The sequential changes in the distribution pattern of the 
lesions provide the basis for a staging procedure that takes the slow and 
gradual progression of the destructive process into consideration. The staging 
procedure provides accurate diagnoses in the initial stages and even reveals 
brain changes developing prior to the appearance of clinical symptoms. It is 
thus advantageous in characterizing nondemented controls. The staging procedure 
can be carried out easily and does not require knowledge of clinical data, 
quantitative assessments, or adjustments for the age of the patients. 
Application of advanced silver techniques (Gallyas, Campbell-Switzer) to 
demonstrate Alzheimer's disease-related lesions also allows recognition of the 
hallmarks of other disorders, such as Lewy body disease (Parkinson's disease) 
and dementia with argyrophilic grains, which frequently co-occur with 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00062-6
PMID: 9330992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1997 Aug;56(8):866-71. doi: 
10.1097/00005072-199708000-00004.

4-hydroxy-2-nonenal pyrrole adducts in human neurodegenerative disease.

Montine KS(1), Kim PJ, Olson SJ, Markesbery WR, Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee 37232, USA.

Increasing age and inheritance of the epsilon 4 allele of apolipoprotein E 
(APOE4) are significant risk factors for sporadic and late onset familial 
Alzheimer disease (AD); however, the mechanisms by which either leads to AD are 
unknown. Numerous studies have associated advancing age with increased indices 
of oxidative challenge to brain, and with still further increased oxidative 
damage to relevant brain regions in AD patients. A major consequence of 
oxidative damage to brain is lipid peroxidation with production of the 
neurotoxic metabolite 4-hydroxy-2-nonenal (HNE). HNE reacts with protein to 
yield several adducts, including a pyrrole adduct that forms irreversibly in 
biological systems. Previously, we have shown in a small number of AD and 
control patients that HNE pyrrole adduct antiserum is immunoreactive with 
neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), and that this reactivity was significantly 
associated with inheritance of APOE4. Others have confirmed this pattern of 
immunoreactivity in AD brain but did not observe an association with APOE4. 
Herein, we have expanded the study group to 19 AD patients homozygous for APOE4 
or APOE3, as well as 30 patients with other neurodegenerative diseases, 
including diffuse Lewy body disease, Pick's disease, progressive supranuclear 
palsy, Parkinson's disease, and human immunodeficiency virus-1 encephalitis. HNE 
pyrrole adduct immunoreactivity on NFT in AD patients was strongly associated 
with APOE4 homozygosity. With the exception of rare immunoreactive Pick bodies 
in one case of Pick's disease, no other structure was recognized by HNE pyrrole 
adduct antiserum in this series of patients. We propose that there is a 
significant difference between the interaction of apoE3 and apoE4 with lipid 
peroxidation in the brains of AD patients.

DOI: 10.1097/00005072-199708000-00004
PMID: 9258256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Arch Neurol. 1997 Aug;54(8):937-44. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550200007003.

What is the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of multiple system atrophy? A 
clinicopathologic study.

Litvan I(1), Goetz CG, Jankovic J, Wenning GK, Booth V, Bartko JJ, McKee A, 
Jellinger K, Lai EC, Brandel JP, Verny M, Chaudhuri KR, Pearce RK, Agid Y.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20814-3559, USA.

BACKGROUND: The presentation of symptoms for multiple system atrophy (MSA) 
varies. Because there are no specific markers for its clinical diagnosis, the 
diagnosis rests on the results of the neuropathologic examination. Despite 
several clinicopathologic studies, the diagnostic accuracy for MSA is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the accuracy for the clinical diagnosis of MSA and to 
identify, as early as possible, those features that would best predict MSA.
DESIGN: One hundred five autopsy-confirmed cases of MSA and related disorders 
(MSA [n=16], non-MSA [n=89]) were presented as clinical vignettes to 6 
neurologists (raters) who were unaware of the study design. Raters identified 
the main clinical features and provided a diagnosis based on descriptions of the 
patients' first and last clinic visits.
METHODS: Interrater reliability was evaluated with the use of kappa statistics. 
Raters' diagnoses and those of the primary neurologists (who followed up the 
patients) were compared with the autopsy-confirmed diagnoses to estimate the 
sensitivity and positive predictive values at the patients' first and last 
visits. Logistic regression analysis was used to determine the best predictors 
to diagnose MSA.
RESULTS: For the first visit (median, 42 months after the onset of symptoms), 
the raters' sensitivity (median, 56%; range, 50%-69%) and positive predictive 
values (median, 76%; range, 61%-91%) for the clinical diagnosis of MSA were not 
optimal. For the last visit (74 months after the onset of symptoms), the raters' 
sensitivity (median, 69%; range, 56%-94%) and positive predictive values 
(median, 80%; range, 77%-92%) improved. Primary neurologists correctly 
identified 25% and 50% of the patients with MSA at the first and last visits, 
respectively. False-negative and -positive misdiagnoses frequently occurred in 
patients with Parkinson disease and progressive supranuclear palsy. Early severe 
autonomic failure, absence of cognitive impairment, early cerebellar symptoms, 
and early gait disturbances were identified as the best predictive features to 
diagnose MSA.
CONCLUSIONS: The low sensitivity for the clinical diagnosis of MSA, particularly 
among neurologists who followed up these patients in the tertiary centers, 
suggests that this disorder is underdiagnosed. The misdiagnosis of MSA is 
usually due to its confusion with Parkinson disease or progressive supranuclear 
palsy, thus compromising the research on all 3 disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550200007003
PMID: 9267967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Arch Neurol. 1997 Aug;54(8):969-75. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550200033007.

Extrapyramidal signs in patients with probable Alzheimer disease.

Lopez OL(1), Wisnieski SR, Becker JT, Boller F, DeKosky ST.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of Neurology, University of 
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine whether extrapyramidal signs (EPSs) were associated with 
more rapid progression of Alzheimer disease (AD).
DESIGN: Cross-sectional with longitudinal follow-up and the likelihood of 
arriving at 4 end points: Mini-Mental State Examination score of less than 9, 
Blessed Dementia Rating Scale score for activities of daily living of 15 or 
more, institutionalization, and death using a proportional hazard model with 6 
variables: overall EPSs, bradykinesia, tremors, abnormal gait, cogwheel 
rigidity, and postural instability.
SETTING: Multidisciplinary behavioral neurology research clinic.
PATIENTS: We examined the individual EPS characteristics of 164 patients with 
mild-moderately probable AD, free of neuroleptic medication, participating in a 
longitudinal study of dementia.
RESULTS: Patients with AD with EPSs (n= 51 [31%]) were older (P>.001) and had 
lower Mini-Mental State Examination scores (P=.003) than those without EPSs at 
study entry. Bradykinesia was present in 35 (69%) of the 51 patients with EPSs, 
abnormal gait in 18 (35%), rigidity in 10 (20%), postural instability in 10 
(20%), tremors in 7 (14%), and oral-mandibular dyskinesia in 2 (4%). Using 
proportional hazard analysis with time-dependent covariates for overall EPSs and 
individual EPSs, adjusted by age at study entry, education, Mini-Mental State 
Examination score, and Blessed Dementia Rating Scale score for activities of 
daily living, the development of EPSs was associated with time to 
institutionalization (P<.001) but not with cognitive (eg, Mini-Mental State 
Examination score <9) or functional (eg, Blessed Dementia Rating Scale score > 
or = 15) decline or death. However, when we examined severity of the EPSs, as 
measured by the New York University Parkinson's Disease Scale, the development 
of EPSs was associated with functional decline (P=.005). Of the individual EPSs, 
rigidity predicted death (P<.001) and institutionalization (P=.03), whereas 
tremors predicted functional decline (P=.02).
CONCLUSIONS: In this cohort, the presence or absence of EPSs is related to time 
to institutionalization, but not to severe cognitive or functional impairment or 
death. However, when severity of the extrapyramidal phenomenon is taken into 
account, EPSs are related to functional decline. Further, it appears that a 
subgroup of patients with AD with EPSs, where cogwheel rigidity and tremors are 
the core signs, can have a worse outcome.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550200033007
PMID: 9267971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Neurology. 1997 Aug;49(2):400-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.49.2.400.

Familial nature and continuing morbidity of the amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis-parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam.

McGeer PL(1), Schwab C, McGeer EG, Haddock RL, Steele JC.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

Comment in
    Neurology. 1998 Aug;51(2):643-4.

Chamorros suffer from two neurologic syndromes known as ALS and the 
parkinsonism-dementia complex (PDC) of Guam. We report mortality figures for 
these syndromes during 1991 to 1995 and compare them with those at 5-year 
intervals dating back to 1951. In contrast to predictions of disease 
disappearance, both syndromes remain prevalent. However, age of onset and age at 
death have increased for both syndromes, suggesting that shifting environmental 
factors are causing disease postponement. We also report the clinical, familial, 
neuropathologic, and immunohistochemical findings on a consecutive autopsy 
series of Guamanian Chamorro cases. Twelve cases were diagnosed as PDC, known 
locally as "bodig," and three as ALS, known locally as "lytico." All but three 
of these fifteen patients had a pronounced family history of similar illness. 
Eight of twelve boding patients had siblings who were also affected with bodig; 
two of three lytico cases had siblings afflicted with lytico. The family 
histories are compatible with genetic transmission of each syndrome. The 
neuropathology of bodig is characterized by severe and widespread 
neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) development. NFTs are surrounded by reactive 
microglia and reactive astrocytes, and complement proteins and other molecules 
connected with inflammation are associated with them. Similar inflammatory 
responses also occur in Alzheimer's disease (AD) but have been largely 
attributed to the presence of senile plaques. These data indicate that tangles, 
as well as plaques, generate inflammatory reactions that such reactions may 
exacerbate the fundamental pathology in bodig as well as in AD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.49.2.400
PMID: 9270568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 1997 Aug;23(4):315-21.

Association of the mitochondrial tRNA(A4336G) mutation with Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's diseases.

Egensperger R(1), Kösel S, Schnopp NM, Mehraein P, Graeber MB.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Neuropathology Laboratory, Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, 
Germany.

Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases (AD, PD) are among the most common 
neurodegenerative disorders in adults. Both AD and PD have a complex aetiology, 
and it is widely considered that genetic factors, acting independently or in 
concert with other genetic and/or environmental factors, modify the risk of 
developing them. While the apolipoprotein E (ApoE) epsilon 4 allele represents 
an established risk factor for familial and sporadic late-onset AD, it has been 
suggested that a common polymorphism in the alpha 1-antichymotrypsin gene 
modifies the ApoE epsilon 4 dosage effect in AD. Moreover, it has been proposed 
that a mitochondrial tRNA(Gln) sequence variant (A4336G transition) confers an 
increased risk for both AD and PD. This finding is of particular interest as the 
A4336G mutation seems to predispose to two clinically and neuropathologically 
distinct neurodegenerative disorders. We have examined the allelic frequencies 
of these putative susceptibility genes in 28 neuropathologically confirmed cases 
of AD, 23 cases with Lewy-body PD and 100 age-matched controls without clinical 
or histological evidence of neurodegenerative disease. The ApoE epsilon 4 allele 
frequency was significantly overrepresented in AD patients vs controls (0.35 vs 
0.11) but we could not find evidence for an association between the alpha 
1-antichymotrypsin AA genotype, the ApoE epsilon 4 allele and AD. In contrast, 
the mtDNA(A4336G) mutation was present in one of AD cases and in two of 23 PD 
patients, whereas no mutation was found in 100 age-matched controls (P < 0.05). 
Our data therefore support the hypothesis that the mitochondrial A4336G mutation 
represents a risk factor for AD and PD.

PMID: 9292870 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 1997 Aug;65(8):347-53. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-996339.

[Clozapine in treatment of neuropsychiatric diseases in the elderly].

[Article in German]

Retz W(1), Rösler M, Sitzmann L, Becker T.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatrische Universitätsklink Würzburg.

The atypical antipsychotic clozapine has been reported to be effective in 
otherwise refractory psychoses. This, and its low potential for inducing 
extrapyramidal side effects and tardive dyskinesia, predestines this drug for 
the treatment of psychotic disorders in late life. However, not much is known 
about the efficacy, safety and pharmacokinetics of clozapine in the treatment of 
aged patients. There are some studies and reports available about clozapine in 
the treatment of psychosis in patients suffering from dementia, schizophrenia 
and Parkinson's disease, which are reported here. They give some evidence that 
even low doses of clozapine are effective in controlling psychotic symptoms in 
the elderly. To avoid side effects, patient-specific factors and changes of 
pharmacokinetics in the elderly have to be considered. However, side effects 
including sedation, delirium, posturnal hypotension and the risk of 
agranulocytosis in particular limits the use of clozapine in elderly patients.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-996339
PMID: 9378447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 1997 Aug;65(8):361-74. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-996341.

[Therapy of Parkinson disease. 1: Standard therapy of motor and non-motor 
symptoms].

[Article in German]

Kuhn W(1), Müller T.

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Klinik im St. Josef-Hospital der Ruhr-Universität Bochum.

Early diagnosis is important for satisfactory pharmacotherapy of idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (PD). L-Dopa therapy is still the gold standard in the 
treatment of PD, but due to complications of long term L-Dopa application, a 
combination therapy of levodopa with various dopamine agonists and putative 
neuroprotective drugs, like e.g. selegiline, is becoming increasingly important 
and attracts more and more attention, especially in the early phases of PD. 
Moreover, disturbances of the autonomic nervous system and the mind have to be 
considered and treated besides pharmacotherapy of motor symptoms in idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Hypersalivation, seborrhoea, dysregulation of the 
cardiovascular system and disturbances of gastrointestinal and bladder motility 
and sleep are common mainly in the context of autonomic failure in PD. Moreover, 
Parkinsonian patients often complain of psychopathological features like 
depression, dementia and psychosis, which may also be due to dopaminergic 
Parkinsonian therapy. This review surveys possible therapeutic approaches of 
these disturbances of the psyche and the autonomic nervous system in PD.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-996341
PMID: 9378449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr. 1997 Aug;28(4):163-71.

[Dementia. Outlook on current developments].

[Article in Dutch]

Jonker C(1).

Author information:
(1)Vakgroep Psychiatrie, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam.

The results of recent neuropathologic and genetic studies in Alzheimer's disease 
led to a renewed interest in differentiations within the dementia syndrome. New 
disease-entities can be distinguished (Lewy Body Dementia, Frontal Lobe 
Dementia) and other criteria have been put forward for vascular dementia. 
Hachinski's Ischemic Score, for many years the diagnostic criterium for vascular 
dementia, has been cancelled. Instead a CT- or MRI scan must demonstrate the 
vascular pathology in the brain. For clinical practice, the differentiation 
between cortical and subcortical dementia is still important. For reasons of 
management it appears useful to distinguish between early-onset and late-onset 
Alzheimer's disease. The amyloid cascade hypothesis for the pathogenesis of 
Alzheimer's disease is credible for the early-onset as well as the late-onset 
type, because results from epidemiological as well as from neurobiological 
studies might be fit in. Moreover, this hypothesis is promising from the point 
of view of developing specific therapies. Finally, the breakdown of the dementia 
syndrome in separate disease-entities stimulated interest in the psychiatric 
symptoms in these patients and activated the development of rational and 
symptomatic therapeutics.

PMID: 9526785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Biol Psychiatry. 1997 Sep 15;42(6):514-8. doi: 10.1016/S0006-3223(96)00408-8.

Increase in salsolinol level in the cerebrospinal fluid of parkinsonian patients 
is related to dementia: advantage of a new high-performance liquid 
chromatography methodology.

Antkiewicz-Michaluk L(1), Krygowska-Wajs A, Szczudlik A, Romańska I, Vetulani J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Jagiellonian 
University Medical College, Kraków, Poland.

The study was carried out on the lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples taken 
from nonparkinsonian, early parkinsonian, and advanced parkinsonian patients. 
Some patients showed dementia, and some were treated with L-dopa. In the 
samples, salsolinol (1-methyl-6,7-dihydroxy-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline) was 
assayed with a newly developed sensitive high-performance liquid chromatography 
(HPLC) method; 3-O-methyldopa (3-O-MD) and homovanillic acid (HVA) were also 
assayed by HPLC. CSF salsolinol concentrations were significantly enhanced in 
patients with signs of dementia, regardless of the degree of parkinsonism, and 
were not affected by L-dopa treatment; HVA and, particularly, 3-O-MD levels were 
elevated in patients receiving L-dopa. The strong association of CSF salsolinol 
level with dementia, but not with L-dopa treatment suggests that salsolinol does 
not originate from L-dopa metabolism, and that its elevation is an indicator of 
neurodegenerative processes resulting in damage to brain areas mediating 
cognitive functions. We found no correlation between the advancement of 
parkinsonism and the concentrations of 3-O-MD and HVA.

DOI: 10.1016/S0006-3223(96)00408-8
PMID: 9285087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Arch Neurol. 1997 Sep;54(9):1104-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550210038010.

Presymptomatic hypertension is a major feature in the diagnosis of progressive 
supranuclear palsy.

Ghika J(1), Bogousslavsky J.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Vaudois, Lausanne, 
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 1998 Aug;55(8):1153-5.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the history of hypertension (HT) in patients with 
parkinsonism (PS) of various causes.
PATIENTS: Nine hundred twenty-three patients with PS listed in a citywide 
movement disorders registry. Hypertension was defined as blood pressure above 
150/90 mm Hg on at least 2 occasions or a history of antihypertensive medication 
use.
RESULTS: Overall, 184 patients (20.6%) had a history of HT. Fifty-three (16.6%) 
of 320 patients with levodopa-responsive parkinsonism (PD) had a history of HT; 
similar prevalence of presymptomatic HT was seen for PS and dementia (22/165 
[13.3%]), including probable diffuse Lewy body disease and multiple system 
atrophy of the nigrostriatal degenerative type (33/171 [19.3%]). 
Olivopontocerebellar atrophy (7/40 [18%]), corticobasal ganglionic degeneration 
(5/15 [33.3%]), drug-induced PS (9/38 [23.1%]), and the predominantly tremulous 
forms of Parkinson disease (17/43 [39.5%]) showed a higher prevalence of HT. 
Patients with familial PS (n = 36), early-onset PD (n = 14), multiple system 
atrophy of the Shy-Drager type (n = 11), and postencephalitic PS (n = 6) had no 
history of HT. In 100 patients with PS of various rare etiologies, a history of 
HT was seen in less than 5%. The highest prevalence of HT was seen in patients 
with clinically diagnosed progressive supranuclear palsy (n = 42), of whom 34 
(81.0%) had a history of HT.
CONCLUSIONS: A presymptomatic history of HT is a major feature in the clinical 
history of progressive supranuclear palsy and may be a diagnostic criterion. Its 
significance is unknown, but adrenergic nuclei of the brainstem are severely 
affected, and HT may be the first symptom arising from involvement of these 
nuclei. This could also explain the features of small vessel disease seen on 
computed tomography or magnetic resonance imaging in 50% of our patients, as in 
previous reports.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1997.00550210038010
PMID: 9311353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Ann Neurol. 1997 Oct;42(4):638-43. doi: 10.1002/ana.410420415.

Familial parkinsonism, dementia, and Lewy body disease: study of family G.

Denson MA(1), Wszolek ZK, Pfeiffer RF, Wszolek EK, Paschall TM, McComb RD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 
68198-2045, USA.

Genetic influences are thought by many to play an important role in the cause of 
Parkinson's disease. We studied two closely intermarried families (Family G) 
whose ancestors immigrated to the United States from Russia. We investigated 
this family clinically, genealogically, and pathologically. Our pedigree 
contained 102 members spanning six generations, with 10 affected individuals and 
1 affected spouse. Detailed telephone interviews were conducted with affected 
individuals, with their spouses, and with their at-risk siblings. Medical 
records of deceased and living affected patients were collected. Physical 
examinations were performed on 7 at-risk and 5 affected persons. Typical 
levodopa-responsive parkinsonism with bradykinesia, rigidity, resting tremor, 
and impaired postural reflexes was seen in 4 members, dementia was present in 3, 
and 3 had both dementia and parkinsonism. An autopsy completed on 1 individual, 
our index case, demonstrated Lewy bodies in the brainstem and neocortex and 
ubiquitin-positive neuritic degeneration in the CA2-3 region of the hippocampus, 
consistent with the limbic (transitional) form of Lewy body disease. This family 
is distinct both clinically and pathologically from several previously reported 
parkinsonian kindreds.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410420415
PMID: 9382476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Ann Neurol. 1997 Oct;42(4):655-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.410420417.

Modulation of the age at onset of Parkinson's disease by apolipoprotein E 
genotypes.

Zareparsi S(1), Kaye J, Camicioli R, Grimslid H, Oken B, Litt M, Nutt J, Bird T, 
Schellenberg G, Payami H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland 97201, USA.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 1998 Aug;44(2):294; author reply 295.
    Ann Neurol. 1998 Aug;44(2):294-5.

Parkinson's disease (PD) patients often develop dementia, and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) patients frequently develop parkinsonian signs. The apolipoprotein 
E epsilon4 allele is associated with increased risk and earlier onset of AD. We 
studied 137 unrelated white PD patients. Those with epsilon4 had the earliest 
onset (52.7 +/- 9.8 years), epsilon3/epsilon3 patients had an intermediate onset 
(56.1 +/- 11.1 years), and those with epsilon2 had the latest onset (59.1 +/- 
13.4 years). The age at onset distribution for epsilon4/epsilon- was 
significantly earlier than for epsilon3/epsilon3 and epsilon2/epsilon3. These 
preliminary results suggest that apolipoprotein E genotypes modulate the age at 
onset of PD.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410420417
PMID: 9382478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Lancet. 1997 Oct 18;350(9085):1136-9. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(97)03495-8.

Association of slow acetylator genotype for N-acetyltransferase 2 with familial 
Parkinson's disease.

Bandmann O(1), Vaughan J, Holmans P, Marsden CD, Wood NW.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 1998 Jan 10;351(9096):141; author reply 142.
    Lancet. 1998 Jan 10;351(9096):141-2.

BACKGROUND: Epidemiological studies have identified positive family history and 
exposure to environmental toxins as risk factors for Parkinson's disease (PD). 
An inherited defect of xenobiotic metabolism could result in increased 
susceptibility to such toxins. We investigated the frequency of functionally 
relevant polymorphisms in six detoxification enzymes among patients with PD to 
elucidate the relation between these polymorphisms and the disease.
METHODS: We obtained brain-tissue samples from 100 patients with apparently 
sporadic PD and blood samples from 100 living patients with familial PD. For the 
control group, we extracted DNA from the tissue of 100 pathologically normal 
brains. The six enzymes analysed in these three groups were: CYP2D6, CYP2E1, 
NAD(P)H-menadione reductase, glutathione transferases M1 and T1, and 
N-acetyltransferase 2. We also investigated N-acetyltransferase 2 in 100 blood 
samples from patients with genetically proven Huntington's disease. We used 
PCR-based methods and restriction-enzyme analysis to detect polymorphisms.
FINDINGS: The slow acetylator genotype for N-acetyltransferase 2 was more common 
in the familial PD group (69%) than in all controls (37%). Even after correction 
for multiple comparisons, this result remained highly significant (p = 0.002) 
for familial PD compared with normal controls (odds ratio 3.79 [95% CI 
2.08-6.90]) and compared with Huntington's disease (2.45 [1.37-4.38], p = 
0.004). The slow acetylator frequency for N-acetyltransferase 2 for sporadic PD 
was between that for Huntington's disease and familial PD. The frequencies of 
all the other polymorphisms were similar in the two study groups and the normal 
control group.
INTERPRETATION: We found an association between the slow acetylator genotype for 
N-acetyltransferase 2 and familial PD. Further studies are needed to investigate 
the biological relevance of these findings, but slow acetylation could lead to 
impaired ability of patients with familial PD to handle neurotoxic substances.

DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(97)03495-8
PMID: 9343502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1997 Sep 26;826:56-74. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1997.tb48461.x.

Cerebrovascular hypoperfusion: a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease? Animal 
model and postmortem human studies.

De Jong GI(1), De Vos RA, Steur EN, Luiten PG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, Graduate School for Behavioral and Cognitive 
Neuroscience, University of Groningen, Haren, The Netherlands. 
jonggi@biol.rug.nl

Although cognitive impairment during aging is usually associated with neuronal 
alterations, the cerebrovascular system undergoes prominent alterations in aging 
as well. Using electron microscopy we previously showed a progressive 
deterioration of the capillary wall in the cerebral cortex of aged rats. In aged 
rats the capillary basement membrane (BM) is thickened, massive bundles of 
collagen fibrils are deposited within the BM, and pericytes are degenerating. A 
compromized cerebral circulation (e.g., in rats with chronic hypertension) is 
characterized by an increased number of capillary alterations. In autopsy 
material (gray matter, gyrus cinguli) of carefully diagnosed patient groups 
(controls, AD, Lewy body disease, MID and demented Lewy body disease patients) 
we observed significantly more morphological changes in the capillary bed of 
demented versus non-demented patients. In both animal and human material 
morphological evidence points to a relation between energy-dependent nutrient 
transport across the blood-brain barrier and the ultrastructural deviations. In 
the AD cases we did not find a correlation between the stage of the disease 
(Braak I-VI) and the incidence of capillary aberrations, which indicates that 
the capillary alterations are not a consequence of AD pathology. Simultaneously, 
we are conducting animal model studies to determine the effects of cerebral 
hypoperfusion in the rat. Permanent bilateral occlusion of the carotid arteries 
shifts the behavioral profile of the rats (Morris maze, open field) towards that 
of aged rats, while the sensitivity for muscarinic ligand agents is altered.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1997.tb48461.x
PMID: 9329681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Acta Neurol Belg. 1997 Sep;97(3):200-5.

Imaging of receptors in clinical neurosciences.

Korf J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Psychiatry, Academic Hospital, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.

This article deals with the question why should one determine receptors in the 
brain with positron and single photon emission tomography (PET and SPECT, 
respectively). Radiopharmaceuticals for a wide variety of receptors are 
available now. Receptors studies with PET and SPECT have thus far focused on the 
following issues: occupancy during drug treatment, quantification in 
neuropsychiatric diseases and visualizing specific pathology. Far most studies 
on receptor occupancy are concerned with antipsychotic treatment in 
schizophrenic patients. During treatment with classical antipsychotic drugs more 
than 65% of the receptors are occupied in both responding and drug therapy 
resistant patients. High occupancy appeared to be linked to frequent occurrence 
of extrapyramidal symptoms (parkinsonism). Atypical antipsychotic drugs, 
producing no parkinsonism, are effective even when less than 50% dopamine D2 
receptors are blocked. Quantification of receptor density in vivo depends very 
much on the mathematical models used, and is often very difficult and thus far 
of little clinical use. Finally, receptors can be used as markers for specific 
neurons or other cells. In the caudate nucleus dopamine receptors are localized 
in neurons that degenerate in Huntington's disease, so early in the disease 
decreases in receptor binding can be shown. In Alzheimer disease decreases in 
neural receptor and increases in omega-3 receptors are observed indicating 
degeneration and inflammation, respectively.

PMID: 9345594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Age Ageing. 1997 Sep;26(5):367-74. doi: 10.1093/ageing/26.5.367.

Medically recognized urinary incontinence and risks of hospitalization, nursing 
home admission and mortality.

Thom DH(1), Haan MN, Van Den Eeden SK.

Author information:
(1)Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA 94304-1760, USA.

OBJECTIVES: this study examined the association between medically recognized 
urinary incontinence and risk of several disease conditions, hospitalization, 
nursing home admission and mortality.
DESIGN: review and abstraction of medical records and computerized data bases 
from 5986 members, aged 65 years and older, of a large health maintenance 
organization in northern California.
RESULTS: there was an increased risk of newly recognized urinary incontinence 
following a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, dementia, stroke, depression and 
congestive heart failure in both men and women, after adjustment for age and 
cohort. The risk of hospitalization was 30% higher in women following the 
diagnosis of incontinence [relative risk (RR) = 1.3, 95% confidence interval 
(CI) = 1.2-1.5] and 50% higher in men (RR = 1.5, 95% CI = 1.3-1.6) after 
adjustment for age, cohort and co-morbid conditions. The adjusted risk of 
admission to a nursing facility was 2.0 times greater for incontinent women (95% 
CI = 1.7-2.4) and 3.2 times greater for incontinent men (95% CI = 2.7-3.8). In 
contrast, the adjusted risk of mortality was only slightly greater for women (RR 
= 1.1; 95% CI = 0.99-1.3) and men (RR= 1.2; 95% CI= 1.1-1.4).
CONCLUSIONS: urinary incontinence increases the risk of hospitalization and 
substantially increases the risk of admission to a nursing home, independently 
of age, gender and the presence of other disease conditions, but has little 
effect on total mortality.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/26.5.367
PMID: 9351481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Int J Epidemiol. 1997 Oct;26(5):995-1002. doi: 10.1093/ije/26.5.995.

Prevalence of chronic diseases in older Italians: comparing self-reported and 
clinical diagnoses. The Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging Working Group.

[No authors listed]

BACKGROUND: The Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging (ILSA) evaluates the rates 
of diabetes, cardiovascular and neurological disorders in a random sample of 
5632 Italians aged 65-84 years.
METHODS: The ILSA has two components: a first screening phase administered to 
all participants, that includes a personal interview, physician examination, 
laboratory and diagnostic tests, and a second phase, consisting of the clinical 
confirmation of suspected cases by a specialist.
RESULTS: Prevalence rates were significantly higher among men for myocardial 
infarction (10.7% versus 4.8%), cardiac arrhythmia (25.1% versus 20.3%) and 
peripheral artery disease (8.1% versus 5.2%), and among women for hypertension 
(67.3% versus 59.4%), heart failure (7.3% versus 5.4%) and dementia (7.2% versus 
5.3%). No gender difference was found for stroke, angina, diabetes, Parkinsonism 
and distal symmetric neuropathy. Unreported diagnoses accounted for 85% of cases 
of distal symmetric neuropathy, for more than half the cases of cardiac failure, 
for 40% of cases of angina, and for more than one-third of cases arrhythmia, 
myocardial infarction, peripheral artery disease, hypertension, Parkinsonism. 
Data from the phase 1 interview showed substantial overreporting for myocardial 
infarction, peripheral artery disease, diabetes, and stroke.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors conclude that self-reported information would lead to 
inaccurate estimates of prevalence rates suggesting the need for including the 
clinical ascertainment in any population-based epidemiological study.

DOI: 10.1093/ije/26.5.995
PMID: 9363520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Geriatrics. 1997 Nov;52(11):51, 55-8, 61.

Occult HIV infection: diagnosis and treatment of older patients.

Woolery WA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Family and Community Medicine, School of Medicine, Mercer 
University, Macon, GA, USA.

The decrease in immune status that accompanies normal aging leaves individuals 
age 50 and older increasingly susceptible to the two main modes of HIV 
infection: sexual activity and blood transfusions. Although therapy for older 
HIV patients is essentially the same as for younger patients, knowledge of 
appropriate drug dosages and nutritional issues that influence the care of the 
older HIV patient is essential for physicians treating this population. 
Physicians need to recognize the clinical features of HIV-related dementia and 
opportunistic infections that distinguish it from other age-related illnesses 
such as Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. Known risk factors that affect 
older patients should influence physicians to routinely include HIV in their 
differential diagnoses.

PMID: 9371104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Acta Neuropathol. 1997 Nov;94(5):486-92. doi: 10.1007/s004010050737.

Dystrophic neurites are associated with early stage extracellular 
neurofibrillary tangles in the parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam.

Schwab C(1), Steele JC, McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, Canada.

We found tangle-associated neuritic clusters (TANCs), previously reported as 
being present in Alzheimer's disease (AD), to be common in early and mild cases 
of the parkinsonism-dementia complex of Guam (PDC, bodig disease). These 
entities were observed around extracellular neurofibrillary tangles (eNFTs), 
apparently as a transient phenomenon. They were not observed around normal 
neurons, or neurons with intracellular neurofibrillary tangles (iNFTs). They 
were also not observed around late stage eNFTs. The TANCs contained both type 1 
(elongated) and type 2 (globular) dystrophic neurites, as well as small, 
granular structures. The type 1 dystrophic neurites in TANCs were immunostained 
by antibodies to neuroskeletal proteins, while type 2 dystrophic neurites were 
immunostained by antibodies to amyloid precursor protein (APP). The eNFTs 
surrounded by TANCs were almost all immunopositive for amyloid P, while only 
some were immunopositive for C4d, and only a minority had beta-amyloid protein 
(A beta) associated with them. We hypothesize that the eNFTs are a source of 
complement activation which results in destruction of surrounding neurites. We 
further hypothesize that the degenerating neurites are a source of A beta which 
forms long-term deposits around eNFTs.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010050737
PMID: 9386782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Chem Neuropathol. 1997 Sep-Dec;32(1-3):59-74. doi: 10.1007/BF02815167.

The effects of aging and neurodegeneration on apoptosis-associated DNA 
fragmentation and the benefits of nicotinamide.

Mukherjee SK(1), Adams JD Jr.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Toxicology, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles 90033, USA.

In this work, the tertiary butylhydroperoxide- (t-BuOOH) treated mouse was used 
as a model to study the oxidative stress that is associated with various 
neurodegenerative diseases. DNA was found to be an early target of t-BuOOH 
attack. Necrosis was associated with extensive DNA fragmentation that occurred 
in almost all regions of the brain within 20 min following 
intracerebroventricular (icv) injection of 109.7 mg/kg t-BuOOH. Apoptosis was 
associated with high levels of DNA fragmentation that was observed at 48 h after 
icv administration of 21.9 mg/kg t-BuOOH. Susceptibility to DNA damage was found 
to be age-dependent, since 24-mo-old mice exhibited consistently higher and more 
pervasive DNA damage than 8 mo-old-mice. Extensive DNA damage was seen in 
various brain regions in patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) and with both 
Alzheimer and Parkinson disease (AD-PD). These results directly implicate DNA 
damage in neurodegeneration. The DNA fragmentation ob-served can lead to both 
apoptosis and necrosis, as suggested by gel electrophoresis. Nicotinamide, a 
precursor of NAD in the brain, was able to prevent DNA fragmentation induced by 
low-dose t-BuOOH, when coadministered with the toxin.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02815167
PMID: 9437658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Clin Invest. 1997 Dec 15;100(12):3093-104. doi: 10.1172/JCI119864.

Characterization of the AD7C-NTP cDNA expression in Alzheimer's disease and 
measurement of a 41-kD protein in cerebrospinal fluid.

Monte SM(1), Ghanbari K, Frey WH, Beheshti I, Averback P, Hauser SL, Ghanbari 
HA, Wands JR.

Author information:
(1)MGH Cancer Center, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA. delamont@helix.MGH.harvard.edu

We have isolated a novel Alu sequence-containing cDNA, designated AD7c-NTP, that 
is expressed in neurons, and overexpressed in brains with Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). The 1,442-nucleotide AD7c-NTP cDNA encodes an approximately 41-kD protein. 
Expression of AD7c-NTP was confirmed by nucleic acid sequencing of reverse 
transcriptase PCR products isolated from brain. AD7c-NTP cDNA probes hybridized 
with 1. 4 kB mRNA transcripts by Northern blot analysis, and monoclonal 
antibodies generated with the recombinant protein were immunoreactive with 
approximately 41-45-kD and approximately 18-21-kD molecules by Western blot 
analysis. In situ hybridization and immunostaining studies localized AD7c-NTP 
gene expression in neurons. Using a quantitative enzyme-linked sandwich 
immunoassay (Ghanbari, K., I. Beheshti, and H. Ghanbari, manuscript submitted 
for publication) constructed with antibodies to the recombinant protein, 
AD7c-NTP levels were measured under code in 323 clinical and postmortem 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples from AD, age-matched control, Parkinson's 
disease, and neurological disease control patients. The molecular mass of the 
AD7c-NTP detected in CSF was approximately 41 kD. In postmortem CSF, the mean 
concentration of AD7c-NTP in cases of definite AD (9.2+/-8.2 ng/ml) was higher 
than in the aged control group (1.6+/-0.9; P < 0.0001). In CSF samples from 
individuals with early possible or probable AD, the mean concentration of 
AD7c-NTP (4.6+/-3.4) was also elevated relative to the levels in CSF from 
age-matched (1.2+/-0.7) and neurological disease (1.0+/-0.9) controls, and 
ambulatory patients with Parkinson's disease (1.8+/-1.1) (all P < 0.001). CSF 
levels of AD7c-NTP were correlated with Blessed dementia scale scores (r = 0. 
66; P = 0.0001) rather than age (r = -0.06; P > 0.1). In vitro studies 
demonstrated that overexpression of AD7c-NTP in transfected neuronal cells 
promotes neuritic sprouting and cell death, the two principal neuroanatomical 
lesions correlated with dementia in AD. The results suggest that abnormal 
AD7c-NTP expression is associated with AD neurodegeneration, and during the 
early stages of disease, CSF levels correlate with the severity of dementia.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI119864
PMCID: PMC508522
PMID: 9399956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Neurosci Lett. 1997 Dec 5;238(3):139-41. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(97)00858-6.

Tau protein concentrations in cerebrospinal fluid of non-demented Parkinson's 
disease patients.

Molina JA(1), Benito-León J, Jiménez-Jiménez FJ, Ortí-Pareja M, Berbel A, 
Tallón-Barranco A, de Bustos F, Hernánz A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Doce de Octubre, Madrid, 
Spain.

We measured total tau protein concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 
26 non-demented Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and 25 matched controls. When 
compared with controls, PD patients had similar CSF tau protein concentrations. 
These values were not correlated with age, age at onset of PD, duration of PD, 
scores of the Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS), and the Hoehn and Yahr staging, 
and were not influenced significantly by antiparkinsonian drugs. Our results 
suggest that CSF tau protein levels are apparently unrelated to the risk of PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(97)00858-6
PMID: 9464639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1998 Winter;6(1):75-82.

Extrapyramidal side effects in patients with Alzheimer's disease treated with 
low-dose neuroleptic medication.

Caligiuri MP(1), Rockwell E, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, USA. 
mcaligiuri@ucsd.edu

The authors examined whether the presence of extrapyramidal side effects (EPS), 
measured before neuroleptic treatment was initiated, could be used to predict 
the development and severity of neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism (NIP) in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Twenty-four newly medicated probable AD patients were 
assessed with a battery of measures of extrapyramidal motor function. 
Assessments were made before neuroleptic therapy, and 3 and 9 months after 
treatment. Posttreatment clinical findings revealed that 66.7% of the AD 
patients developed NIP. Patients who developed NIP exhibited more severe 
pretreatment bradykinesia on instrument-derived measures. These findings suggest 
that a substantial proportion of AD patients treated with neuroleptics develop 
significant EPS and that the risk for EPS can be estimated before intervention 
by use of instruments measuring motor function.

PMID: 9469217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1998 Jan;108(1):80-91. doi: 
10.1016/s0168-5597(97)00070-1.

Age and stage dependency of P300 latency alterations in non-demented Parkinson's 
disease patients without therapy.

Stanzione P(1), Semprini R, Pierantozzi M, Santilli AM, Fadda L, Traversa R, 
Peppe A, Bernardi G.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Neurologica Tor Vergata, Università di Roma, Italy.

Acoustic P300 was recorded from Fz, Cz and Pz by means of an 'odd-ball' paradigm 
in 44 non-demented de novo Parkinson's disease patients (PD) or PD patients 
under treatment withdrawal, and in 31 age-matched normal subjects, to evaluate 
whether a P300 latency increase was present in PD patients. The influence of age 
and disease stage on latency was successively verified by subgrouping PD 
patients according to different age ('young' and 'old') and disease stage 
('early' or 'advanced'). PD patient data were compared to data of normal 
subjects subgrouped into 'young' and 'old' or, to eliminate the age-dependent 
shift of latency, this latter was adjusted to 60 years in all the examined 
subjects. A significant increase of latency has been found in Fz and Cz in the 
'old' group of PD patients (n = 23) but not in the 'young' group (n = 21) 
utilising both methods. Moreover, a significant latency increase was also 
present in Fz and Cz in the group of 'advanced' PD patients (n = 8), but not in 
the group of 'early' PD patients (n = 36) utilising age-adjusted measurements. 
When the 'early' PD patient group was divided into 'young' (n = 20) and 'old' (n 
= 16), the 'early old' group displayed significantly increased latencies in Fz 
compared with normal subjects. Abnormal P300 latencies were observed, at least 
in one electrode, by analysing the raw data, in 5.0% of the 'early young', 43.7% 
of the 'early old' and up to 62.7% of the 'advanced' patients. Fz represented 
the site in which abnormal P300 latencies were most often observed. Moreover, in 
the total group of PD patients, the P300 delay was significant only on the 
frontal (Fz) site when compared with normal subjects. The reported findings were 
interpreted as if PD produces a sort of 'accelerated effect of age' on the 
cognitive functions, presumably produced by a mechanism different from that 
producing motor impairment since no clear correlation could be detected between 
P300 latency and motor score. The frontal impairment of P300 is in line with 
previous neuropsychological findings obtained in these patients. Considering 
that about 30% of PD patients develop dementia during their disease progression, 
a border-line or abnormal P300 latency observed at disease onset may represent a 
predictive marker of this evolution.

DOI: 10.1016/s0168-5597(97)00070-1
PMID: 9474065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Neurology. 1998 Feb;50(2):388-91. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.2.388.

Apolipoprotein E and alpha-1 antichymotrypsin polymorphism genotyping in 
Alzheimer's disease and in dementia with Lewy bodies. Distinctions between 
diseases.

Lamb H(1), Christie J, Singleton AB, Leake A, Perry RH, Ince PG, McKeith IG, 
Melton LM, Edwardson JA, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK.

The possibility of gene interactions in Alzheimer's disease (AD) has been 
suggested by the finding of an association of the AA genotype of the alpha-1 
antichymotrypsin (AACT) gene and the apolipoprotein E (apoE) epsilon 4/4 
genotype in AD. We tested this possibility by genotyping a large series of 
clinically and neuropathologically confirmed cases of AD and a series of cases 
with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) with a matched control group for the AACT 
locus and apoE. ApoE genotyping showed the established finding of an increased 
frequency of the apoE epsilon 4 allele in AD and in DLB. The AD and DLB groups 
differed between each other with a higher epsilon 2 allele frequency and a 
reduced incidence of the epsilon 4/4 genotype in DLB. Differences in the apoE 
frequencies may account for some of the differences between the two diseases. No 
association was found for the AACT A allele in AD or DLB in the groups as a 
whole or when stratified with respect to apoE, with the exception of a trend 
showing an increased incidence of the apoE epsilon 4/4 AACT AA genotype 
combination in AD patients (chi 2 = 3.18, p = 0.07), although in DLB this was 
not apparent (chi 2 = 0.0, p = 1.0). The AACT A allele is not a major risk 
factor for late-onset AD or DLB.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.50.2.388
PMID: 9484359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Med Hypotheses. 1998 Jan;50(1):25-36. doi: 10.1016/s0306-9877(98)90173-6.

Alzheimer's disease risk factors as related to cerebral blood flow: additional 
evidence.

Crawford JG(1).

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Terre Haute Centerfor Medical 
Education, 47890, USA. iccrawfo@scifac.indstate.edu

In a previous report, Alzheimer's disease risk factors, including alcohol abuse, 
depression, Down's syndrome, cerebral glucose metabolism defect, head trauma, 
old age, Parkinson's disease, sleep disturbance, and underactivity, were shown 
to have an association with reduced cerebral blood flow. In this report an 
attempt is made to strengthen a hypothesis that reduced cerebral blood flow may 
be a required cofactor in the cause of Alzheimer's disease with examples of 
additional putative risks, including aluminum, ApoE 4 alleles, estrogen 
deficiency, family history of dementia, low education-attainment, olfactory 
deficit, and underactivity coupled with gender, considered to have a 
relationship or potential relationship with reduced cerebral blood flow. 
Factors, believed to ameliorate Alzheimer's disease, associated with improved or 
stabilized cerebral blood flow are tabulated. A tentative cerebral blood flow 
nomogram is shown as a potential model to possibly help predict Alzheimer's 
disease susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1016/s0306-9877(98)90173-6
PMID: 9488178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1998 Feb;64(2):178-83. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.64.2.178.

Neuropsychological prediction of dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Mahieux F(1), Fénelon G, Flahault A, Manifacier MJ, Michelet D, Boller F.

Author information:
(1)Service de Neurologie, Hôpital Tenon, Paris, France.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1998 Nov;65(5):804-5.

OBJECTIVE: To identify neuropsychological characteristics predictive of later 
dementia in Parkinson's disease.
METHODS: A comprehensive neuropsychological test battery was administered to a 
cohort of 89 initially non-demented patients with Parkinson's disease 
consecutively enrolled at a specialised Parkinson's disease clinic. They were 
reassessed after a mean of 3.5 years for the diagnosis of dementia. The Cox 
proportional hazards model was used to identify baseline characteristics 
predictive of dementia.
RESULTS: Only four of the baseline clinical characteristics of Parkinson's 
disease and neuropsychological variables remained independently linked to 
subsequent development of dementia: the age of onset of Parkinson's disease (>60 
years; relative risk (RR) 4.1, 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 1.8-24.0, 
p<0.03), the picture completion subtest of the Wechsler adult intelligence scale 
(score<10; RR 4.9, 95% CI 1.0-24.1, p<0.02), the interference section of the 
Stroop test (score<21; RR 3.8, p=0.08), and a verbal fluency task (score<9; RR 
2.7, 95% CI 0.8-9.1, p=0.09). Depressive symptoms and the severity of motor 
impairment were not predictive of dementia.
CONCLUSION: These features are different from the neuropsychological 
characteristics predictive of Alzheimer's dementia in healthy elderly people 
(mainly memory and language performance). They are in keeping with the well 
known specificity of the impairments in Parkinson's disease for visuospatial 
abilities and difficulties in inhibiting irrelevant stimuli. It is postulated 
that the composite nature of the picture completion subtest, involving several 
cognitive abilities impaired in Parkinson's disease, explains its sensitivity.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.64.2.178
PMCID: PMC2169963
PMID: 9489527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


450. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1998 Feb;64(2):184-9. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.64.2.184.

Natural history and survival of 14 patients with corticobasal degeneration 
confirmed at postmortem examination.

Wenning GK(1), Litvan I, Jankovic J, Granata R, Mangone CA, McKee A, Poewe W, 
Jellinger K, Ray Chaudhuri K, D'Olhaberriague L, Pearce RK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Innsbruck, Austria.

OBJECTIVE: To analyse the natural history and survival of corticobasal 
degeneration by investigating the clinical features of 14 cases confirmed by 
postmortem examination.
METHODS: Patients with definite corticobasal degeneration were selected from the 
research and clinical files of seven tertiary medical centres in Austria, the 
United Kingdom, and the United States. Clinical features were analysed in 
detail.
RESULTS: The sample consisted of eight female and six male patients; mean age at 
symptom onset was 63 (SD 7.7) years, and mean disease duration was 7.9 (SD 2.6) 
years. The most commonly reported symptom at onset included asymmetric limb 
clumsiness with or without rigidity (50%) or tremor (21%). At the first 
neurological visit, on average 3.0 (SD 1.9) years after symptom onset, the most 
often encountered extrapyramidal features included unilateral limb rigidity 
(79%) or bradykinesia (71%), postural imbalance (45%), and unilateral limb 
dystonia (43%). Ideomotor apraxia (64%), and to a lesser extent cortical 
dementia (36%), were the most common cortical signs present at the first visit. 
During the course of the disease, virtually all patients developed asymmetric or 
unilateral akinetic rigid parkinsonism and a gait disorder. No patient had a 
dramatic response to levodopa therapy. Median survival time after onset of 
symptoms was 7.9 (SD 0.7) (range, 2.5-12.5) years, and, after the first clinic 
visit, 4.9 (SD 0.7) (range, 0.8-10) years. Early bilateral bradykinesia, frontal 
syndrome, or two out of tremor, rigidity, and bradykinesia, predicted a shorter 
survival.
CONCLUSION: The results confirm that unilateral parkinsonism unresponsive to 
levodopa and limb ideomotor apraxia are the clinical hallmarks of corticobasal 
degeneration, and only a minority of patients with corticobasal degeneration 
present with dementia. The study also suggests that a focal cognitive and 
extrapyramidal motor syndrome is indicative of corticobasal degeneration. 
Survival in corticobasal degeneration was shortened by the early presence of 
(more) widespread parkinsonian features or frontal lobe syndrome.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.64.2.184
PMCID: PMC2169933
PMID: 9489528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Br J Biomed Sci. 1997 Sep;54(3):201-15.

Some developments in brain ageing and dementia.

Perry E(1), Kay DW.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, England, UK.

The aetiology of the common dementias of old age remains incompletely 
understood. Here we describe some of the biological, neurophysiological and 
psychological changes associated with ageing of the human brain, in terms of 
those that occur throughout life and those that are characteristic of 
senescence. Age-dependent diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (IPD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), are considered 
from these viewpoints, and risk factors described. Vascular dementia (VaD) is 
related to hypertension and atherosclerosis and detailed description of its 
pathogenesis is outside the scope of this review. The importance of age as the 
main risk factor raises basic questions about the relationship of these diseases 
to the ageing process itself. Similarities and differences between ageing and 
disease may be important for a rational approach to prevention and treatment of 
cognitive decline and dementia in later life.

PMID: 9499598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Int Psychogeriatr. 1997 Sep;9(3):327-41. doi: 10.1017/s104161029700447x.

Risk factors for clinically diagnosed Alzheimer's disease: a case-control study 
of a Greek population.

Tsolaki M(1), Fountoulakis K, Chantzi E, Kazis A.

Author information:
(1)3rd Department of Neurology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, G. 
Papanikolaou Hospital, Greece.

Many efforts have been made to trace the causes of Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
There are, however, many points of controversy among reports from the same 
country as well as among reports from different countries. The current study is 
a case-control study to determine the risk factors in the development of AD in 
Greece. Sixty-five patients with AD and 69 age-matched controls were examined. 
All patients with AD fulfilled the DSM-IV criteria for AD and NINCDS-ADRDA 
criteria for probable AD. Demographic characteristics such as gender, current 
marital status, who he/she is living with, education, main place of residence in 
childhood, adulthood, and late life, occupational hazards, patient's medical 
history (history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension), life habits like 
alcohol consumption and smoking, and a history of head trauma, heart attack, 
stroke, parkinsonism, or depression were collected from the subject or from an 
informant. A family history of selected diseases (hypertension, diabetes 
mellitus, dementia, Parkinson's disease, Down's syndrome, stroke) was also 
elicited. Ages of father and mother at birth were also recorded. Chi-square 
test, Kruskal-Wallis analysis of variance, cluster analysis, and logistic 
regression analysis were used for statistical analysis. The results (chi-square 
test) showed a statistically significant difference between patients with 
dementia of the Alzheimer type and controls as far as marital status (p = .04), 
the subject's history of major depressive episode (p = .02), and family history 
of dementia (p = .002) were concerned. Logistic regression analysis results 
produced a complex model of family aggregation of dementia, with patients with a 
history of depression and family history of dementia having an up to seven times 
higher risk of developing AD. These findings, especially a family history of 
dementia, are consistent with most of the literature.

DOI: 10.1017/s104161029700447x
PMID: 9513031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Magnes Res. 1997 Dec;10(4):339-53.

Are age-related neurodegenerative diseases linked with various types of 
magnesium depletion?

Durlach J(1), Bac P, Durlach V, Durlach A, Bara M, Guiet-Bara A.

Author information:
(1)SDRM, Hôpital Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, Paris, France.

Age-related human neurodegenerative diseases are a major social and medical 
problem. It is therefore logical to take into consideration every theory with an 
overall approach to neurodegenerative diseases. This environmental proposal 
relies mainly on data concerning the Western Pacific amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis-Parkinsonism-dementia complex (WP ALS-PD) considered as 'a prototypal 
human neurodegenerative disease' and on extrapolation from it to the bulk of 
neurodegenerative diseases (NDD). NDD would be due to an accelerated ageing 
process in certain populations of neurons due to the noxious synergy of (1) 
increased environmental slow deleterious factors (such as slow toxins) and of 
(2) decreased environmental protective factors (Mg deficient intake 
particularly). First, it was observed that three apparently dissimilar 
conditions occurred at extraordinary high rates in the Guam area: motoneuron 
disease (ALS), Parkinson's disease (P) and Alzheimer's-like dementia (D). Next, 
several other foci of endemic ALS-PD were found in Asia and Oceania in three 
Western Pacific population groups. These included the Chamorro people in Mariana 
Islands (Guam and Rota), the Auyu and Jakai people of West New Guinea and the 
Japanese residents of the Kii peninsula (Honshu island). The post-Second World 
War decline of the occurrence of WP ALS-PD in all three high incidence disease 
foci coupled with the absence of demonstrable heritable or transmissible factors 
had led to focus the search for the cause of this degenerative disease on 
nontransmissible environmental factors that are disappearing as the susceptible 
population groups acculturate to modern way. Epidemiologic study has shown that 
preference for traditional Chamorro food is the only one of 23 tested variables 
significantly associated with an increased risk for PD. An early suggestion 
incriminated the toxic seed of the false sago palm (Cycas circinalis L) which 
was used in traditional food and medicine. Laboratory investigation of cycad 
seed revealed the presence of various toxins and particularly of an 'unusual' 
non protein aminoacid: L-BMAA (beta-N-methylamino-L-alanine), an excitotoxic 
aminoacid. This slow toxin presents some structural similarity to another 
'unusual' excitotoxic aminoacid: L-BOAA (beta-N-oxalyl-amino-L-alanine), an 
exogenous neurotoxin present in the grass pea (Lathyrus sativus) whose excessive 
consumption may cause lathyrism. The excitotoxicity of both L-BMAA and L-BOAA 
mainly concerns non-NMDA receptors. The neurotoxicity of these aminoacids varies 
with experimental models failing to induce an experimental model akin to WP 
ALS-PD or displaying many of the motor-system and behavioral changes of WP 
ALS-PD. It may be due to the presence of physiological levels of bicarbonate or 
of various toxic cofactors: bio-organic such as cycasin or inorganic such as 
pollutant metals e.g. aluminum or manganese, together with the lack of 
protective factors (e.g. calcium and magnesium deficiencies). Combined Al 
intoxication with Ca-Mg deficiencies is a reasonable model to investigate the 
pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases and eventually to screen their 
treatments. It may also be considered as a model of magnesium deficit, but it 
does not concern simple magnesium deficiency reversible with mere oral 
physiological magnesium supplementation. Magnesium deficiency cannot result in 
neurodegenerative disease. Combined Al intoxication with Ca-Mg deficiencies is 
not reversible through physiological oral magnesium supplementation. It 
therefore constitutes a type of experimental magnesium depletion model, 
instrumental in the investigation of the pathogenesis of magnesium depletion and 
in the screening of its still unknown possible treatments. (ABSTRACT TRUNCATED)

PMID: 9513930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Feb 7;81(1):98-107. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980207)81:1<98::aid-ajmg17>3.0.co;2-r.

Initial results of a genome survey for novel Alzheimer's disease risk genes: 
association with a locus on the X chromosome.

Zubenko GS(1), Stiffler JS, Hughes HB, Hurtt MR, Kaplan BB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Corrected and republished in
    Am J Med Genet. 1998 Mar 28;81(2):196-205.

As the initial step in a systematic genome survey, 16 simple sequence tandem 
repeat polymorphisms that span the X chromosome at an average spacing of 10 cM 
were examined for allelic associations with typical-onset Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). The efficiency of this survey was substantially enhanced by genotyping 
pools of genomic DNA from 50 autopsy-confirmed AD cases and 50 autopsied 
controls who were similar in sex ratio, race, and age at death. The frequency of 
the DXS1047 202-bp allele was twice as common among AD cases (0.45+/-S.E. 0.06) 
than controls (0.22+/-S.E. 0.05), a finding that was reproduced in an 
independent and geographically disparate sample. Consistent with Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium, the proportion of women with AD who carried the 202-bp allele, 73% 
was nearly double that observed for men with AD, 38%. However, the frequency of 
the 202-bp allele was similar for men and women and the presence of this allele 
did not affect the age at onset of dementia in either sex. Furthermore, the 
frequency of the DXS1047 202-bp allele in AD cases and controls was unaffected 
by the APOE genotype, indicating that these two loci modulate AD risk 
independently. Finally, the frequency of the 202-bp allele among 50 
autopsy-confirmed cases of Parkinson's disease (0.29+/-S.E. 0.06) was 
indistinguishable from the control value, reflecting relative specificity for 
this allelic association with AD.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1096-8628(19980207)81:1<98::aid-ajmg17>3.0.co;2-r
PMID: 9514595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Arch Neurol. 1998 Mar;55(3):326-35. doi: 10.1001/archneur.55.3.326.

Clinicopathologic studies in cognitively healthy aging and Alzheimer's disease: 
relation of histologic markers to dementia severity, age, sex, and 
apolipoprotein E genotype.

Berg L(1), McKeel DW Jr, Miller JP, Storandt M, Rubin EH, Morris JC, Baty J, 
Coats M, Norton J, Goate AM, Price JL, Gearing M, Mirra SS, Saunders AM.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Center of Washington University, St Louis, Mo 63108-2293, 
USA. adrcsec@neuro.wustl.edu

OBJECTIVE: To study differences between subjects with Alzheimer disease (AD) and 
cognitively intact control subjects, with respect to brain histologic markers of 
AD, and the relationship of those markers in the AD group to severity of 
dementia, age at death, sex, and apolipoprotein E genotype.
SETTING: Washington University Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, St Louis, 
Mo.
DESIGN AND SUBJECTS: Consecutive neuropathologic series of 224 prospectively 
studied volunteer research subjects, 186 with dementia of the Alzheimer type 
(DAT) or "incipient" DAT and confirmed to have AD by postmortem examination and 
13 cognitively intact subjects, confirmed to lack postmortem findings of AD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Brain densities (number per square millimeter) of senile 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles, extent of cerebral amyloid angiopathy, 
cortical Lewy bodies, and apolipoprotein E genotype.
RESULTS: Neocortical neurofibrillary tangle densities were substantially 
correlated with dementia severity, and to a greater degree than was true for 
senile plaque densities. When infarcts, hemorrhages, and Parkinson disease 
changes coexisted with AD, neurofibrillary tangle and senile plaque densities 
were lower. Plaque-predominant AD was found in a greater proportion of subjects 
with milder than more severe dementia. Entorhinal cortical Lewy bodies were no 
more frequent in plaque-predominant AD than in the remaining AD cases. 
Increasing age at death was negatively correlated with dementia severity and 
densities of senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. The apolipoprotein E 
epsilon4 allele frequency was greater in AD than in control subjects but 
decreased with increasing age. After controlling for dementia severity, senile 
plaque densities were only weakly related to epsilon4 allele frequency, and only 
in hippocampus. However, the degree of cerebral amyloid angiopathy was clearly 
related to epsilon4 allele frequency. Among subjects diagnosed during life as 
having DAT or incipient DAT, only 7% were found to have a neuropathologic 
disorder other than AD causing their dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) The order of the strength of relationships between densities of 
histologic markers and dementia severity in AD is neurofibrillary tangles 
greater than cored senile plaques greater than total senile plaques. (2) 
Advanced age at death is associated with somewhat less severe dementia and fewer 
senile plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. (3) Plaque-predominant AD may 
represent a developmental stage in AD. (4) Despite a substantial effect of 
apolipoprotein E epsilon4 as a risk factor for AD, on decreasing the age at AD 
onset, and increasing the amount of cerebral amyloid angiopathy, its effect on 
senile plaque densities is variable and complex, being confounded with age, 
dementia severity, and methodologic differences. (5) Stringent clinical 
diagnostic criteria for DAT, even in the very mild stage, and senile 
plaque-based neuropathologic criteria for AD are highly accurate.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.55.3.326
PMID: 9520006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Gerontol B Psychol Sci Soc Sci. 1998 Mar;53(2):P73-85. doi: 
10.1093/geronb/53b.2.p73.

Personality counts for a lot: predictors of mental and physical health of spouse 
caregivers in two disease groups.

Hooker K(1), Monahan DJ, Bowman SR, Frazier LD, Shifren K.

Author information:
(1)Syracuse University, USA. hookerk@ucs.orst.edu

The purpose of this study were to examine the influence of personality on mental 
and physical health of spouse caregivers and to determine whether there were 
differences in such influences depending on disease context. The disease 
contexts compared were Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD; 
with no coexisting dementia)--both chronic, degenerative diseases of later life. 
It was predicted that personality would be related to mental and physical 
health, directly and indirectly, and that AD caregivers would have higher levels 
of perceived stress and worse mental and physical health outcomes. Participants 
in the study were 175 caregivers (88 AD; 87 PD) living at home with their ill 
spouses. The data provided an excellent fit to the hypothesized model of the 
relationships between personality, disease group, social support, perceived 
stress, and mental and physical health. Seventy-eight percent of the variance in 
mental health was accounted for and 35% of the variance in physical health was 
explained. Personality had significant direct and indirect effects on mental 
health and significant indirect effects on physical health. As predicted, AD 
caregivers had significantly worse mental health than PD caregivers; however, AD 
caregivers had better physical health than PD caregivers, controlling for other 
variables in the model. These results are discussed in relation to the existing 
caregiving and behavioral medicine literature. Future research should include 
different domains of personality--states and longer term self-regulatory 
processes in addition to traits--to advance models of caregiving processes 
further.

DOI: 10.1093/geronb/53b.2.p73
PMID: 9520924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1998 Mar;12(1):45-8. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199803000-00007.

Apolipoprotein E4 in Parkinson disease and dementia: new data and meta-analysis 
of published studies.

Inzelberg R(1), Chapman J, Treves TA, Asherov A, Kipervasser S, Hilkewicz O, 
Verchovsky R, Klimowitzky S, Korczyn AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Sackler Faculty of 
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Ramat-Aviv, Israel.

The authors examined whether the epsilon4 allele might be associated with 
dementia in Parkinson disease (PD), given that the dementia of PD shares 
neuroanatomic and neurochemical features with Alzheimer disease (AD) and that 
many recent studies have found a high prevalence of the epsilon4 allele of 
apolipoprotein E (ApoE) in AD. The authors examined patients with PD (n=125, 47 
demented) and unrelated controls (n=93) using a short mental test. DNA was 
obtained from blood leukocytes. The relevant portion of the apolipoprotein E 
(ApoE) gene was amplified by polymerase chain reaction, and the epsilon4 allele 
was identified using a restriction enzyme. The frequency of the ApoE epsilon4 
allele in demented patients with PD (14%) was not greater than that in 
nondemented patients (17%), whereas patients with PD as a whole showed a trend 
toward a higher epsilon4 allele frequency (16%) than age-matched controls (10%, 
p=0.07). The epsilon4 allele frequency in nondemented patients with PD was 
significantly higher than in controls (p=0.055). These results and the 
meta-analysis of four published reports fail to support the hypothesis that the 
epsilon4 allele is associated with dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199803000-00007
PMID: 9539410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Brain Pathol. 1998 Apr;8(2):299-324. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00156.x.

Dementia with Lewy bodies. A distinct non-Alzheimer dementia syndrome?

Ince PG(1), Perry EK, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)University of Newcastle upon Tyne, and Department of Neuropathology, 
Newcastle General Hospital, UK. paulince@hamsterley.u-net.com

Lewy body formation is central to the pathological phenotype of a spectrum of 
disorders. The most familiar of these is the extrapyramidal syndrome of 
idiopathic Lewy-body Parkinson's disease (PD). Studies of dementia in the 
elderly suggest that another manifestation of Lewy body pathology is equally or 
more common than Parkinson's disease. This syndrome of Dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) has been given a number of diagnostic labels and is characterised by 
dementia, relatively mild parkinsonism, visual hallucinations, and fluctuations 
in conscious level. Although many of these features can arise in Parkinson's 
disease, the patients with DLB tend to have early neuropsychiatric features 
which predominate the clinical picture, and the diagnosis of the syndrome in 
practice is more concerned with the differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Distinction from AD has clinical importance because of potentially 
differing therapeutic implications. Diagnostic guidelines for the clinical 
diagnosis and pathological evaluation of DLB are reviewed. Research into the 
disorder has centered around characterising the clinical, neuropsychological, 
pathological, neurochemical and genetic relationships with Alzheimer's disease 
on the one hand, and Parkinson's disease on the other. Many cases of DLB have 
prominent pathological features of AD and there are some shared genetic risk 
factors. Differences from the pathology of PD are predominantly quantitative 
rather than qualitative and evidence is discussed which suggests that DLB 
represents a clinicopathological syndrome within the spectrum of Lewy body 
disorders. The possibility that the syndrome represents a chance association of 
PD and AD is not supported by published studies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.1998.tb00156.x
PMCID: PMC8098421
PMID: 9546289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Int Psychogeriatr. 1997 Dec;9(4):381-8. doi: 10.1017/s1041610297004523.

A detailed phenomenological comparison of complex visual hallucinations in 
dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Ballard C(1), McKeith I, Harrison R, O'Brien J, Thompson P, Lowery K, Perry R, 
Ince P.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle Upon 
Tyne, England.

Visual hallucinations (VH) are a core feature of dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB), but little is known about their phenomenology. A total of 73 dementia 
patients (42 DLB, 30 Alzheimer's disease [AD], 1 undiagnosed) in contact with 
clinical services were assessed with a detailed standardized inventory. DLB was 
diagnosed according to the criteria of McKeith and colleagues, AD was diagnosed 
using the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria. Autopsy confirmation has been obtained when 
possible. VH were defined using the definition of Burns and colleagues. Detailed 
descriptions of hallucinatory experiences were recorded. Annual follow-up 
interviews were undertaken. The clinical diagnosis has been confirmed in 18 of 
the 19 cases that have come to autopsy. A total of 93% of DLB patients and 27% 
of AD patients experienced VH. DLB patients were significantly more likely to 
experience multiple VH that persisted over follow-up. They were significantly 
more likely to hear their VH speak but there were no significant differences in 
the other phenomenological characteristics including whether the hallucinations 
moved, the time of day that they were experienced, their size, the degree of 
insight, and whether they were complete. VH may be more likely to be multiple, 
to speak, and to be persistent in DLB patients. These characteristics could 
potentially aid accurate diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1017/s1041610297004523
PMID: 9549588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Neurosci Res. 1998 Apr 1;52(1):1-6. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(19980401)52:1<1::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-I.

Neurodegeneration and aging: role of the second genome.

Graeber MB(1), Grasbon-Frodl E, Eitzen UV, Kösel S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromorphology, Max-Planck-Institute of Neurobiology, 
Martinsried, Germany. neuropat@neuro.mpg.de

The latest Health Report of the World Health Organization predicts a significant 
increase in the age of human populations over the next two decades. In the 
developed world, at least 20% of the population will be older than 65 years. 
This development together with the as yet unknown etiology of many 
neurodegenerative disorders has caused an increased interest in the biology and 
pathophysiology of mitochondria. Dysfunction of mitochondria has been linked to 
both normal aging and neurodegenerative disorders, with the latter occurring 
much more frequently at higher age. Specifically, genetic defects in 
mitochondria have been shown to accumulate during life, and certain mutations of 
mitochondrial genes have been implicated in the etiology of Parkinson's and 
Alzheimer's diseases. In addition, a large number of new mitochondrial diseases 
have been identified following the first description of mitochondrial mutations 
10 years ago. While there can be little doubt that DNA defects of mitochondria 
play a role in aging, specific mutations of mitochondrial genes underlying 
Parkinson's or Alzheimer's diseases remain to be identified. There is evidence, 
however, that mutations of the mitochondrial genome may increase the 
susceptibility to neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(19980401)52:1<1::AID-JNR1>3.0.CO;2-I
PMID: 9556024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Neurobiol Aging. 1998 Jan-Feb;19(1):41-5. doi: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00165-6.

Tubulin immunopositive structures resembling intracellular neurofibrillary 
tangles.

Schwab C(1), McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research and the Neurodegenerative 
Disorders Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Tau protein promotes microtubule assembly. When aberrantly phosphorylated, it 
forms the core of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs). We investigated by 
immunohistochemistry whether microtubules might also be involved in NFT 
formation. We found beta-tubulin immunoreactive NFT-like structures in Alzheimer 
disease, and, more frequently, in the parkinsonism dementia complex of Guam 
(bodig disease) and Down Syndrome. The beta-tubulin immunoreactive structures 
were intracellular and appeared at an early stage of tangle development. This 
may indicate an involvement of tubulin in NFT formation.

DOI: 10.1016/s0197-4580(97)00165-6
PMID: 9562502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Neurology. 1998 Apr;50(4):1138-40. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1138.

Systemic iron metabolism and mortality from Parkinson's disease.

Marder K(1), Logroscino G, Tang MX, Graziano J, Cote L, Louis E, Alfaro B, Mejia 
H, Slavkovich V, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Department of Neurology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Six measures of systemic iron metabolism were used to predict mortality among 
103 patients with Parkinson's disease and 353 controls followed in a 
longitudinal study. Adjusting for gender, education, ethnicity, presence of 
dementia, and extrapyramidal signs, transferrin receptor concentration was 
strongly associated with mortality in patients with PD but not controls. This 
increase in serum transferrin receptor concentration before death suggests that 
the previously observed perturbation in iron metabolism continues throughout the 
disease course.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1138
PMID: 9566409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Neurology. 1998 Apr;50(4):1141-3. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1141.

Postmenopausal estrogen use and Parkinson's disease with and without dementia.

Marder K(1), Tang MX, Alfaro B, Mejia H, Cote L, Jacobs D, Stern Y, Sano M, 
Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Department of Neurology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We investigated the effects of estrogen replacement therapy (ERT) on the risk of 
development of dementia in 87 women with Parkinson's disease without dementia 
(PDND), 80 women with Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD), and 989 
nondemented healthy women from the same community. ERT was protective for the 
development of dementia within the setting of PD (OR 0.22, 95% CI 0.05-1.0) and 
when PDD patients were compared with controls (OR 0.24, 95% CI 0.07-0.78), but 
did not affect the risk of PD. The results of the study suggest that a 
randomized clinical trial of ERT may be warranted.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.50.4.1141
PMID: 9566410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Arch Environ Health. 1998 Jan-Feb;53(1):71-4. doi: 10.1080/00039899809605691.

Electrical occupations and neurodegenerative disease: analysis of U.S. mortality 
data.

Savitz DA(1), Loomis DP, Tse CK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599-7400, USA.

Investigators have hypothesized that occupations involving electric and magnetic 
field exposure are associated with a variety of health problems, including 
neurological disease. The authors conducted a case-control study, and they used 
U.S. death certificates with occupational coding to compare male cases of 
Alzheimer's disease (n = 256), Parkinson's disease (n = 168), and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (n = 114) with controls matched for age and calendar time. The 
authors selected controls in a 3:1 ratio to cases from persons who died of 
causes other than leukemia, brain cancer, and breast cancer. Overall 
associations with electrical occupations were modest (i.e., adjusted odds ratios 
of 1.2, 1.1, and 1.3 for Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, respectively). Individual electrical occupations 
were associated more strongly with disease than overall electrical occupations, 
particularly amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, for which relative risks ranged from 
2 to 5 across several job categories. The largest associations with all three 
diseases occurred for power plant operators.

DOI: 10.1080/00039899809605691
PMID: 9570311 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


465. BMJ. 1998 Apr 18;316(7139):1191-6. doi: 10.1136/bmj.316.7139.1191.

Investigation by Parkinson's Disease Research Group of United Kingdom into 
excess mortality seen with combined levodopa and selegiline treatment in 
patients with early, mild Parkinson's disease: further results of randomised 
trial and confidential inquiry.

Ben-Shlomo Y(1), Churchyard A, Head J, Hurwitz B, Overstall P, Ockelford J, Lees 
AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Social Medicine, University of Bristol, Bristol BS8 2PR, UK.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1998 Apr 18;316(7139):1182-3.
    BMJ. 1998 Apr 18;316(7139):1183-4.
    BMJ. 1998 Dec 5;317(7172):1586.
    BMJ. 1998 Dec 5;317(7172):1586-7.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the excess mortality observed in patients who 
received both levodopa and selegiline in a randomised trial could be explained 
by revised diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, autonomic or cardiovascular 
effects, more rapid disease progression, or drug interactions.
DESIGN: Open randomised trial and blind comparison and reclassification of the 
cause of death of patients who were recruited from 93 hospitals between 1985 and 
1990 and who had died before December 1993 in arms 1 and 2.
SETTING: United Kingdom.
SUBJECTS: 624 patients with early Parkinson's disease who were not receiving 
dopaminergic treatment and a subgroup fo 120 patients who died during the trial.
INTERVENTIONS: Levodopa and a dopa carboxylase inhibitor (arm 1), levodopa and a 
dopa decarboxylase inhibitor in combination with selegiline (arm 2), or 
bromocriptine alone (arm 3).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: All cause mortality for 520 subjects in arms 1 and 2 and 
for 104 subjects who were randomised into these arms from arm 3. Cause specific 
mortality for people who died in the original arms 1 and 2 on the basis of the 
opinion of a panel, revised diagnosis and disability ratings, evidence from 
clinical records of either autonomic or cardiovascular episodes, other clinical 
features before death, and drug interactions.
RESULTS: After extended follow up (mean 6.8 years) until the end of September 
1995, when arm 2 was terminated, the hazard ratio for arm 2 compared with arm 1 
was 1.32 (95% confidence interval 0.98 to 1.79). For subjects who were 
randomised from arm 3 the hazard ratio for arm 2 was 1.54 (0.83 to 2.87). When 
all subjects were included the hazard ratio was 1.33 (1.02 to 1.74) and after 
adjustment for other baseline factors it was 1.30 (0.99 to 1.72). The excess 
mortality seemed to be greatest in the third and fourth year of follow up. Cause 
specific death rates showed an excess of deaths from Parkinson's disease only 
(hazard ratio 2.5 (1.3 to 4.7)). No significant differences were found for 
revised diagnosis, disability rating scores, autonomic or cardiovascular events, 
other clinical features, or drug interactions. Patients who died in arm 2 were 
more likely to have had possible dementia and a history of falls before death 
compared with those who died in arm 1.
CONCLUSION: The results consistently show excess mortality in patients treated 
with combined levodopa and selegiline. Revised diagnosis, autonomic or 
cardiovascular events, or drug interactions could not explain this finding, but 
falls and possible dementia were more common in arm 2. The results do not 
support combined treatment in patients with newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease. 
In more advanced disease, combined treatment should perhaps be avoided in 
patients with postural hypotension, frequent falls, confusion, or dementia.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.316.7139.1191
PMCID: PMC28519
PMID: 9583926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Neuroepidemiology. 1998;17(2):96-104. doi: 10.1159/000026159.

Gene-toxin interaction as a putative risk factor for Parkinson's disease with 
dementia.

Hubble JP(1), Kurth JH, Glatt SL, Kurth MC, Schellenberg GD, Hassanein RE, 
Lieberman A, Koller WC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, 
USA.

We had previously examined environmental, sociodemographic and clinical 
variables as predictors for Parkinson's disease with dementia (PD + D) and found 
that lower educational attainment, greater motor impairment and advanced age at 
disease onset were more common in PD + D than in subjects with Parkinson's 
disease without dementia (PD-D). We now explore the hypothesis that genetic 
traits coupled with nongenetic factors may raise the risk of development of PD + 
D. The study cohort of 43 PD + D and 51 PD-D subjects was analyzed examining 
environmental, sociodemographic and clinical variables along with 3 candidate 
gene markers: poor debrisoquine metabolizer allele (CYP 2D6 29B+), monoamine 
oxidase B allele 1, and apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele. Variables were 
initially entered into a multivariate model singly. Again lower education, age 
at onset and motor impairment appeared as predictors of PD + D while other 
variables (including allele status) failed to emerge as significant individual 
risk factors for dementia. We then examined environmental and genetic variables 
analyzed in tandem to look for potential variable interactions. Subjects who had 
pesticide exposure and at least 1 copy of the CYP 2D6 29B+ allele had 83% 
predicted probability of PD + D (stepwise logistic regression model: p = 
0.0491). This case-control study provides preliminary evidence that a gene-toxin 
interaction may play an etiological role in PD + D. Further assessment of the 
role of these putative risk factors in incident dementia in PD is indicated.

DOI: 10.1159/000026159
PMID: 9592786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Neurology. 1998 May;50(5):1327-31. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.5.1327.

Levodopa improves motor function without impairing cognition in mild 
non-demented Parkinson's disease patients. Parkinson Study Group.

Growdon JH(1), Kieburtz K, McDermott MP, Panisset M, Friedman JH.

Author information:
(1)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to determine the effects of short-term 
levodopa administration on motor, cognitive, and psychiatric aspects of 
Parkinson's disease (PD).
BACKGROUND: The effects of levodopa on mental processes in PD are controversial. 
Opinions range from the claim that levodopa improves cognition to the opposite 
view that levodopa causes or exacerbates dementia, delusions, and 
hallucinations. Of the 800 idiopathic PD patients enrolled in the original 
DATATOP study, 387 reached the end point of functional disabilities sufficiently 
severe to require levodopa treatment. There were 263 men and 124 women who were 
comparable with regard to age, symptom duration of PD, and measures of PD 
severity. We compared test scores on motor performance, cognitive function, and 
psychiatric status before levodopa and again within 6 months after initiation of 
levodopa therapy.
RESULTS: Levodopa administration improved all motor functions significantly. The 
improvement was significantly greater in women than in men. Levodopa 
administration did not worsen scores on any cognitive tests, and there were 
quantitatively small but significant improvements in tests of frontal lobe 
function. Levodopa exerted only minor effects on psychiatric measures. There 
were small but significant decreases in scores for depression, and increases in 
vivid dreams and hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: Levodopa administration for up to 6 months in dosages sufficient to 
improve motor function has only small effects on cognitive function and 
psychiatric status in mild to moderate PD patients. We conclude that motor 
symptoms in early PD, which result from dopamine depletion, are dissociable from 
cognitive functions and psychiatric status, which may be more dependent on 
nondopaminergic mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.50.5.1327
PMID: 9595982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


468. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1998 May;57(5):415-25. doi: 
10.1097/00005072-199805000-00005.

Distribution of reducible 4-hydroxynonenal adduct immunoreactivity in Alzheimer 
disease is associated with APOE genotype.

Montine KS(1), Reich E, Neely MD, Sidell KR, Olson SJ, Markesbery WR, Montine 
TJ.

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Department of Pathology, Nashville, 
Tenn 37232, USA.

Two major risk factors for late-onset familial and sporadic Alzheimer disease 
(AD), a leading cause of dementia worldwide, are increasing age and inheritance 
of the epsilon4 allele of the apolipoprotein E gene (APOE4). Several 
isoform-specific effects of apoE have been proposed; however, the mechanisms by 
which apoE isoforms influence the pathogenesis of AD are unknown. Also 
associated with AD is increased lipid peroxidation in the regions of the brain 
most damaged by disease. 4-hydroxynonenal (HNE), the most potent neurotoxic 
product of lipid peroxidation, is thought to be deleterious to cells through 
reactions with protein nucleophiles. We tested the hypothesis that accumulation 
of the most common forms of HNE-protein adducts, borohydride-reducible adducts, 
is associated with AD and examined whether there was a relationship to APOE. Our 
results demonstrated that reducible HNE adducts were increased in the 
hippocampus, entorhinal cortex, and temporal cortex of patients with AD. 
Furthermore, our data showed that the pattern of reducible HNE adduct 
accumulation was related to APOE genotype; AD patients homozygous for APOE4 had 
pyramidal neuron cytoplasmic accumulation of reducible HNE adducts, while AD 
APOE3 homozygotes had both pyramidal neuron and astrocyte accumulation of 
reducible HNE adducts. This is in contrast to our previous observations that a 
distinct HNE protein adduct, the pyrrole adduct, accumulates on neurofibrillary 
tangles in AD patients. We conclude that APOE genotype influences the cellular 
distribution of increased reducible HNE adduct accumulation in AD.

DOI: 10.1097/00005072-199805000-00005
PMID: 9596412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1998 Apr;57(4):334-7. doi: 
10.1097/00005072-199804000-00005.

Nigral and cortical Lewy bodies and dystrophic nigral neurites in Parkinson's 
disease and cortical Lewy body disease contain alpha-synuclein immunoreactivity.

Irizarry MC(1), Growdon W, Gomez-Isla T, Newell K, George JM, Clayton DF, Hyman 
BT.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital-East, 
Charlestown 02129, USA.

A mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene has recently been linked to some cases of 
familial Parkinson's disease (PD). We characterized the expression of this 
presynaptic protein in the midbrain, striatum, and temporal cortex of control, 
PD, and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) brain. Control brain showed punctate 
pericellular immunostaining. PD brain demonstrated alpha-synuclein 
immunoreactivity in nigral Lewy bodies, pale bodies and abnormal neurites. Rare 
neuronal soma in PD brain were immunoreactive for alpha-synuclein. DLB cases 
demonstrated these findings as well as alpha-synuclein immunoreactivity in 
cortical Lewy bodies and CA2-3 neurites. These results suggest that, even in 
sporadic cases, there is an early and direct role for alpha-synuclein in the 
pathogenesis of PD and the neuropathologically related disorder DLB.

DOI: 10.1097/00005072-199804000-00005
PMID: 9600226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Am J Med Genet. 1998 Mar 28;81(2):196-205.

Initial results of a genome survey for novel Alzheimer's disease risk genes: 
association with a locus on the X chromosome.

Zubenko GS(1), Stiffler JS, Hughes HB, Hurtt MR, Kaplan BB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, 
University of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15213, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Am J Med Genet. 1998 Feb 7;81(1):98-107.

As the initial step in a systematic genome survey, 16 simple sequence tandem 
repeat polymorphisms that span the X chromosome at an average spacing of 10 cM 
were examined for allelic associations with typical-onset Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). The efficiency of this survey was substantially enhanced by genotyping 
pools of genomic DNA from 50 autopsy-confirmed AD cases and 50 autopsied 
controls who were similar in sex ratio, race, and age at death. The frequency of 
the DXS1047 202-bp allele was twice as common among AD cases (0.45 +/- S.E. 
0.06) than controls (0.22 +/- S.E. 0.05), a finding that was reproduced in an 
independent and geographically disparate sample. Consistent with Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium, the proportion of women with AD who carried the 202-bp allele, 73% 
was nearly double that observed for men with AD, 38%. However, the frequency of 
the 202-bp allele was similar for men and women and the presence of this allele 
did not affect the age at onset of dementia in either sex. Furthermore, the 
frequency of the DXS1047 202-bp allele in AD cases and controls was unaffected 
by the APOE genotype, indicating that these two loci modulate AD risk 
independently. Finally, the frequency of the 202-bp allele among 50 
autopsy-confirmed cases of Parkinson's disease (0.29 +/- S.E. 0.06) was 
indistinguishable from the control value, reflecting relative specificity for 
this allelic association with AD.

PMID: 9613863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Am J Med. 1998 Apr 27;104(4A):2S-12S; discussion 39S-42S. doi: 
10.1016/s0002-9343(98)00022-9.

The initial recognition and diagnosis of dementia.

Knopman DS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Minnesota Hospital, Minneapolis 55455, 
USA.

Dementia is characterized by a decline in cognition, behavioral disturbances, 
and interference with daily functioning and independence. Diagnosis is sometimes 
delayed as patients or family members often misattribute obvious manifestations 
of cognitive decline to normal aging rather than to the onset of a degenerative 
disease. Many physicians do not perform mental status examinations or do not use 
them effectively to detect early symptoms. Clinical markers are available to 
decrease the difficulty in distinguishing dementia from depression and 
confusional states such as delirium. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common 
form of dementia; others include rapidly progressive dementias, dementias 
associated with strokes and Parkinson's disease, and frontotemporal dementias. 
Often, AD coexists with other forms of dementia. Sensitivity to early warning 
signs, interviews with family members, and mental status examinations are 
essential to early detection of AD, and will prove useful to primary-care 
physicians who care for older patients.

DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9343(98)00022-9
PMID: 9617846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Lancet. 1998 May 30;351(9116):1631. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)77686-8.

Parkinsonian signs and mortality from Alzheimer's disease.

Bennett DA, Beckett LA, Wilson RS, Murray AM, Evans DA.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)77686-8
PMID: 9620721 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 1998 May;4(3):279-84.

Prospective comparative study of the evolution of probable Alzheimer's disease 
and Parkinson's disease dementia.

Stern Y(1), Tang MX, Jacobs DM, Sano M, Marder K, Bell K, Dooneief G, Schofield 
P, Côté L.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Department of Neurology, Columbia University 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032. ys11@columbia.edu

No previous comparison of test performance in probable Alzheimer's disease (pAD) 
and Parkinson's disease (PD) dementia has provided information about potential 
differences in the dementing process. This study compared the evolution of 
cognitive changes associated with these dementias. Generalized estimating 
equations (GEE) applied to regression analyses with repeated measures were used 
to evaluate cognitive changes over 1 to 3 years prior to the point when dementia 
was diagnosed in 40 matched pairs of patients with incident pAD and PD dementia. 
Both groups' performance declined on the Short Blessed, Selective Reminding Test 
(SRT; total recall, long-term retrieval, and delayed recall), Boston Naming 
Test, Category Fluency, and Similarities. The decline on naming and SRT delayed 
recall was more rapid in the PD dementia group, suggesting that these 
performance deficits emerge earlier in the development of pAD. The PD dementia 
group performed worse on Category Fluency throughout the follow-up period, 
suggesting either that dementia is overlaid on this preexisting performance 
deficit or that this type of executive deficit is an early manifestation of 
dementia in PD. The pAD group performed more poorly throughout the follow-up 
period on SRT delayed recognition, consistent with a pAD-specific encoding 
deficit. We conclude that while pAD and PD dementia are similar in many 
respects, differences in their evolution support previous observation of unique 
features in the 2 dementias and suggest different underlying pathologies.

PMID: 9623002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Ann Neurol. 1998 Jun;43(6):768-81. doi: 10.1002/ana.410430612.

Hereditary form of parkinsonism--dementia.

Muenter MD(1), Forno LS, Hornykiewicz O, Kish SJ, Maraganore DM, Caselli RJ, 
Okazaki H, Howard FM Jr, Snow BJ, Calne DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic Scottsdale, AZ 85259, USA.

In four generations of a family, 13 members were afflicted with an autosomal 
dominant disorder characterized by young age at onset, early weight loss, and 
rapidly progressive dopa-responsive parkinsonism, followed later by dementia 
and, in some, by hypotension. Intellectual dysfunction began with subjective 
memory loss and objective visuospatial dysfunction and was followed later by 
decline of frontal lobe cognitive and memory functions. Neuropathological 
examination in 4 autopsied cases showed neuronal loss in the substantia nigra 
and locus ceruleus and widespread Lewy bodies, many of them in the cerebral 
cortex; those in the hypothalamus and locus ceruleus were often of bizarre 
shapes. Other findings were vacuolation of the temporal cortex, unusual neuronal 
loss and gliosis in the hippocampus (CA 2/3), and neuronal loss in the nucleus 
basalis. There were no neuritic plaques, neurofibrillary tangles, or amyloid 
deposits. Positron emission tomography in 3 patients showed decreased striatal 
uptake of fluorodopa. Neurochemical analysis of an autopsied brain showed a 
pronounced decrease in choline acetyltransferase activity in the frontal and 
temporal cortices and hippocampus and a severe depletion of striatal dopamine 
with a pattern not typical of classic Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410430612
PMID: 9629847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Neurology. 1998 Jun;50(6):1661-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.50.6.1661.

Practice styles of US compared to UK neurologists.

Vickrey BG(1), Gifford DR, Belin TR, Martin PJ, Smith D, Delrahim S, Chadwick 
DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Los Angeles 90095-1769, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study assessed variation between neurologists in the United 
States and United Kingdom in their diagnostic and treatment decisions for 
commonly encountered neurologic presentations, and identified explanatory 
factors for any observed variation.
METHODS: All 210 consultant neurologists in the United Kingdom and a nationally 
representative sample of 595 US neurologists received mailed surveys containing 
three detailed clinical scenarios depicting patients with (1) a single 
unprovoked seizure occurring 3 days previously, (2) early Parkinson's disease, 
and (3) dementia. The main study outcome measures were self-reported decisions 
regarding diagnostic test ordering and treatment, which were assessed after each 
scenario. Neurologists' practice characteristics, certainty about the diagnosis, 
and attitudes toward uncertainty were also measured. Survey response rates were 
92% of US and 63% of UK neurologists.
RESULTS: A higher proportion of US than UK neurologists indicated they would 
order additional diagnostic tests for all three scenarios (all p < 0.05); 77% of 
UK compared with 26% of US neurologists would manage a single unprovoked seizure 
without antiepileptic medication (p < 0.0001), but treatment of early 
Parkinson's disease was not different. Nearly all US and UK neurologists would 
obtain a neuroimaging study in the evaluation of dementia. International 
differences persisted after adjustment for differences in demographic and 
practice characteristics and for attitudes toward test use and clinical 
uncertainty.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified large international variation in clinical decisions 
across three common neurologic conditions. Cross-country collaboration should 
explore these differences to develop consensus on standards of care.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.50.6.1661
PMID: 9633708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Jun 23;95(13):7737-41. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.95.13.7737.

Mutation in the tau gene in familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile 
dementia.

Spillantini MG(1), Murrell JR, Goedert M, Farlow MR, Klug A, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Brain Repair and Department of Neurology, 
University of Cambridge, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 2PY, UK. mgsll@cam.ac.uk

Familial multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia (MSTD) is a 
neurodegenerative disease with an abundant filamentous tau protein pathology. It 
belongs to the group of familial frontotemporal dementias with Parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), a major class of inherited dementing 
disorders whose genetic basis is unknown. We now report a G to A transition in 
the intron following exon 10 of the gene for microtubule-associated protein tau 
in familial MSTD. The mutation is located at the 3' neighboring nucleotide of 
the GT splice-donor site and disrupts a predicted stem-loop structure. We also 
report an abnormal preponderance of soluble tau protein isoforms with four 
microtubule-binding repeats over isoforms with three repeats in familial MSTD. 
This most likely accounts for our previous finding that sarkosyl-insoluble tau 
protein extracted from the filamentous deposits in familial MSTD consists only 
of tau isoforms with four repeats. These findings reveal that a departure from 
the normal ratio of four-repeat to three-repeat tau isoforms leads to the 
formation of abnormal tau filaments. The results show that dysregulation of tau 
protein production can cause neurodegeneration and imply that the FTDP-17 gene 
is the tau gene. This work has major implications for Alzheimer's disease and 
other tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.95.13.7737
PMCID: PMC22742
PMID: 9636220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Epidemiology. 1998 Jul;9(4):398-404.

Magnetic field exposure and neurodegenerative disease mortality among electric 
utility workers.

Savitz DA(1), Checkoway H, Loomis DP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, School of Public Health, University of North 
Carolina, Chapel Hill 27599-7400 USA.

Several recent reports indicate that occupational exposure to electric and 
magnetic fields may be associated with increased risk of neurodegenerative 
diseases. To address that hypothesis, we analyzed data from a cohort study of 
electric utility workers. We examined exposure to magnetic fields, assessed as 
duration of work in exposed jobs and through an index of cumulative exposure 
based on magnetic field measurements, in relation to mortality from Alzheimer's 
disease, Parkinson's disease, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, considering 
both underlying and all mentioned causes of death. Adjusted mortality rate 
ratios based on Poisson regression models indicate no association between 
magnetic fields and Parkinson's disease and little support for an association 
with Alzheimer's disease mortality. Mortality from amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
was positively associated with duration of work in exposed jobs [rate ratio = 
2.0, 95% confidence interval (CI)= 0.7-6.0; and rate ratio = 3.1, 95% CI = 
1.0-9.8, based on underlying cause for 5 - < 20 years and > or = 20 years vs < 5 
years, respectively], as well as with cumulative magnetic field exposure with a 
> or = 20-year lag (rate ratio = 2.3, 95% CI = 0.8-6.6; and rate ratio = 3.0, 
95% CI = 1.0-9.2, for exposure in the middle and upper intervals relative to the 
lowest interval, respectively).

PMID: 9647903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Neurochem. 1998 Jul;71(1):338-44. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71010338.x.

Expression pattern of synucleins (non-Abeta component of Alzheimer's disease 
amyloid precursor protein/alpha-synuclein) during murine brain development.

Hsu LJ(1), Mallory M, Xia Y, Veinbergs I, Hashimoto M, Yoshimoto M, Thal LJ, 
Saitoh T, Masliah E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of California-San Diego, La Jolla 
92093-0624, USA.

The non-Abeta component of Alzheimer's disease amyloid precursor protein (NACP) 
is predominantly a neuron-specific presynaptic protein that may play a central 
role in neurodegeneration because NACP fragments are found in Alzheimer's 
disease amyloid and a mutation in the NACP gene is associated with familial 
Parkinson's disease. In addition, NACP may play an important role during 
synaptogenesis and CNS development. To understand better the patterns of NACP 
expression during development, we analyzed the levels of this protein as well as 
the levels of another synaptic protein (synaptophysin) by ribonuclease 
protection assay, western blotting, and immunocytochemistry in fetal, juvenile, 
and adult mouse brain. From embryonic day 12 to 15, there was a slight increase, 
which was then followed by a more dramatic increase at later time points. 
Immunocytochemical staining for NACP increases throughout these stages as well. 
Although NACP appeared early in CNS development, synaptophysin levels started to 
rise at a later stage. These findings support the contention that NACP might be 
important for CNS development. Furthermore, the cytosolic component of NACP 
precedes the particulate component in development, indicating that a 
redistribution of the protein to the membrane fraction may be important for 
events later in neuronal development and in synaptogenesis.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1998.71010338.x
PMID: 9648883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Percept Mot Skills. 1998 Jun;86(3 Pt 1):851-77. doi: 10.2466/pms.1998.86.3.851.

Hallucinations.

Brasić JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Bellevue Hospital Center, New York University School of Medicine, New York 
10016-6481, USA.

Hallucinations, sensory perceptions without environmental stimuli, occur as 
simple experiences of auditory, gustatory, olfactory, tactile, or visual 
phenomena as well as mixed- or complex experiences of more than one simple 
phenomenon. The nature of the hallucination assists localization, differential 
diagnosis, and treatment planning. In particular, the presence of persistent 
visual hallucinations of persons with Parkinson's disease predicts dementia, 
rapid deterioration, permanent nursing home placement, and death. Hallucinations 
in persons with Alzheimer's disease are often associated with serious behavioral 
problems and predict a rapid cognitive decline. Theories of the etiology of 
hallucinations include (1) stimulation, e.g., neurochemical, electrical, 
seizure, and ephaptic, and (2) inhibition, e.g., destruction of normally 
inhibitory functions, resulting in disinhibition as in the Charles Bonnet and 
phantom limb syndromes. Functional neuroimaging procedures suggest anatomical 
associations for hallucinations. While hallucinations may be a symptom of 
medical, neurologic, and psychiatric disorders, they may also occur in a wide 
range of human experiences.

DOI: 10.2466/pms.1998.86.3.851
PMID: 9656280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Eur J Epidemiol. 1998 Apr;14(3):233-8. doi: 10.1023/a:1007488902983.

A study of familial aggregation of depression, dementia and Parkinson's disease.

Fahim S(1), van Duijn CM, Baker FM, Launer L, Breteler MM, Schudel WJ, Hofman A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Depression is often accompanied by other disorders including Alzheimer's disease 
and Parkinson's disease. We studied the familial aggregation of these disorders 
in order to examine the possibility of a shared genetic origin. In a 
population-based study of 6596 subjects, we studied the association of 
self-reported depression, which required treatment by a psychiatrist, to family 
history of psychiatric disease, dementia, and Parkinson's disease. A family 
history of psychiatric disease was significantly associated with overall 
depression as well as with unipolar (n = 303 patients) and bipolar (n = 27 
patients) depression. The risk of unipolar depression was associated with the 
presence of two or more demented individuals among their first degree relatives 
(e.g. parents, siblings and children). Since there was no evidence for familial 
aggregation in subjects with only one demented relative, our study suggests that 
unipolar depression may be associated specifically to a strongly familial, form 
of dementia. The risk of bipolar depression was increased for those with one or 
more relatives with dementia and, perhaps, for those with relatives with 
Parkinson's disease. The familial aggregation of depression with dementia and 
perhaps Parkinson's disease suggests that there may be shared susceptibility 
gene(s) underlying these diseases. Our study indicates further that there may be 
differences in the genetic etiology between unipolar and bipolar depression.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1007488902983
PMID: 9663515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Arch Neurol. 1998 Jul;55(7):969-78. doi: 10.1001/archneur.55.7.969.

Accuracy of the clinical diagnoses of Lewy body disease, Parkinson disease, and 
dementia with Lewy bodies: a clinicopathologic study.

Litvan I(1), MacIntyre A, Goetz CG, Wenning GK, Jellinger K, Verny M, Bartko JJ, 
Jankovic J, McKee A, Brandel JP, Chaudhuri KR, Lai EC, D'Olhaberriague L, Pearce 
RK, Agid Y.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-9130, USA.

BACKGROUND: Whether Parkinson disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
represent 2 distinct nosologic entities or are diverse phenotypes of Lewy body 
disease is subject to debate.
OBJECTIVES: To determine the accuracy of the diagnoses of Lewy body disease, PD, 
and DLB by validating the clinical diagnoses of 6 neurologists with the 
neuropathologic findings and to identify early predictors of the diagnoses.
METHODS: Six raters who were unaware of the neuropathologic diagnoses analyzed 
105 clinical vignettes corresponding to 29 cases of Lewy body disease (post hoc 
analysis of 15 patients with PD and 14 with DLB) and 76 patients without PD or 
DLB whose cases were confirmed through autopsy findings.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Sensitivity and positive predictive value (PPV) were 
chosen as validity measures and the K statistic as a reliability measure.
RESULTS: Interrater reliability for the diagnoses of Lewy body disease and PD 
was moderate for the first visit and substantial for the last, whereas agreement 
for diagnosis of DLB was fair for the first visit and slight for the last. 
Median sensitivity for diagnosis of Lewy body disease was 56.9% for the first 
visit and 67.2% for the last; median PPV was 60.0% and 77.4%, respectively. 
Median sensitivity for the diagnosis of PD was 73.3% for the first visit and 
80.0% for the last; median PPV was 45.9% and 64.1%, respectively. Median 
sensitivity for the diagnosis of DLB was 17.8% for the first visit and 28.6% for 
the last; median PPV was 75.0% for the first visit and 55.8% for the last. The 
raters' results were similar to those of the primary neurologists. Several 
features differentiated PD from DLB, predicted each disorder, and could be used 
as clinical pointers.
CONCLUSIONS: The low PPV with relatively high sensitivity for the diagnosis of 
PD suggests overdiagnosis. Conversely, the extremely low sensitivity for the 
diagnosis of DLB suggests underdiagnosis. Although the case mix included in the 
study may not reflect the frequency of these disorders in practice, limiting the 
clinical applicability of the validity measures, the raters' results were 
similar to those of the primary neurologists who were not exposed to such 
limitations. Overall, our study confirms features suggested to predict these 
disorders, except for the early presence of postural imbalance, which is not 
indicative of either disorder.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.55.7.969
PMID: 9678315 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Acta Neurol Belg. 1998 Jun;98(2):186-9.

Differential diagnosis in dementia.

Cras P(1).

Author information:
(1)Born Bunge Foundation and Dept. of Neurology, University Hospital of Antwerp.

Dementia is characterised by progressive memory loss, associated with agnosia, 
aphasia, dyscalculia, apraxia, and deficits in executive functioning. Alzheimer 
disease is the most frequent cause of dementia, with vascular dementia, diffuse 
Lewy body disease, and other etiologies being important differential diagnoses. 
A strategy and diagnostic hierarchy for diagnosis in dementia is proposed. 
Diagnostic criteria for Alzheimer disease, diffuse Lewy body disease, and 
vascular dementia are discussed.

PMID: 9686278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mov Disord. 1998 Jul;13(4):684-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.870130413.

Parkinsonism with HIV infection.

Mirsattari SM(1), Power C, Nath A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2000 Sep;15(5):1032-3.

We describe six patients with parkinsonism and another 10 patients with 
parkinsonian features with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection. In 50% 
of these patients, the symptoms were precipitated by neuroleptics. In the 
remaining patients, no obvious cause other than HIV infection was identified. 
Discontinuation of the neuroleptics produced complete recovery in one patient 
and partial or no response in others. Rapid progression of parkinsonism was 
noted in two patients, one of whom was treated with high-dose zidovudine (AZT) 
and benztropine. We conclude that patients with AIDS are at risk of developing 
an akinetic parkinsonism which may be precipitated by the use of neuroleptics, 
response to treatment is variable, and parkinsonism may be another primary 
HIV-induced syndrome.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870130413
PMID: 9686775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Psychol Rev. 1998 Jul;105(3):442-81. doi: 10.1037/0033-295x.105.3.442.

A neuropsychological theory of multiple systems in category learning.

Ashby FG(1), Alfonso-Reese LA, Turken AU, Waldron EM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Santa Barbara 93106, USA. 
ashby@psych.ucsb.edu

A neuropsychological theory is proposed that assumes category learning is a 
competition between separate verbal and implicit (i.e., 
procedural-learning-based) categorization systems. The theory assumes that the 
caudate nucleus is an important component of the implicit system and that the 
anterior cingulate and prefrontal cortices are critical to the verbal system. In 
addition to making predictions for normal human adults, the theory makes 
specific predictions for children, elderly people, and patients suffering from 
Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, major depression, amnesia, or lesions 
of the prefrontal cortex. Two separate formal descriptions of the theory are 
also provided. One describes trial-by-trial learning, and the other describes 
global dynamics. The theory is tested on published neuropsychological data and 
on category learning data with normal adults.

DOI: 10.1037/0033-295x.105.3.442
PMID: 9697427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1998;53:223-35. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6467-9_20.

Combination of the different biological markers for increasing specificity of in 
vivo Alzheimer's testing.

Blennow K(1), Vanmechelen E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, University of Göteborg, Sweden.

In view of existing drugs (acetylcholine esterase inhibitors) and emerging 
therapeutic compounds (e.g. neuroprotective and anti-inflammatory compounds), 
CSF markers would be of great use to improve the clinical diagnostic accuracy of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). Correct identification of AD would be especially 
important early in the course of the disease, when the clinical diagnosis is 
difficult, and drugs have the greatest potential of being effective. Biochemical 
markers for AD include ApoE genotyping, where the ApoE epsilon 4 allele has 
proven to have a high predictive value for AD. Biochemical markers for AD also 
include several potential cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) markers: beta-amyloid(1-42), 
possibly reflecting amyloid deposition and formation of senile plaques; PHFtau 
protein a marker for the phosphorylation state of tau, and formation of 
neurofibrillary tangles; (total)tau protein, a normal axonal protein, as a 
marker for ongoing neuronal and axonal degeneration; synaptic vesicle proteins, 
e.g. synaptotagmin, a synaptic vesicle protein which is found in the CSF, as 
markers for synaptic activity or degeneration; neuromodulin or growth-associated 
protein GAP-43, as a marker for synaptic degeneration, and the CSF/serum albumin 
ratio, as a marker for blood-brain barrier damage, used to exclude patients with 
concomitant cerebrovascular pathology. However, although CSF markers may 
identify different pathogenic processes in AD, there is no such process that is 
specific for AD, and thus little hope of ever finding a single CSF biochemical 
marker that gives an absolute discrimination between AD and other dementia 
disorders. Instead, combination of several CSF biochemical markers, each 
reflecting a pathogenic process, may increase both the sensitivity and 
specificity. Further, the accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of AD may increase 
if the diagnosis is based on the summarised information gained from the clinical 
examination, brain-imaging techniques (SPECT, CT/MRT scans), and biochemical 
markers. Using this approach, CSF markers have a large potential to help to 
differentiate AD from the most problematic differential diagnoses, especially 
age-associated memory impairment, depressive pseudo-dementia, Parkinson's 
disease, and frontal lobe dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6467-9_20
PMID: 9700660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Arch Neurol. 1998 Aug;55(8):1132-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.55.8.1132.

Hemianopsia in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Bashir K(1), Elble RJ, Ghobrial M, Struble RG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, 
Springfield 62794-1413, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the pathologic changes that caused a left homonymous 
hemianopsia in a patient with dementia with Lewy bodies.
DESIGN: Report of a case and postmortem studies.
MAIN OUTCOME AND RESULTS: A 66-year-old woman experienced parkinsonism and left 
homonymous hemianopsia early in the course of a rapidly progressive dementia 
that culminated in death only 21 months after the onset of her symptoms. 
Postmortem examination revealed pathologic features consistent with the 
diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies. The only apparent explanation for her 
visual field deficit was a disproportionately large number of neurofibrillary 
tangles in the right striate, peristriate, and inferotemporal cortices.
CONCLUSION: A clinically obvious homonymous hemianopsia can result from the 
occipital and inferotemporal cortical degeneration in dementia with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.55.8.1132
PMID: 9708965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Exp Neurol. 1998 Aug;152(2):307-9. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1998.6857.

Mutation analysis of the glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor gene in 
Parkinson's disease.

Wartiovaara K(1), Hytönen M, Vuori M, Paulin L, Rinne J, Sariola H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, FIN-00014, 
Finland.

Glial cell line-derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) is a potent survival factor 
for nigrostriatal dopaminergic, central cholinergic, and motoneurons. GDNF also 
prevents the neuronal loss in experimental animal models for Parkinson's disease 
(PD). We have now investigated the GDNF gene for possible mutations in a group 
of nonfamilial PD and other patients. By cleavase fragment length polymorphism 
(CFLP) analysis and direct sequencing of the full coding region of GDNF gene we 
found a novel GDNF sequence variant in 1 of 30 PD patients. The alteration does 
not change the predicted amino acid sequence and it was also found in 1 of 20 
patients without PD, suggesting that it represents a polymorphism in the gene. 
No other sequence variations were found. We conclude therefore that mutations in 
the GDNF coding region are not commonly contributing to the pathogenesis of PD.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1998.6857
PMID: 9710530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Aust N Z J Psychiatry. 1998 Aug;32(4):511-22. doi: 10.3109/00048679809068325.

The role of SPECT scanning in a neuropsychiatry unit.

Velakoulis D(1), Lloyd JH.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychiatry Unit, Royal Melbourne Hospital, Parkville, Victoria, 
Australia.

OBJECTIVES: Single photon emission computerised tomography (SPECT) studies allow 
the assessment of cerebral blood flow and have been increasingly used as a 
clinical tool in neurology and neuropsychiatry. This paper examines the 
contribution of SPECT to the clinical management of patients with 
neuropsychiatric disorders, in particular patients with atypical or early onset 
dementia.
METHOD: All patients admitted to an eight-bed neuropsychiatry unit in a general 
hospital setting who had undergone SPECT scanning over a 15-month period were 
reviewed. Information was collected on clinical diagnosis, neuropsychological 
testing, structural neuroimaging and SPECT.
RESULTS: SPECT abnormalities were present in 88% of patients. The pattern of 
SPECT abnormality was concordant with structural neuroimaging in 65% of patients 
and concordant with neuropsychological testing in 82% of patients. The 
sensitivity and specificity of SPECT was 89%/79% for Alzheimer's disease and 
56%/79% for frontotemporal dementias.
CONCLUSIONS: SPECT results must be interpreted in the context of other clinical 
and diagnostic assessments. In no single case was the clinical diagnosis made 
solely on the basis of a SPECT result. SPECT was of maximum clinical use in the 
diagnosis of frontotemporal dementias and in confirming the diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's dementia. SPECT was valuable in Lewy body dementia, vascular 
dementia and head injury. Its clinical utility in other psychiatric disorders 
remains unclear.

DOI: 10.3109/00048679809068325
PMID: 9711365 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Aug 10;1366(1-2):225-33. doi: 
10.1016/s0005-2728(98)00115-7.

Mitochondrial dysfunction in neurodegenerative disorders.

Schapira AH(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Royal Free Hospital School 
of Medicine and University Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute of 
Neurology, Rowland Hill Street, London NW3 2PF, UK. schapira@rfhsm.ac.uk

Mutations of mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) are associated with a wide spectrum of 
disorders encompassing the myopathies, encephalopathies and cardiomyopathies, in 
addition to organ specific presentations such as diabetes mellitus and deafness. 
The pathogenesis of mtDNA mutations is not fully understood although it is 
assumed that their final common pathway involves impaired oxidative 
phosphorylation. The identification of a specific respiratory chain defect 
(complex I deficiency) in Parkinson's disease (PD) 10 years ago focused 
attention on the aetiological and pathogenetic roles that mitochondria may play 
in neurodegenerative diseases. There is evidence now emerging that mtDNA 
abnormalities may determine the complex I defect in a proportion of PD patients 
and it may prove possible to use biochemical analysis of platelet and cybrid 
complex I function to identify those that lie within this group. Respiratory 
chain defects of a different pattern have been identified in Huntington's 
disease (HD) (complex II/III deficiency) and Friedreich's ataxia (FA) complex 
I-III deficiency). In both these disorders, the mitochondrial abnormality is 
secondary to the primary nuclear mutation:CAG repeat in the huntingtin gene in 
HD, and GAA repeat in the frataxin gene in FA. Nevertheless, it appears that the 
mitochondrion may be the target of the biochemical defects that are the 
consequence of these mutations. There is a close and reciprocal relationship 
between respiratory chain dysfunction and free radical generation, and there is 
evidence for oxidative stress and damage in PD, HD and FA, which together with 
the mitochondrial defect may result in cell damage. Impaired oxidative 
phosphorylation and free radical generation may independently adversely affect 
the maintenance of mitochondrial transmembrane potential (Deltapsim). A fall in 
Deltapsim is an early event (preceding nuclear fragmentation) in the apoptotic 
pathway. It is possible therefore that mitochondrial dysfunction in the 
neurodegenerative disorders may result in a fall in the apoptotic threshold of 
neurones which, in some, may be sufficient to induce cell death whilst, in 
others, additional factors may be required. In any event, mitochondria present 
an important target for future strategies for 'neuroprotection' to prevent or 
retard neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/s0005-2728(98)00115-7
PMID: 9714816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Acta Neurol Scand. 1998 Aug;98(2):116-20. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1998.tb01729.x.

Dementia in Saudi Arabia: experience from a university hospital.

Ogunniyi A(1), Daif AK, Al-Rajeh S, AbdulJabbar M, Al-Tahan AR, Al-Bunyan M, 
Shamina AR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, King Khalid University Hospital, Riyadh, KSA.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the pattern of presentation, the types of dementia and 
the associated conditions in Saudi patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hospital-based study using DSM-IV and ICD 10 criteria for 
consensus diagnosis of cases from clinical information and results of 
investigations. Dementia subtypes were made according to NINCDS-ADRDA, 
NINDS-AIREN and ICD 10 criteria while CDR was used for severity grading.
RESULTS: A total of 77 demented patients (49 males, 28 females) were studied. 
The hospital frequency was 19.3/100,000 patients. The mean age at presentation 
was 74.6 years and age at onset was below 65 years in 17 patients. The types of 
dementia were: Alzheimer's disease (51.9%), vascular dementia (18.2%), mixed 
cases (15.6%), dementia with Parkinson's disease (7.8%) and treatable dementia 
(5.2%). Only 3 patients were in the severe clinical stage and infections were 
important causes of deterioration.
CONCLUSION: The hospital frequency appears to be low probably because of the 
relatively young population. The pattern of dementia with preponderance of AD is 
similar to that in western countries and intervention directed at the risk 
factors for stroke could reduce the burden of vascular dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1998.tb01729.x
PMID: 9724009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Exp Neurol. 1998 Sep;153(1):8-22. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1998.6852.

Multivariate analysis of laminar patterns of neurodegeneration in posterior 
cingulate cortex in Alzheimer's disease.

Vogt BA(1), Vogt LJ, Vrana KE, Gioia L, Meadows RS, Challa VR, Hof PR, Van 
Hoesen GW.

Author information:
(1)Cingulum NeuroSciences Institute, 101 North Chestnut Street, Winston-Salem, 
North Carolina 27101, USA.

Posterior cingulate cortex is the site of earliest reductions in glucose 
metabolism and qualitatively different laminar patterns of neurodegeneration in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). This study used multivariate analyses of area 23 in 72 
cases of definite AD to assess relationships between laminar patterns of 
neurodegeneration, neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) and senile plaque (SP) 
densities, age of disease onset and duration, and apolipoprotein E (ApoE) 
genotype. No age-related changes in neurons occurred over four decades in 17 
controls and regression analysis of all AD cases showed no relationships between 
neuron, SP, and tau-immunoreactive NFT densities. Principal components analysis 
of neurons in layers III-Va and eigenvector projections showed five subgroups. 
The subgroups were independent because each had a full range of disease 
durations and qualitatively different laminar patterns in degeneration suggested 
disease subtypes (ST). Cases with most severe neuron losses (STSevere) had an 
early onset, most SP, and highest proportion of ApoE epsilon4 homozygotes. 
Changes in the distribution of NFT were similar over disease course in two 
subtypes and NFT did not account for most neurodegeneration. In STII-V with 
moderate neuron loss in most layers, cases with no NFT had a disease duration of 
3.5 +/- 0.9 years (mean +/- SEM), those with most in layers IIIc or Va had a 
duration of 7.3 +/- 1 years, and those with most in layers II-IIIab had a 
duration of 12.1 +/- 1 years. In STSevere, cases with highest NFT densities in 
layers II-IIIab also were late stage. Finally, epsilon4 homozygotes were most 
frequent in STSevere, but four statistical tests showed that this risk is not 
directly involved in neurodegeneration. In conclusion, multivariate pattern 
recognition shows that AD is composed of independent neuropathological subtypes 
and NFT in area 23 do not account for most neuron losses.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1998.6852
PMID: 9743563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Exp Neurol. 1998 Sep;153(1):164-6. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1998.6868.

Mutation in the alpha-synuclein gene and sporadic Parkinson's disease, 
Alzheimer's disease, and dementia with lewy bodies.

Higuchi S(1), Arai H, Matsushita S, Matsui T, Kimpara T, Takeda A, Shirakura K.

Author information:
(1)National Institute on Alcoholism, Kurihama National Hospital, Yokosuka, 
Kanagawa, 239, Japan.

Recently, alpha-synuclein attracted attention when Polymeropoulos and colleagues 
identified a missense mutation of this gene (Science 276:2045-2047, 1997), which 
is responsible for a form of early-onset familial Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Immunohistochemically, alpha-synuclein is localized in Lewy bodies, 
characteristic brain pathology of PD, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), suggesting that this protein may link these common 
neurological diseases. Exploration of the possibility that the same mutation of 
the alpha-synuclein gene as that in familial PD (Ala53Thr) may also confer 
susceptibility to sporadic PD, DLB, and AD revealed the mutation in none of the 
samples of 329 cases and 230 controls examined, suggesting that this mutation is 
not involved in these neurological diseases.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1998.6868
PMID: 9743579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Ann Neurol. 1998 Sep;44(3 Suppl 1):S1-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.410440703.

The natural history of Parkinson's disease.

Poewe WH(1), Wenning GK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Innsbruck, Austria.

There are still insufficient data on the natural course of Parkinson's disease 
(PD) owing to lack of standardized longitudinal follow-up studies. Reported 
progression rates in early PD vary considerably by a factor of 2 to 3. 
Similarly, data from sequential [18F]dopa PET studies in PD patients have 
produced variable decline rates of PET indices ranging between 7 and 70% per 
decade. Risk factors for rapid progression include old age at onset, concomitant 
major depression, dementia, and akinetic-rigid symptom presentation. The 
introduction of levodopa into the routine treatment of PD patients had a 
dramatic impact on symptomatic control without affecting the underlying rate of 
disease progression. By contrast, monoamine oxidase (MAO) B inhibition by 
deprenyl monotherapy in early PD was shown to delay the need for levodopa by 
around 9 months. However, the neuroprotective action disappeared after 2 years 
of follow-up. Furthermore, deprenyl also failed to influence the subsequent 
development of levodopa-induced motor complications. Available studies on 
mortality in PD provide heterogeneous mortality rates, probably because of 
discrepancies between patient populations with respect to co-morbidity, disease 
stage at study entry, and diagnostic accuracy. However, the most recent 
follow-up from the DATATOP cohort suggests normal life expectancy in carefully 
selected patients without significant co-morbidity and with adequate treatment 
and expert follow-up.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410440703
PMID: 9749568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Ann Neurol. 1998 Sep;44(3 Suppl 1):S45-52. doi: 10.1002/ana.410440707.

Epidemiology versus genetics in Parkinson's disease: progress in resolving an 
age-old debate.

Langston JW(1).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, CA 94089, USA.

Determining the relative contributions of environment and heredity to the cause 
of Parkinson's disease (PD) is more than an academic issue because its 
resolution dictates future research directions to an enormous degree. This 
article reviews new advances on both sides of this equation. The recent 
identification of the genetic mutation responsible for parkinsonism in a large 
Italian kindred is likely to provide exciting new research opportunities but the 
mutation does not appear to be responsible for the vast majority of PD. A large 
twin study also points away from genetic influences as important, at least in 
patients with disease beginning after the age of 50 years. On the other hand, 
genetic influences loom large in younger-onset disease. With regard to the 
environment, epidemiologic studies have provided only broad, thought-tantalizing 
clues to the cause of the disease. Although rural living, well-water 
consumption, and exposure to pesticides have emerged as potential risk factors, 
identification of specific agents is lacking, and aging remains as the only 
unequivocal risk factor for the disease. The surprisingly strong inverse 
relationship between cigarette smoking and PD provides an intriguing lead, but 
novel experimental avenues to pursue this observation are not readily obvious. 
The amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/dementia/parkinsonism complex in the western 
Pacific suggests the possibility of long-latency toxins, but pinning down a 
specific causative agent for this syndrome has eluded investigators to date. 
Despite the many obstacles ahead, however, research on PD appears to be more 
robust than ever, and our quest to find its cause appears to be under a full 
head of steam as we approach the 21st century.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410440707
PMID: 9749572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Ann Neurol. 1998 Sep;44(3 Suppl 1):S134-41. doi: 10.1002/ana.410440720.

Mitochondria in neurodegenerative apoptosis: an opportunity for therapy?

Tatton WG(1), Chalmers-Redman RM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY 
10029-6574, USA.

Apoptotic cell death has been shown to constitute the terminal process in some 
neurodegenerative diseases, notably Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease 
(PD). A decrease in mitochondrial membrane potential (delta psiM) causing 
opening of the permeability transition pore (PTP) in mitochondrial membranes has 
been implicated as a critical effector of apoptosis in a variety of non-neural 
cells. Opening of the PTP leads to the release of so-called apoptosis initiation 
factors that induce the degradative events of apoptosis, such as nuclear 
chromatin condensation and DNA fragmentation. We have extended those findings to 
a neuronal model of apoptosis caused by trophic withdrawal, by showing that a 
decrease in delta psiM is an early event occurring 2 to 6 hours before the 
degradative events of apoptosis. A deficiency in mitochondrial complex I 
activity has been demonstrated in the substantia nigra of postmortem brains and 
several peripheral tissues obtained from PD patients. Because delta psiM is 
generated by the pumping of protons out across the inner mitochondrial membrane 
at the mitochondrial complexes, particularly complex I, we hypothesized that the 
decrease in complex activity could result in a decrease in delta psiM that would 
render PD substantia nigra neurons vulnerable to apoptosis. In preliminary 
studies, we have found a decrease in delta psiM in fibroblasts obtained from 
some PD patients. If a decrease in delta psiM consequent on decreased complex 
activity is an intrinsic defect in some PD patients, it would open a number of 
new avenues for the reduction of neuronal apoptosis in PD. The oncoprotein BCL-2 
and the scavenger protein SOD-1 have been shown to reduce apoptosis by 
facilitating closure of the PTP. A number of agents have been shown to maintain 
BCL-2 and/or SOD-1 synthesis in damaged nerve cells and thereby reduce 
apoptosis. Other agents, such as cyclosporin A and some benzodiazepine 
receptor-binding agents, have been found to act directly on the PTP to reduce 
apoptosis. Accordingly, agents that maintain delta psiM and PTP closure may 
offer new and effective means of treating neurodegenerative apoptosis.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410440720
PMID: 9749585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 9;273(41):26292-4. doi: 10.1074/jbc.273.41.26292.

Binding of alpha-synuclein to brain vesicles is abolished by familial 
Parkinson's disease mutation.

Jensen PH(1), Nielsen MS, Jakes R, Dotti CG, Goedert M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Building 170, University of Aarhus, 
DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark. phj@biokemi.au.dk

The presynaptic protein alpha-synuclein has been implicated in the pathogenesis 
of Parkinson's disease. First, two missense mutations A30P and A53T cause 
inheritable early onset Parkinson's disease in some families. Secondly, 
alpha-synuclein is present in Lewy bodies of affected nerve cells in the 
predominant sporadic type of Parkinson's disease as well as in dementia with 
Lewy bodies. We demonstrate in the rat optic system that a portion of 
alpha-synuclein is carried by the vesicle-moving fast component of axonal 
transport and that it binds to rat brain vesicles through its amino-terminal 
repeat region. We find alpha-synuclein with the A30P mutation of familial 
Parkinson's disease devoid of vesicle-binding activity and propose that mutant 
alpha-synuclein may accumulate, leading to assembly into Lewy body filaments.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.273.41.26292
PMID: 9756856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 1998 Sep-Oct;20(5):493-502. doi: 
10.1016/s0892-0362(98)00013-0.

Symposium overview: the use of delayed matching-to-sample procedures in studies 
of short-term memory in animals and humans.

Paule MG(1), Bushnell PJ, Maurissen JP, Wenger GR, Buccafusco JJ, Chelonis JJ, 
Elliott R.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Toxicology Laboratory, Division of Neurotoxicology, National 
Center for Toxicological Research, Jefferson, AR 72079-9502, USA. 
mpaule@nctr.fda.gov

Behavioral paradigms applicable for use in both human and nonhuman subjects for 
investigating aspects of working/short-term memory are presented with a view 
towards exploring their strengths, weaknesses, and utility in a variety of 
experimental situations. Such procedures can be useful in teasing out specific 
aspects of mnemonic processes including discrimination, encoding, and retention. 
Delayed matching-to-position, delayed matching-to-sample (DMTS), and titrating 
matching-to-sample procedures are highlighted. Additionally, the application of 
DMTS tasks in preclinical and clinical settings is presented: drug effects on 
memory processes can be explored preclinically in animal models; normative data 
have been developed in human populations where they have been used in adults to 
explore the relationships between mnemonic processes and specific clinical 
entities such as Parkinsonism, senile dementia of the Alzheimer's type, 
schizophrenia, and depression. Studies in children indicate that encoding and 
retention processes improve rapidly in the early years, plateauing prior to 
puberty. Noninvasive imaging techniques such as positron emission tomography 
(PET) indicate that activity in specific brain areas is associated with DMTS 
task performance and may serve to confirm roles for such structures in mnemonic 
processes.

DOI: 10.1016/s0892-0362(98)00013-0
PMID: 9761587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1998 Sep;12(3):204-7. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199809000-00013.

No association between familial Alzheimer disease and cytochrome P450 
polymorphisms.

Yamada H(1), Dahl ML, Viitanen M, Winblad B, Sjöqvist F, Lannfelt L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Laboratory Sciences and Technology, Karolinska 
Institute, Huddinge Hospital, Sweden.

Four different loci have been found to be involved in the development of 
familial Alzheimer disease (AD). The epsilon4 allele of the apolipoprotein E 
gene on chromosome 19 is a susceptibility factor for AD, and in a small number 
of AD families, dominant mutations with high penetrance are operating in genes 
on chromosomes 1, 14 and 21. However, the disease in many familial AD cases 
cannot be explained by these genes; thus, other genetic factors involved in the 
etiology of AD should exist. Recently, an association between the cytochrome 
P450 2D6B (CYP2D6B) allele and the Lewy body variant of AD was reported. In the 
present study, 54 unrelated Swedish familial AD patients and 56 age- and 
sex-matched healthy controls were studied with respect to the two genetic 
polymorphisms of oxidative drug metabolism, CYP2D6 and CYP2C19. No significant 
association was found between the defect CYP2D6A and -B or CYP2C19ml and -m2 
alleles and familial AD patients, with the exception of a lower frequency of 
CYP2D6B in the male AD cases.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199809000-00013
PMID: 9772024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Acta Neuropathol. 1998 Oct;96(4):417-20. doi: 10.1007/s004010050913.

Apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele frequency is increased in Parkinson's disease 
only with co-existing Alzheimer pathology.

Mattila PM(1), Koskela T, Röyttä M, Lehtimäki T, Pirttilä TA, Ilveskoski E, 
Karhunen P, Rinne JO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Turku, Finland.

We determined the apolipoprotein E (apoE) genotype in clinically diagnosed and 
neuropathologically verified cases of Parkinson's disease (PD) (n = 45), with or 
without Alzheimer (AD)-type changes, and compared the apoE genotype with that in 
healthy age-matched controls (n = 59). The PD cases were divided into two groups 
according to the CERAD criteria: "O + A", with no or only uncertain histological 
findings of AD, and "B + C" with histological findings suggestive or indicative 
of AD. DNA was isolated from frozen brain samples, and the apoE genotypes were 
determined using polymerase chain reaction amplification and subsequent 
restriction analysis by HhaI enzyme. The frequency of the apo epsilon4 allele 
(29.4%) was significantly increased in the B + C group. The odds ratio for an 
apo epsilon4 allele in the B + C group was 2.5 as compared to controls (95% 
confidence interval, 1.2-5.2). In the O + A group, the frequency of apo epsilon4 
allele (13.6%) was similar to that in controls (14.4%) and the risk of an apo 
epsilon4 allele was not increased (odds ratio 0.94). The PD cases with an apo 
epsilon4 allele had a greater number of cortical (P = 0.02) but not nigral Lewy 
bodies than those without an apo epsilon4 allele (P = 0.57). The results show 
that neuropathologically verified PD as such is not associated with increased 
apo epsilon4 allele frequency.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010050913
PMID: 9797007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1998 Sep;107(3):213-22. doi: 
10.1016/s0013-4694(98)00064-9.

Clinical neurophysiologic findings in patients with rapidly progressive familial 
parkinsonism and dementia with pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration.

Wszolek ZK(1), Lagerlund TD, Steg RE, McManis PG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha 
68198-2045, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To present clinical electrophysiologic studies performed on the 
pallido-ponto-nigral degeneration (PPND) family linked to chromosome 17q21-22.
METHODS: Nine patients from this kindred were studied with 11 
electroencephalograms (EEGs), 4 electroencephalographic background frequency 
analysis (BFA) studies, 4 electromyographic recordings (EMGs) including nerve 
conduction studies (NCSs), 4 electromyographic multichannel surface recordings 
(MSRs), one pattern visual evoked potential (VEP) study and one median nerve 
somatosensory evoked potential (SEP) study.
RESULTS: EEGs revealed normal findings early in the disease and diffuse slowing 
which became more prominent with disease progression. BFA studies demonstrated 
rapid decrease in mean parietal frequencies with disease progression. EMGs and 
NCSs showed no abnormalities. MSRs revealed action myoclonus and a dystonic 
process. Long loop reflexes were absent in resting hand muscles. VEPs and SEPs 
were normal.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical neurophysiologic studies were consistent with a cortical 
and subcortical degenerative process. With clinical deterioration, there is a 
progressive decline in the mean parietal frequency and background rhythms. 
Tremor studies were consistent with action myoclonus and a dystonic process and 
did not show parkinsonian features of resting tremor or agonist-antagonist 
cocontraction. There was no evidence of peripheral nerve involvement or slowing 
in central sensory pathways. Electrophysiologic findings are characteristic for 
this illness.

DOI: 10.1016/s0013-4694(98)00064-9
PMID: 9803952 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


