601. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2000 Jan;37(1):63-7. doi: 10.3143/geriatrics.37.63.

[A swallowing study, based on clinico-pathological evaluation, performed by 
video-fluoroscopy].

[Article in Japanese]

Hasegawa Y(1), Yamamoto T, Inagaki T, Suzuki K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Nagoya City Koseiin Geriatric Hospital.

A clinico-pathological evaluation was performed on patients requiring 
nasogastric nutritional support. As a result, it was found that nasogastric tube 
feeding was common in patients with cerebrovascular diseases (CVD) and senile 
dementia of Alzheimer's type (SDAT). Pneumonia was anamnestic in many CVD 
patients, which was frequently the direct indication for nasogastric tube 
feeding and the major cause of death in these patients. On the other hand, 
pneumonia was not common in SDAT in which the major indication of nasogastric 
tube feeding was abnormal appetite. However, pneumonia was an infrequent cause 
of death in SDAT compared to CVD patients. The mean age in which nasogastric 
tube feeding was started was 8 years older in SDAT than CVD patients, however, 
there was no significant difference in the duration of nasogastric tube feeding 
ranging from initiation to death. A swallowing study, based on a 
clinico-pathological evaluation, was performed by video-fluoroscopy on healthy 
seniors and senior patients neurological diseases. There was no abnormal finding 
in the healthy seniors. Findings in CVD patients with single-sided neurological 
diseases indicated that 27.3% had moderate abnormalities and 18.2% had severe 
abnormalities. In CVD with bilateral defects, 35.7% had moderate abnormalities 
and 42.9% had severe abnormalities. Though even single-sided CVD defects can 
frequently cause swallowing disorder, oral food intake was maintained in nearly 
half of the patients with bilateral CVD, despite high incidence of severe 
swallowing disorder. In the mild SDAT group, rated on a scale from 0.5 to 1.0 
according to the Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), 11.1% had moderate swallowing 
disorder. In the CDR 2-3 group, 23.1% had moderate disability and 15.4% had 
severe disability. It appears that SDAT patients do not suffer from rapid 
deterioration in swallowing ability, which was relatively retained in this 
disease group. In Parkinson's disease patients with a Yahr grade of I-II, 55.6% 
had normal findings and 44.4% had mild abnormalities. In Yahr grade III-IV 
patients, 28.6% had mild and 28.6% had severe disability. Patients with severe 
dysfunction had a high incidence of silent aspiration. The swallowing function 
was maintained in the early course of mild Parkinson's disease patients, however 
the ability rapidly deteriorated with the course of the disease. The 
radiological findings of the swallowing study supported the clinico-pathological 
characteristics of each disease.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.37.63
PMID: 10737024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


602. Neurology. 2000 Mar 28;54(6):1272-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.6.1272.

APOE and the risk of PD with or without dementia in a population-based study.

Harhangi BS(1), de Rijk MC, van Duijn CM, Van Broeckhoven C, Hofman A, Breteler 
MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, 
The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To study the association between APOE genotype and PD with or without 
dementia.
METHODS: The study formed part of the Rotterdam Study, a prospective, 
population-based cohort study on the frequency, etiology, and prognosis of 
chronic diseases. The cohort examined for PD consisted of 6,969 independently 
living or institutionalized inhabitants from a suburb of Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands, aged 55 years or older. All participants were screened at baseline 
(1990 to 1993) and at follow-up (1993 to 1994) for symptoms of parkinsonism by 
study physicians; screen positives received a diagnostic workup by a 
neurologist.
RESULTS: APOE genotyping was available for 107 PD patients (26 with and 81 
without dementia) and 4,805 non-PD control subjects. The presence of at least 
one epsilon2 allele significantly increased the risk of PD (OR = 1.7; 95% CI, 
1.0 to 2.8). When we looked separately for demented and nondemented PD patients 
as compared with nonparkinsonian controls, APOE did not appear to be associated 
with PD without dementia, but both the epsilon2 and the epsilon4 allele 
increased the risk of PD with dementia (OR = 5.6; 95% CI, 2.0 to 15.2 and OR = 
3.6; 95% CI, 1.3 to 9.9). The risk of dementia for epsilon4 allele carriers was 
not significantly different for persons with or without PD. However, the 
epsilon2 allele strongly increased the risk of dementia in patients with PD 
(interaction p < 0.007).
CONCLUSIONS: In the elderly the APOE-epsilon2 allele increases the risk of PD 
and, in particular, the risk of PD with dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.6.1272
PMID: 10746597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


603. J Neurol. 2000 Feb;247(2):88-96. doi: 10.1007/pl00007803.

Olfaction in Parkinson's disease: methods of assessment and clinical relevance.

Liberini P(1), Parola S, Spano PF, Antonini L.

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Neurophysiology, Brescia General Hospital, Italy. 
silvia.p@altavista.net

Several neurological conditions have been reported to be associated with 
peripheral or central deficits of olfactory system. In recent years particular 
emphasis has been placed on the early and severe olfactory impairment in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), in which limited neuropathological studies have 
revealed a marked dopaminergic deficit in the olfactory tubercles. Moreover, 
indirect evidence suggests that dysfunction of the dopaminergic pathways from 
mesencephalon to the piriform cortex may play a role in olfactory impairment in 
PD. A large number of clinical studies have reported that olfactory loss in 
idiopathic PD is bilateral, present in hemiparkinsonism, unrelated to the stage 
or clinical subtype of the disease, and independent of antiparkinsonian 
medication. In addition, major olfactory alterations have been reported in 
familial PD and dementia with Lewy bodies but not in progressive supranuclear 
palsy and essential tremor. These findings might stimulate further research 
targeted to determine the biological substrate of dissimilar olfactory 
performances in these movement disorders. The present review summarizes 
standardized procedures for the assessment of olfactory acuity (detection 
threshold), identification (multiple choice odor naming), discrimination 
(differentiation between similar/dissimilar odorants), and memory (recognition 
of a substance previously smelled). Specific suggestions concerning the 
psychometric and neuropsychological evaluation of PD patients are provided.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00007803
PMID: 10751109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


604. Neurology. 2000 Apr 11;54(7):1498-504. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.7.1498.

Combined assessment of tau and neuronal thread protein in Alzheimer's disease 
CSF.

Kahle PJ(1), Jakowec M, Teipel SJ, Hampel H, Petzinger GM, Di Monte DA, 
Silverberg GD, MÃ¶ller HJ, Yesavage JA, Tinklenberg JR, Shooter EM, Murphy GM Jr.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurobiology, Stanford University School of Medicine, 
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2000 Oct 10;55(7):1068-9.

OBJECTIVE: Comparative study of CSF levels of tau and AD7C-neuronal thread 
protein (NTP) in patients with AD and control subjects.
BACKGROUND: AD is characterized by neurofibrillary tangles composed of the 
abnormally hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein tau. AD7C-NTP is a 
proposed AD marker expressed at early stages of neurofibrillary degeneration.
METHODS: Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays specific for tau and AD7C-NTP. CSF 
samples were obtained from 35 demented patients (25 with antemortem clinical 
diagnosis of probable AD, 5 with neuropathologic diagnosis of definite AD, 5 
with Lewy body pathology), 29 nondemented patients with PD, and 16 elderly 
healthy control subjects. Receiver operating characteristics (ROC) and 
multivariate discriminant analysis for AD versus controls. Correlational 
analysis of CSF tau and AD7C-NTP and of each marker with Mini-Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) scores was performed.
RESULTS: Levels of both tau and AD7C-NTP were significantly elevated in the AD 
patients compared with control subjects. ROC analysis showed that CSF tau 
distinguished between patients with AD and nondemented control subjects with 63% 
sensitivity and 89% specificity, AD7C-NTP with 70% sensitivity and 87% 
specificity. Combined evaluation of both markers with discriminant analysis 
raised the specificity to 93% at a 63% sensitivity level. Both markers 
positively correlated with each other within the AD group, but not among control 
subjects. CSF levels of AD7C-NTP, but not of tau, showed a small but significant 
inverse correlation (r = -0.43) with MMSE scores of AD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: CSF levels of tau and AD7C-NTP may be useful biomarkers for AD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.7.1498
PMID: 10751266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


605. Mov Disord. 2000 Mar;15(2):301-4. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200003)15:2<301::aid-mds1014>3.0.co;2-2.

Risperidone treatment of drug-related psychosis in patients with parkinsonism.

Leopold NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Parkinson Disease and Movement Disorder Center, Crozer-Chester Medical 
Center, Upland, Pennsylvania 19013, USA.

Risperidone, a novel neuroleptic with approximately equal D2 and 5HT2A receptor 
blocking properties, has been used to treat drug-related hallucinations in 
patients with Parkinson's disease. However, the results of only small numbers of 
patients have been reported with the drug demonstrating limited usefulness. We 
report our experience with this drug in 39 patients (25 women and 19 men) with 
parkinsonism. Monitored clinical data included duration of disease, Hoehn and 
Yahr score, Mini-Mental State Score, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale 
(UPDRS) prior to drug administration and after 3 and 6 months of treatment, and 
response to treatment. Twenty-three patients with Parkinson's disease had either 
complete or near-complete resolution of hallucinations whereas an unsatisfactory 
response (N = 6) or worsening of parkinsonism (N = 6) was noted in 12 patients, 
only six of whom had Parkinson's disease. Excluding patients with diffuse Lewy 
body disease, there was no significant worsening of the UPDRS scores after 
either 3 or 6 months of treatment. The presence of dementia did not predict 
response to treatment. Our results suggest that risperidone is a useful 
treatment for hallucinations in patients with parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200003)15:2<301::aid-mds1014>3.0.co;2-2
PMID: 10752580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


606. Gerontology. 2000 May-Jun;46(3):146-52. doi: 10.1159/000022150.

Health and relicensing policies for older drivers in the European union.

White S(1), O'Neill D.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Mobility Enhancement, Adelaide and Meath Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.

BACKGROUND: The number of older drivers is increasing rapidly in the developed 
world. Many states of the European Union (EU) have initiated legislation to 
screen older drivers for age-related disease, despite evidence that screening 
may be harmful or have no positive effect.
METHODS: We reviewed the current situation in the EU by sending a questionnaire 
to the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency in each member state.
RESULTS: All fifteen countries replied. Regular medical screening occurs in ten. 
European Council Directive 91/439/EEC forms the basis for national guidelines on 
medical fitness to drive, but these are not specific for age-related illness, 
and interpretation of the directive varies between countries. Specific 
guidelines are not available in all countries for the age-related conditions of 
dementia, stroke, and Parkinson's disease. In nine countries a medical colleague 
is available for consultation in difficult cases. Drivers are required to report 
illness to the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Agency only in the United Kingdom. 
In six countries, there is mandatory reporting by physicians of conditions which 
may pose a risk to driving.
CONCLUSIONS: There is considerable heterogeneity within the EU on the processes 
of older driver screening. This diversity may facilitate research into the 
effect of different policies on safe mobility of older people. If changes in the 
screening process are considered, further knowledge is needed on issues such as 
older driver exposure and valid measures of safe mobility for the EU. More 
evidence-based research is required to help policy makers frame future 
guidelines and legislation, so as to promote safe mobility of older people.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000022150
PMID: 10754372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


607. Neurology. 2000 Apr 25;54(8):1596-602. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.8.1596.

A 10-year study of the incidence of and factors predicting dementia in 
Parkinson's disease.

Hughes TA(1), Ross HF, Musa S, Bhattacherjee S, Nathan RN, Mindham RH, Spokes 
EG.

Author information:
(1)Division of Psychiatry and Behavioural Sciences, University of Leeds, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the incidence of dementia in PD with that of a control 
group without PD, and to assess the relationship between dementia and other 
features of PD.
METHODS: The authors recruited 83 patients with PD and 50 controls, all without 
dementia at initial assessment, and assessed them at regular intervals over a 
maximum period of 122 months. Dementia was diagnosed according to objective 
criteria, and included a judgment by researchers masked to subject group and to 
variables putatively associated with dementia.
RESULTS: Seventeen patients fulfilled dementia criteria; no controls did so. The 
cumulative proportion of PD patients becoming demented by 112 months was 0.38 
(95% CI 0.20 to 0.55), or 42.6 cases per 1000 years of observation. Univariate 
analyses showed that incident dementia in patients with PD was associated with 
older age at entry into the study, greater severity of neurologic symptoms, 
longer duration of PD, greater disability, and male sex. The association of age 
at onset of PD with incident dementia was of only borderline significance. 
Multivariate analysis found that age at entry into the study and severity of 
motor symptoms were significant predictors of dementia but duration of PD and 
age at onset of PD were not.
CONCLUSIONS: Dementia in PD is likely to reflect interaction of the 
neuropathology of the basal ganglia and age-related pathology. The findings do 
not support the division of PD into early and late-onset cases.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.8.1596
PMID: 10762499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


608. J Nucl Med. 2000 Apr;41(4):661-81.

PET: the merging of biology and imaging into molecular imaging.

Phelps ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for 
Molecular Imaging, School of Medicine, UCLA, Los Angeles, California 90095-1735, 
USA.

PET and SPECT are molecular imaging techniques that use radiolabeled molecules 
to image molecular interactions of biological processes in vivo. PET imaging 
technologies have been developed to provide a pathway to the patient from the 
experimental paradigms of biological and pharmaceutical sciences in genetically 
engineered and tissue transplanted mouse models of disease. PET provides a novel 
way for molecular therapies and molecular diagnostics to come together in the 
discovery of molecules that can be used in low mass amounts to image the 
function of a target and, by elevating the mass, to pharmacologically modify the 
function of the target. In both cases, the molecules are the same or analogs of 
each other. PET can be used to titrate drugs to their sites of action within 
organ systems in vivo and to assay biological outcomes of the processes being 
modified in the mouse and the patient. The goal is to provide a novel way to 
improve the rates of discovery and approval of radiopharmaceuticals and 
pharmaceuticals. Extending this relationship into clinical practice can improve 
drug use by providing molecular diagnostics in concert with molecular 
therapeutics. Diseases are biological processes, and molecular imaging with PET 
is sensitive and informative to these processes. This sensitivity is exemplified 
by the detection of disease with PET without evidence of anatomic changes on CT 
and MRI. These biological changes are seen early in the course of disease, even 
in asymptomatic stages, as illustrated by the metabolic abnormalities detected 
with PET and FDG in Huntington's and familial Alzheimer's diseases 7 and 5 y, 
respectively, before symptoms appear. Differentiation of viable from nonviable 
tissue is fundamentally a metabolic question, as shown by the use of PET to 
differentiate patients with coronary artery disease who will benefit from 
revascularization from those who will not. Although beginning within a specific 
organ, cancer is a systemic disease the most devastating consequences of which 
result from metastases. Whole-body PET imaging with FDG enables inspection of 
glucose metabolism in all organ systems in a single examination to improve the 
detection and staging of cancer, selection of therapy, and assessment of 
therapeutic response. In lung and colorectal cancers, melanoma, and lymphoma, 
PET FDG improves the accuracy of detection and staging from 8% to 43% over 
conventional work-ups and results in treatment changes in 20%-40% of the 
patients, depending on the clinical question. Approximately 65% are upstaged 
because unsuspected metastases are detected, and 35% are downstaged because a 
structural diagnosis of lesions is changed from malignant to benign. Similar 
results are now being shown for other cancers. The main difference between CT, 
sonography, MRI, and PET or SPECT is not technologic but, rather, a difference 
between detecting and characterizing a disease by its anatomic features as 
opposed to its biology. The importance and success of developing new molecular 
imaging probes is increasing as PET becomes integral to the study of the 
integrative mammalian biology of disease and as molecular therapies targeting 
the biological processes of disease are developed.

PMID: 10768568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


609. Arch Neurol. 2000 Apr;57(4):489-93. doi: 10.1001/archneur.57.4.489.

Visuoperceptual impairment in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Mori E(1), Shimomura T, Fujimori M, Hirono N, Imamura T, Hashimoto M, Tanimukai 
S, Kazui H, Hanihara T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Hyogo Institute for Aging Brain and 
Cognitive Disorders, Himeji, Japan. mori@hiabcd.go.jp

BACKGROUND: In dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), vision-related cognitive and 
behavioral symptoms are common, and involvement of the occipital visual cortices 
has been demonstrated in functional neuroimaging studies.
OBJECTIVES: To delineate visuoperceptual disturbance in patients with DLB in 
comparison with that in patients with Alzheimer disease and to explore the 
relationship between visuoperceptual disturbance and the vision-related 
cognitive and behavioral symptoms.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Research-oriented hospital.
PATIENTS: Twenty-four patients with probable DLB (based on criteria of the 
Consortium on DLB International Workshop) and 48 patients with probable 
Alzheimer disease (based on criteria of the National Institute of Neurological 
and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders 
Association) who were matched to those with DLB 2:1 by age, sex, education, and 
Mini-Mental State Examination score.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Four test items to examine visuoperceptual functions, 
including the object size discrimination, form discrimination, overlapping 
figure identification, and visual counting tasks.
RESULTS: Compared with patients with probable Alzheimer disease, patients with 
probable DLB scored significantly lower on all the visuoperceptive tasks (P<.04 
to P<.001). In the DLB group, patients with visual hallucinations (n = 18) 
scored significantly lower on the overlapping figure identification (P = .01) 
than those without them (n = 6), and patients with television misidentifications 
(n = 5) scored significantly lower on the size discrimination (P<.001), form 
discrimination (P = .01), and visual counting (P = .007) than those without them 
(n = 19).
CONCLUSIONS: Visual perception is defective in probable DLB. The defective 
visual perception plays a role in development of visual hallucinations, 
delusional misidentifications, visual agnosias, and visuoconstructive disability 
charcteristic of DLB.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.57.4.489
PMID: 10768622 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


610. Eur J Pharmacol. 2000 Mar 30;393(1-3):215-22. doi: 
10.1016/s0014-2999(00)00064-9.

Nicotinic receptor subtypes in human brain ageing, Alzheimer and Lewy body 
diseases.

Perry E(1), Martin-Ruiz C, Lee M, Griffiths M, Johnson M, Piggott M, Haroutunian 
V, Buxbaum JD, NÃ£sland J, Davis K, Gotti C, Clementi F, Tzartos S, Cohen O, 
Soreq H, Jaros E, Perry R, Ballard C, McKeith I, Court J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle 
General Hospital, Westgate Road, Newcastle, UK. e.k.perry@ncl.ac.uk

Human brain ageing is associated with reductions in a variety of nicotinic 
receptors subtypes, whereas changes in age-related disorders including 
Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's disease are more selective. In Alzheimer's 
disease, in the cortex there is a selective loss of the alpha4 (but not alpha3 
or 7) subunit immunoreactivity and of nicotine or epibatidine binding but not 
alpha-bungarotoxin binding. Epibatidine binding is inversely correlated with 
clinical dementia ratings and with the level of Abeta1-42, but not related to 
plaque or tangle densities. In contrast, alpha-bungarotoxin binding is 
positively correlated with plaque densities in the entorhinal cortex. In human 
temporal cortex loss of acetylcholinesterase catalytic activity is positively 
correlated with decreased epibatidine binding and in a transgenic mouse model 
over expressing acetylcholinesterase, epibatidine binding is elevated. In 
Parkinson's disease, loss of striatal nicotine binding appears to occur early 
but is not associated with a loss of alpha4 subunit immunoreactivity. Tobacco 
use in normal elderly individuals is associated with increased alpha4 
immunoreactivity in the cortex and lower densities of amyloid-beta plaques, and 
with greater numbers of dopaminergic neurons in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta. These findings indicate an early involvement of the alpha4 subunit in 
beta-amyloidosis but not in nigro-striatal dopaminergic degeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(00)00064-9
PMID: 10771016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


611. Mod Pathol. 2000 Apr;13(4):420-6. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.3880072.

Ubiquitin immunochemistry as a diagnostic aid for community pathologists 
evaluating patients who have dementia.

Chu CT(1), Caruso JL, Cummings TJ, Ervin J, Rosenberg C, Hulette CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

Alzheimer's disease is the most common cause of dementia It is associated with 
genetic risk factors and at least three autosomal dominant mutations. Community 
pathologists are frequently asked by families to evaluate autopsy material for 
Alzheimer's disease. Neuropathologic diagnosis is based on technically difficult 
silver impregnation stains that may not be readily available to community-based 
pathologists. Because immunohistochemical techniques are more widely accessible, 
we evaluated the practical utility of using a single immunohistochemical stain 
for diagnosing Alzheimer's disease. The ubiquitin antigen was selected because 
of its presence in morphologically distinct deposits characteristic of several 
neurodegenerative diseases. Paraffin blocks were obtained from the Bryan 
Alzheimer's Disease Research Center Brain Bank, a repository of approximately 
900 brains. Tissues from 16 individuals who exhibited the entire range of 
Alzheimer's-type neuropathology were selected. Ubiquitin immunostains, evaluated 
blindly and independently by four pathologists ranging from first-year resident 
trainee to experienced neuropathologist, reliably stained both neuritic plaques 
and neurofibrillary tangles essential for diagnosing and staging Alzheimer's 
disease. Nondemented controls with early Alzheimer's-type changes were easily 
distinguished from cases of definitive Alzheimer's disease. The stains also 
highlighted characteristic inclusions of Parkinson's disease or Lewy body 
dementia Ubiquitin immunohistochemistry is a reliable, reproducible, and readily 
available diagnostic aid for distinguishing Alzheimer's disease from other 
causes of dementia.

DOI: 10.1038/modpathol.3880072
PMID: 10786809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


612. Mov Disord. 2000 May;15(3):490-496. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200005)15:3<490::AID-MDS1011>3.0.CO;2-E.

Gender differences in the frequency and treatment of behavior problems in 
Parkinson's disease.

Fernandez HH(1), Lapane KL(2)(3), Ott BR(1)(3), Friedman JH(1)(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island, U.S.A.
(2)Center for Gerontology and Health Care Research, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island, U.S.A.
(3)Department of Community Health, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island, 
U.S.A.

OBJECTIVE: To determine gender differences in the prevalence, survival rates, 
and management of noncognitive behavioral problems of patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) in nursing homes (NH).
METHODS: We performed an observational study on 24,402 residents with PD using 
the Systematic Assessment and Geriatric drug use via Epidemiology (SAGE) 
database collected from the Minimum Data Set on a cross-section of over 400,000 
NH residents in five US states. Gender differences in behavior were used to 
predict differences in pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapies using 
logistic regression. Similar analyses were done to evaluate gender differences 
in 1-year survival rates among patients with PD with and without behavioral 
problems.
RESULTS: 36% of men and 33% of women exhibited behavioral problems. Wandering, 
verbal and physical abusiveness, and inappropriate behavior tended to be more 
common in men, especially among PD residents with severe cognitive impairment. 
Hallucinations and delusions were equally prevalent between genders and 
depressive symptoms were more common in women. Regardless of behavioral 
manifestation, men were more likely to receive antipsychotic drugs, whereas 
women were more likely to receive antidepressants. This gender difference in 
treatment was also widest among the severely demented group. Although women 
lived longer, no difference in survival curves were noted between PD residents 
with and without behavioral problems.
CONCLUSION: Gender appears to play an important role in determining the 
frequency and treatment of behavioral problems of NH residents with PD.

Copyright Â© 2000 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200005)15:3<490::AID-MDS1011>3.0.CO;2-E
PMID: 28470738


613. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000 Apr;48(4):422-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.tb04701.x.

The association between parkinsonism, Alzheimer's disease, and mortality: a 
comprehensive approach.

Mitchell SL(1), Rockwood K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Geriatric Medicine, Loeb Health Research Institute, the Ottawa 
Hospital and the University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The impact of parkinsonism on survival in older persons independent 
of dementia is not well understood.
METHODS: Participants in the clinical examination of the Canadian Study of 
Health and Aging who had parkinsonism and were older than age 65 were 
identified. The impact of parkinsonism on 5-year survival was determined for a 
combined cohort with and without dementia, and a stratified analysis was then 
conducted for the subgroups with Alzheimer's disease (AD) and those without 
dementia. Subjects with a previous diagnosis of Parkinson's disease and those 
prescribed drugs causing extrapyramidal side effects were excluded.
FINDINGS: A total of 721 subjects with AD and 1705 subjects without dementia 
were examined. After adjusting for age and residential status (community vs 
institution), parkinsonism was associated with poorer survival in the combined 
cohort (risk ratio 1.51; 95% CI, 1.22-1.85), in those with AD (risk ratio 1.34; 
95% CI, 1.02-1.76), and those without dementia (risk ratio 1.54; 95% CI, 
1.11-2.15). In the combined cohort, parkinsonism remained independently 
associated with higher mortality after adjusting for AD status (risk ratio 1.39; 
95% CI, 1.13-1.72). In the subgroup with AD, parkinsonism remained associated 
with poorer survival after adjusting for severity of cognitive impairment (risk 
ratio 1.33; 95% CI. 1.04-1.74).
INTERPRETATION: Parkinsonism is significantly associated with poorer survival in 
older persons, regardless of whether they have dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.tb04701.x
PMID: 10798470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


614. Neurology. 2000 May 9;54(9):1780-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.9.1780.

Severity of cognitive impairment and the clinical diagnosis of AD with Lewy 
bodies.

Lopez OL(1), Hamilton RL, Becker JT, Wisniewski S, Kaufer DI, DeKosky ST.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of 
Pittsburgh School of Medicine, PA, USA.

OBJECTIVE: 1) To examine the clinical differences between AD and AD with Lewy 
bodies (AD+LB); and 2) to determine the accuracy of Consensus guidelines for the 
clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) at different levels of 
dementia severity.
METHODS: The authors examined the clinical characteristics of 185 patients with 
pathologically diagnosed AD alone and 60 with AD+LB. The relationship between 
clinical symptoms and AD+LB was determined by multivariate analyses, controlled 
by age, duration of symptoms, presence of cerebrovascular disease, and dementia 
severity.
RESULTS: Mild dementia syndrome: No specific clinical symptom was associated 
with the presence of AD+LB. The sensitivity of the diagnosis of DLB was 62% and 
specificity was 54%. Moderate dementia syndrome: Extrapyramidal signs (EPS), 
especially cogwheel rigidity, and major depression were associated with AD+LB. 
The sensitivity for DLB was 82% and specificity was 31%. Severe dementia 
syndrome: Cogwheel rigidity and diurnal hypersomnia were associated with AD+LB. 
The sensitivity for DLB was 93% and specificity was 16%.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of EPS is not useful in differentiating AD+LB from AD 
in patients with mild dementia. However, as the disease progressed, they emerge 
as defining features, especially cogwheel rigidity. The accuracy of AD+LB 
diagnosis varies according the severity of the dementia syndrome. The low 
sensitivity and specificity in AD+LB patients with mild dementia suggest that in 
early stages AD+LB patients do not present the clinical characteristics of DLB. 
By contrast, the high sensitivity and low specificity for the diagnosis of DLB 
in moderate/severe dementia stages suggests that AD patients can also have 
characteristic symptoms of DLB. These results indicate that the antemortem 
diagnosis of AD+LB is difficult in all dementia stages, and better clinical and 
biologic differentiations of these entities are needed.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.9.1780
PMID: 10802784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


615. Neurology. 2000 May 9;54(9):1787-95. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.9.1787.

Two brothers with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism with an N279K 
mutation of the tau gene.

Arima K(1), Kowalska A, Hasegawa M, Mukoyama M, Watanabe R, Kawai M, Takahashi 
K, Iwatsubo T, Tabira T, Sunohara N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ultrastructure and Histochemistry, Tokyo Institute of 
Psychiatry, Tokyo, Japan. arima@prit.go.jp

Comment in
    Neurology. 2000 Dec 26;55(12):1939.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the clinical diagnostic features, neuropathologic 
phenotype of tau deposition, and subunit structure of tau filaments in patients 
who had an asparagine-to-lysine substitution at codon 279 (the N279K missense 
mutation) of the gene for microtubule-associated tau protein.
BACKGROUND: The N279K mutation is a causative genetic defect for 
pallidopontonigral degeneration in an American kindred that presents with 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and parkinsonism.
METHODS: The authors analyzed retrospectively the clinical symptoms of two 
Japanese brothers who carry this mutation. Postmortem neuropathologic and 
electron microscopic studies, and Western blot analysis of insoluble tau were 
performed to correlate tau-mediated lesions with neurologic deficits.
RESULTS: Both patients exhibited impairment in recent memory, parkinsonism, and 
corticospinal disturbances in addition to FTD. Parkinsonism in one patient was 
responsive temporarily to l-dopa. There was intense tau deposition in the medial 
temporal cortices and upper and lower motor neurons with accompanying 
corticospinal tract degeneration. Two distinct tau isoforms with four 
microtubule-binding repeats, in hyperphosphorylated forms, were the primary 
constituents of insoluble tau, which aggregated to the filamentous component, 
termed "paired tubules," in neurons, oligodendrocytes, and astrocytes. The 
elemental filaments were hollow tubules measuring 11 to 12 nm in diameter, two 
of which adhered to each other along their longitudinal axes to form "paired 
tubules."
CONCLUSIONS: Early memory loss and pyramidal signs, which are atypical of FTD, 
can be presenting symptoms in this disorder. The authors demonstrated that the 
subunit structure of tau filaments is a pair of hollow tubules despite the 
prevailing twisted ribbon model.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.9.1787
PMID: 10802785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


616. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2000;107(1):59-71. doi: 10.1007/s007020050005.

Risk factors for dementia, depression and psychosis in long-standing Parkinson's 
disease.

Giladi N(1), Treves TA, Paleacu D, Shabtai H, Orlov Y, Kandinov B, Simon ES, 
Korczyn AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tel-Aviv Medical Center, Sackler School of Medicine, 
Tel-Aviv University, Israel. ngiladi@tasmc.health.gov.il

OBJECTIVES: To study the relationships between clinical features of Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and the development of dementia, depression or psychosis in 
patients with long-standing disease.
BACKGROUND: The natural history of dementia and depression in PD, and its 
relation to psychosis in long standing PD, are unclear.
METHOD: 172 consecutive patients (99 men and 73 women, mean age at symptoms 
onset 58.3 +/- 13.2 years) with 5 years or more of PD (mean symptom duration of 
11.8 +/- 5.6 years) were studied. Clinical data were collected during the last 
office visit through physical examination, detailed history, review of patient 
charts and outside documents. Dementia and depression were diagnosed according 
to DSM-IV criteria, while psychosis was diagnosed if hallucinations or delusions 
were present. Chi-square and t tests were used to compare the patient 
characteristics among those with vs. those without mental complications of the 
disease at different disease stages. Logistic regression was used for the 
comparison of associations between the presence of dementia or depression 
(dependent variable) and age at onset of PD, duration of PD and disease staging 
(explanatory variables).
RESULTS: The study population consisted of 45 patients at Hoehn & Yahr (H&Y) 
stage < or = 2.5 (26%), 104 patients at stage 3 (60.5%) and 23 patients at H&Y 
stage 4-5 (13.5%). Sixty one patients (36%) had dementia, 55 patients had 
depression (33%) and 50 patients (27%) had psychosis. Dementia and depression 
were significantly associated with disease severity as reflected in the H&Y 
scale (P = 0.0003, Z = 3.59; P = 0.006, Z = 3.22, respectively). These 
associations were significant also for the older age of PD onset (> or = 59 
years n = 89) subgroup (p = 0.001, Z = 3.2 for dementia and p = 0.02, Z = 2.9 
for depression), but not for younger onset cases (< 59 years n = 83). Dementia 
was significantly associated with older age of PD onset (beta = 0.04, p = 0.009) 
while depression was inversely associated with age of PD onset (beta = -0.04, p 
= 0.02). The presence of dementia was also significantly associated with 
depression (beta = 1.49, p = 0.0006). Dementia and depression were found to be 
independent explanatory variables for the development of psychosis (logistic 
regression, odds ratio (OR) = 26.0, p < 0.0001; OR = 10.2, p < 0.0001, 
respectively). In patients with younger age of PD onset, depression more than 
dementia was strongly correlated with the appearance of psychosis.
CONCLUSION: Dementia in PD was related to older age of symptoms onset and old 
age. Depression was associated with dementia or early age of PD onset. 
Depression seemed to contribute to the appearance of psychosis even more than 
dementia, especially in patients with younger age of symptoms onset.

DOI: 10.1007/s007020050005
PMID: 10809404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


617. Eur J Neurol. 2000 Jan;7(1):77-9. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2000.00021.x.

Fall-related injuries in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's 
disease.

Imamura T(1), Hirono N, Hashimoto M, Kazui H, Tanimukai S, Hanihara T, Takahara 
A, Mori E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neurosciences, Hyogo Institute for Ageing Brain and 
Cognitive Disorders, Hyogo Institute Hospital for Ageing Brain and Cognitive 
Disorders, Himeji, Japan. imamura@hiabcd.go.jp

Repeated falls are reported as one of the clinical characteristics in dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB). We examined the incidence of fall-related injuries in 
561 dementia patients with various clinical diagnoses, including DLB and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), in a ward established for dementia research. The 
incidence of fall-related injuries was significantly higher in DLB patients 
(10.7%) than in AD patients (1.1%) (P < 0.001). The high incidence in those 
patients with DLB cannot be attributed to Parkinsonism because none of the DLB 
patients with injuries showed extrapyramidal sign. Our observations suggest that 
patients with a clinical diagnosis of DLB have a high risk of fall-related 
injuries, even though they do not show Parkinsonism. An appropriate clinical 
discrimination between DLB and AD is recommended to manage and prevent 
fall-related injuries.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.2000.00021.x
PMID: 10809918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


618. Cell Transplant. 2000 Mar-Apr;9(2):273-8. doi: 10.1177/096368970000900212.

Porcine xenografts in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's disease patients: 
preliminary results.

Fink JS(1), Schumacher JM, Ellias SL, Palmer EP, Saint-Hilaire M, Shannon K, 
Penn R, Starr P, VanHorne C, Kott HS, Dempsey PK, Fischman AJ, Raineri R, 
Manhart C, Dinsmore J, Isacson O.

Author information:
(1)Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. jsfink@bu.edu

The observation that fetal neurons are able to survive and function when 
transplanted into the adult brain fostered the development of cellular therapy 
as a promising approach to achieve neuronal replacement for treatment of 
diseases of the adult central nervous system. This approach has been 
demonstrated to be efficacious in patients with Parkinson's disease after 
transplantation of human fetal neurons. The use of human fetal tissue is limited 
by ethical, infectious, regulatory, and practical concerns. Other mammalian 
fetal neural tissue could serve as an alternative cell source. Pigs are a 
reasonable source of fetal neuronal tissue because of their brain size, large 
litters, and the extensive experience in rearing them in captivity under 
controlled conditions. In Phase I studies porcine fetal neural cells grafted 
unilaterally into Parkinson's disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD) 
patients are being evaluated for safety and efficacy. Clinical improvement of 
19% has been observed in the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale "off" 
state scores in 10 PD patients assessed 12 months after unilateral striatal 
transplantation of 12 million fetal porcine ventral mesencephalic (VM) cells. 
Several patients have improved more than 30%. In a single autopsied PD patient 
some porcine fetal VM cells were observed to survive 7 months after 
transplantation. Twelve HD patients have shown a favorable safety profile and no 
change in total functional capacity score 1 year after unilateral striatal 
placement of up to 24 million fetal porcine striatal cells. Xenotransplantation 
of fetal porcine neurons is a promising approach to delivery of healthy neurons 
to the CNS. The major challenges to the successful use of xenogeneic fetal 
neuronal cells in neurodegenerative diseases appear to be minimizing 
immune-mediated rejection, management of the risk of xenotic (cross-species) 
infections, and the accurate assessment of clinical outcome of diseases that are 
slowly progressive.

DOI: 10.1177/096368970000900212
PMID: 10811399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


619. Nutr Rev. 2000 Mar;58(3 Pt 1):61-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2000.tb01840.x.

Energetic adaptation to chronic disease in the elderly.

Toth MJ(1), Poehlman ET.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Vermont, Burlington 05405, USA.

Several chronic diseases occur with increased prevalence in the elderly. Body 
weight loss is a common feature of many chronic diseases. Weight loss increases 
the risk for morbidity and mortality and contributes to decreased functional 
independence and poor quality of life. Thus, an understanding of the effect of 
chronic disease on energy balance has important implications for nutritional 
supplementation and clinical outcome. This brief review will consider recent 
studies that have examined the effect of several chronic diseases (i.e., 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and congestive heart failure) on daily 
energy expenditure in elderly individuals. Additionally, we put forth a model to 
explain the energetic adaptation to chronic disease in the elderly that is based 
on measurements of daily energy expenditure and its components. Studies suggest 
that chronic disease decreases daily energy expenditure in elderly individuals 
due to a marked reduction in physical activity energy expenditure. Moreover, 
these changes in daily energy expenditure often occur in the presence of 
increased resting energy expenditure. Thus, the net effect of chronic disease is 
to decrease daily energy expenditure. These results do not favor the hypothesis 
that increased energy expenditure contributes to disease-related weight loss. 
Instead, reduced energy intake appears to be a more likely mediator of the 
negative energy imbalance and weight loss that frequently accompany chronic 
disease in the elderly.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1753-4887.2000.tb01840.x
PMID: 10812919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


620. Arch Neurol. 2000 May;57(5):713-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.57.5.713.

The relative frequency of "dementia of unknown etiology" increases with age and 
is nearly 50% in nonagenarians.

Crystal HA(1), Dickson D, Davies P, Masur D, Grober E, Lipton RB.

Author information:
(1)Einstein Aging Study, Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA. crystal@aecom.yu.edu

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2001 Sep;58(9):1498-9.

CONTEXT: With the recent change in pathological criteria for Alzheimer disease 
(AD), a group of patients has emerged who do not meet pathological criteria for 
any well-characterized degenerative dementias. Whether these unclassified 
patients have vascular dementia or some other form of dementia is not known.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the clinical characteristics, pathological substrate, 
and relative frequency of dementia not caused by well-characterized degenerative 
dementias.
DESIGN/SETTING: Clinicopathological study of a prospectively observed sample of 
elderly nondemented and demented subjects recruited from our urban community.
METHODS: In our series of 128 subjects with prospective neuropsychological 
evaluations as well as neuropathology, we identified 35 clinically nondemented 
subjects and 20 demented patients who did not meet pathological criteria for 
well-characterized degenerative dementias such as AD or dementia with Lewy 
bodies. The 20 demented patients were grouped together under the term dementia 
of unknown etiology (DUE). We compared clinical, genetic, neuropsychological, 
pathological, and neurochemical characteristics of the nondemented group, 
patients with DUE, and 28 patients with AD and no other pathological 
abnormality.
RESULTS: Mean age at death for patients with DUE was 89.1 +/- 5.8 years compared 
with 79.9 +/- 11.4 years for AD (P<.001). Patients with AD and DUE did not 
differ in sex, risk factors, apolipoprotein E genotype, neuropsychological 
features, or neurological features. Hippocampal sclerosis (in 11 patients with 
dementia and no controls) and leukoencephalopathy (in 7 patients with dementia 
and 1 control) were associated with cognitive impairment; other vascular markers 
were not. Dementia of unknown etiology accounted for 5% of all cases of dementia 
among patients dying in their 70s, 21% for patients dying in their 80s, and 48% 
for patients dying in their 90s.
CONCLUSIONS: A significant percentage of demented patients older than 80 years 
do not meet pathological criteria for AD or dementia with Lewy bodies. 
Hippocampal sclerosis and leukoencephalopathy are common in these patients but 
rare in clinically nondemented subjects.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.57.5.713
PMID: 10815138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


621. Neuroreport. 2000 Apr 27;11(6):1167-71. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200004270-00005.

Alpha2-macroglobulin gene polymorphisms show racial diversity and are not 
associated with Alzheimer's disease.

Higuchi S(1), Matsushita S, Nakane J, Arai H, Matsui T, Urakami K, Yuzuriha T, 
Takeda A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Research, National Institute on Alcoholism, Kurihama 
National Hospital, Yokosuka Kanagawa, Japan.

Two genetic markers of the plasma protein alpha2-macroglobulin, a 5 bp 
deletion/insertion at the 5' splice site of exon 18 (A2MI) and the GTC/ATC 
(VaIIO00IIe) in exon 24 (A2M2), may have roles in the development of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). Genotyping and linkage analysis of these markers in 426 Japanese 
sporadic AD patients, 85 autopsy-confirmed Caucasian AD cases, and, as controls, 
382 Japanese and 65 Caucasians who were cognitively normal and 140 Japanese 
Parkinson's disease patients showed racial diversity in the frequencies and 
relationship of the two markers. Comparison of genotype and allele frequencies, 
stratification of the samples by the presence of the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 
allele, and logistic regression analysis revealed no association of these 
markers with AD in either racial group.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-200004270-00005
PMID: 10817585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


622. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000 Apr;903:442-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06396.x.

Neurocardiovascular instability, hypotensive episodes, and MRI lesions in 
neurodegenerative dementia.

Ballard C(1), O'Brien J, Barber B, Scheltens P, Shaw F, McKeith I, Kenny RA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle 
General Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. c.g.ballard@ncl.ac.uk

We investigated whether carotid sinus hypersensitivity (CSH) and orthostatic 
hypotension (OH) were associated with a greater severity of hyperintensities on 
MRI scan in 30 patients with neurodegenerative dementia (17 dementia with Lewy 
bodies, 13 Alzheimer's disease), who had a detailed evaluation of OH and CSH 
during active standing and head-up tilt. Patients also underwent a 1.0 Tesla MRI 
scan, from which hyperintensities were rated on a standardized scale. A blood 
pressure (BP) drop > 30 mm Hg during carotid sinus massage or active standing 
was significantly associated with the severity of MRI hyperintensities in the 
deep white matter (OR 10.0, 95%; CI 1.8-55.7) and in the basal ganglia (OR 11.0, 
95%; CI 1.2-99.5) but not in periventricular areas (OR 1.4, 95%; CI 0.3-1.8). 
Patients with the cardio-inhibitory form of CSH with the largest BP drops were 
the most at risk. Further longitudinal studies need to investigate the direction 
of causality to determine whether CSH or OH predispose to MRI hyperintensities 
and accelerate cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06396.x
PMID: 10818535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


623. Neurology. 2000 May 23;54(10):1916-21. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1916.

Alpha-synuclein cortical Lewy bodies correlate with dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Hurtig HI(1), Trojanowski JQ, Galvin J, Ewbank D, Schmidt ML, Lee VM, Clark CM, 
Glosser G, Stern MB, Gollomp SM, Arnold SE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania, PA, USA. 
hihurtig@pahosp.com

BACKGROUND: Dementia is a frequent complication of idiopathic parkinsonism or 
PD, usually occurring later in the protracted course of the illness. The primary 
site of neuropathologic change in PD is the substantia nigra, but the 
neuropathologic and molecular basis of dementia in PD is less clear. Although 
Alzheimer's pathology has been a frequent finding, recent advances in 
immunostaining of alpha-synuclein have suggested the possible importance of 
cortical Lewy bodies (CLBs) in the brains of demented patients with PD.
METHODS: The brains of 22 demented and 20 nondemented patients with a clinical 
and neuropathologic diagnosis of PD were evaluated with standard neuropathologic 
techniques. In addition, CLBs and dystrophic neurites were identified 
immunohistochemically with antibodies specific for alpha-synuclein and 
ubiquitin; plaques and tangles were identified by staining with thioflavine S. 
Associations between dementia status and pathologic markers were tested with 
logistic regression.
RESULTS: CLBs positive for alpha-synuclein are highly sensitive (91%) and 
specific (90%) neuropathologic markers of dementia in PD and slightly more 
sensitive than ubiquitin-positive CLBs. They are better indicators of dementia 
than neurofibrillary tangles, amyloid plaques, or dystrophic neurites.
CONCLUSION: CLBs detected by alpha-synuclein antibodies in patients with PD are 
a more sensitive and specific correlate of dementia than the presence of 
Alzheimer's pathology, which was present in a minority of the cases in this 
series.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1916
PMID: 10822429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


624. Neurology. 2000 May 23;54(10):1965-71. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1965.

Incidence of and risk factors for hallucinations and delusions in patients with 
probable AD.

Paulsen JS(1), Salmon DP, Thal LJ, Romero R, Weisstein-Jenkins C, Galasko D, 
Hofstetter CR, Thomas R, Grant I, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, University of Iowa, Iowa City 
52242-1057, USA. jane-paulsen@uiowa.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2000 Oct 24;55(8):1240-1.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the incidence of and risk factors for hallucinations and 
delusions associated with patients clinically diagnosed with probable AD.
BACKGROUND: Estimates of the incidence of psychosis in AD range widely from 10% 
to 75%. The risk factors for psychosis of AD are not known, although multiple 
studies indicate that AD patients with psychosis demonstrate greater cognitive 
and functional impairment.
METHODS: The authors conducted psychiatric evaluations of 329 patients with 
probable AD from the University of California at San Diego Alzheimer's Disease 
Research Center to determine the incidence of hallucinations and delusions. They 
examined data from annual clinical and neuropsychological evaluations to 
determine whether there were specific risk factors for the development of 
hallucinations and delusions.
RESULTS: Using Cox survival analyses, the cumulative incidence of hallucinations 
and delusions was 20.1% at 1 year, 36.1% at 2, 49.5% at 3, and 51.3% at 4 years. 
Parkinsonian gait, bradyphrenia, exaggerated general cognitive decline, and 
exaggerated semantic memory decline were significant predictors. Age, education, 
and gender were not significant predictors.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors found a relatively high incidence of hallucinations and 
delusions in patients diagnosed with probable AD and suggest that specific 
neurologic signs, cognitive abilities, and accelerated decline may be predictive 
markers for their occurrence.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.10.1965
PMID: 10822438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


625. Mov Disord. 2000 May;15(3):490-6.

Gender differences in the frequency and treatment of behavior problems in 
Parkinson's disease. SAGE Study Group. Systematic Assessment and Geriatric drug 
use via Epidemiology.

Fernandez HH(1), Lapane KL, Ott BR, Friedman JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University, Providence, Rhode 
Island, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine gender differences in the prevalence, survival rates, 
and management of noncognitive behavioral problems of patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) in nursing homes (NH).
METHODS: We performed an observational study on 24,402 residents with PD using 
the Systematic Assessment and Geriatric drug use via Epidemiology (SAGE) 
database collected from the Minimum Data Set on a cross-section of over 400,000 
NH residents in five US states. Gender differences in behavior were used to 
predict differences in pharmacologic and nonpharmacologic therapies using 
logistic regression. Similar analyses were done to evaluate gender differences 
in 1-year survival rates among patients with PD with and without behavioral 
problems.
RESULTS: 36% of men and 33% of women exhibited behavioral problems. Wandering, 
verbal and physical abusiveness, and inappropriate behavior tended to be more 
common in men, especially among PD residents with severe cognitive impairment. 
Hallucinations and delusions were equally prevalent between genders and 
depressive symptoms were more common in women. Regardless of behavioral 
manifestation, men were more likely to receive antipsychotic drugs, whereas 
women were more likely to receive antidepressants. This gender difference in 
treatment was also widest among the severely demented group. Although women 
lived longer, no difference in survival curves were noted between PD residents 
with and without behavioral problems.
CONCLUSION: Gender appears to play an important role in determining the 
frequency and treatment of behavioral problems of NH residents with PD.

PMID: 10830414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


626. Injury. 2000 Jul;31(6):421-4. doi: 10.1016/s0020-1383(00)00012-7.

Contralateral hip fractures - can predisposing factors be determined?

Saxena P(1), Shankar J.

Author information:
(1)Royal Liverpool University Hospital, Liverpool, L69 3GA, UK.

A case control study was carried out in the Orthopaedic Department of Bradford 
Royal Infirmary in an attempt to see if certain medical conditions, which can 
affect balance and stability, are more common in those who sustain a second 
proximal femoral fracture. Medical conditions included in the study were: late 
effects of cerebro-vascular accident, blindness, syncope and collapse, 
alcoholism, Alzheimer's disease, epilepsy, Parkinsonism, ischaemic heart disease 
and senile dementia. The study group comprised 53 patients admitted to hospital 
between 1992 and 1998 with two separate proximal femoral fractures each on a 
different side. The control group comprised 530 patients selected from a general 
pool of 2080 proximal femoral fracture patients admitted to hospital during the 
same period. The control group patients were matched to the study group for age, 
sex, and time of occurrence of the first fracture. Results show significantly 
higher association of late effects of cerebro-vascular accident, blindness, 
syncope and collapse, and Alzheimer's disease with subsequent contralateral 
proximal femoral fractures. This study supports a causal relationship between 
the above medical conditions and subsequent contralateral proximal femoral 
fractures. It may therefore be possible to identify patients who are at risk of 
returning with a second fracture.

DOI: 10.1016/s0020-1383(00)00012-7
PMID: 10831738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


627. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2000 Jun;2(2):129-38.

Diagnosis and management of Alzheimer's disease.

Burns A(1).

Author information:
(1)Professor of Old Age Psychiatry, University of Manchester, Dept of 
Psychiatry, Withington Hospital, West Didsbury, Manchester, UK.

The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a 2-stage process, in stage 1, the 
dementia syndrome, comprising neuropsychologic and neuropsychiatrie components 
together with deficits in activities of daily living, is differentiated on 
clinical grounds from a number of other conditions (delirium, concomitant 
physical illness, drug treatment normal memory loss, etc), in stage 2, the cause 
is determined, AD being the most common, followed by vascular dementia, 
Lewy-body dementia, frontal lobe dementia, and a host of so-called secondary 
causes. Although a mixed Alzheimer/vascular picture is common, gradual onset of 
multiple cognitive deficits is typical of AD, while abrupt onset, a fluctuating 
course, hypertension, and focal neurologic signs suggest vascular dementia, in 
Lewy-body dementia, memory loss may not be an early feature, and fluctuation can 
be marked by distressing psychotic symptoms and behavioral disturbance, 
investigations should be minimally invasive and relatively cheap, confined to 
routine blood tests, chest x-ray and/or electrocardiogram if clinically 
indicated, cardiologie or neurologic referral in the presence of cerebrovascular 
signs, and computed tomography if an intracranial lesion is suspected. Accurate 
diagnosis enables the clinician to outline the disease course to the family and 
inform them of genetic implications. Numerous instruments for assessing 
cognitive function, global status, psychiatric well-being, and activities of 
daily living are briefly reviewed.

PMCID: PMC3181595
PMID: 22034134


628. J Clin Neurosci. 2000 May;7(3):203-8. doi: 10.1054/jocn.1999.0193.

Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease: diagnostic utility of 14-3-3 protein immunodetection 
in cerebrospinal fluid.

Collins S(1), Boyd A, Fletcher A, Gonzales M, McLean CA, Byron K, Masters CL.

Author information:
(1)The Australian Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Registry, Department of Pathology, 
the University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia 3010. 
s.colins@pathology.unimelb.edu.au

With the aim of improving the pre-mortem diagnostic accuracy of sporadic 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), there has been considerable recent interest in 
the merit of immunodetecting 14-3-3 proteins in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
using Western blotting, with cumulative support for the utility of this 
technique. As a corollary, during a 20 month period, CSF samples from an 
unselected prospective series of 124 patients in whom sporadic CJD was a 
differential diagnostic possibility were examined by the Australian 
Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease Registry (ACJDR) for the presence of 14-3-3 proteins. 
Follow up to achieve a final diagnosis or clinical outcome was successful in 
119. For definite and probable sporadic CJD combined, a positive result was 
91.4% sensitive, while the sensitivity for the pathologically verified group 
alone was 96.0%. A negative outcome was 92.5% specific with false positive 
results seen in five patients with diagnoses which included inflammatory CNS 
disorders, cerebral ischaemia and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
Immunodetectable 14-3-3 proteins were present in three of four symptomatic 
patients with prion protein gene (PRNP) mutations. CSF samples containing 
significant amounts of blood were confirmed as suboptimal, with weak or 
qualitatively unusual positive results found in greater than 50% of such 
specimens, with only one of 14 such cases ultimately classified as definite or 
probable CJD.

Copyright 2000 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

DOI: 10.1054/jocn.1999.0193
PMID: 10833616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


629. N Engl J Med. 2000 Jun 8;342(23):1708-14. doi: 10.1056/NEJM200006083422304.

Long-term follow-up of unilateral pallidotomy in advanced Parkinson's disease.

Fine J(1), Duff J, Chen R, Chir B, Hutchison W, Lozano AM, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Toronto Western Hospital, University of Toronto, ON, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: Although the short-term benefits of posteroventral pallidotomy for 
patients with advanced Parkinson's disease have been well documented, little is 
known about the long-term outcome of the procedure.
METHODS: We conducted a long-term follow-up study of a cohort of 40 patients who 
had undergone unilateral posteroventral medial pallidotomy between 1993 and 
1996. Twenty patients were not evaluated because they had undergone a second 
surgical procedure (11 patients) or had died (2) or because they had dementia or 
another debilitating illness (4), lived too far away (1), or had been lost to 
follow-up (2). We conducted serial postoperative assessments of parkinsonism in 
the remaining 20 patients while they were taking medications ("on" period) and 
after overnight withdrawal of the drugs ("off" period). The mean follow-up time 
was 52 months (range, 41 to 64).
RESULTS: The combined off-period score for activities of daily living and motor 
function on the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale was 18.0 percent better 
at the last evaluation than at base line (95 percent confidence interval, 4.9 to 
31.0 percent; P=0.01). Significant improvements were also evident in the 
off-period scores for contralateral tremor (65.4 percent improvement, P=0.007), 
rigidity (43.2 percent, P=0.03), and bradykinesia (18.2 percent, P=0.04) and in 
the on-period score for contralateral dyskinesia (70.6 percent, P<0.001). 
Changes in medication did not contribute to the sustained improvement. The 20 
patients who could not be included in the long-term analysis had similar 
base-line characteristics but a worse response to surgery at six months.
CONCLUSIONS: In the group of patients with advanced Parkinson's disease who 
could be enrolled in our long-term follow-up study of unilateral posteroventral 
medial pallidotomy (20 patients from the original cohort of 40), significant 
early improvements in off-period contralateral signs of parkinsonism were 
sustained for up to five and a half years. There was a sustained significant 
improvement in on-period contralateral dyskinesia but not in other on-period 
signs of parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJM200006083422304
PMID: 10841873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


630. Audiol Neurootol. 2000 May-Aug;5(3-4):216-24. doi: 10.1159/000013883.

Mismatch negativity in aging and in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Pekkonen E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Finland. 
eero@biomag.helsinki.fi

Mismatch negativity (MMN) is an auditory event-related potential (ERP) that 
reflects automatic stimulus discrimination in the human auditory system. By 
varying the interstimulus intervals (ISIs), the MMN can be used as an index of 
auditory sensory memory. This paper focuses on MMN findings in aging and in 
Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's diseases (PD). The accumulated data suggest 
that MMN to duration deviance, unlike MMN to frequency deviance, is reduced in 
amplitude in aging at short ISIs. The attenuated MMN to frequency deviance 
observed at long ISIs in elderly subjects seems to be caused by age-related 
memory trace decay. Existing results suggest that automatic discrimination for 
the frequency change is not affected in the early phase of AD, whereas the 
memory trace seems to decay faster in AD patients. The present findings on PD 
are not as conclusive, although they tentatively suggest deteriorated automatic 
change detection. The MMN appears to offer an objective tool for studying 
auditory processing and memory trace decay in different neurological disorders.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000013883
PMID: 10859416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


631. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2000 Jul-Aug;11(4):219-22. doi: 10.1159/000017240.

One year follow-up of parkinsonism in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Ballard C(1), O'Brien J, Swann A, Neill D, Lantos P, Holmes C, Burn D, Ince P, 
Perry R, McKeith I.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, UK. c.g.ballard@ncl.ac.uk

The progression of parkinsonism over 1 year was evaluated in a prospective 
cohort of patients (n = 338), suffering from dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) or vascular dementia (VaD). Parkinsonism was assessed 
using the modified Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale. Significant 
parkinsonism was significantly commoner in DLB sufferers (71%) than amongst 
patients with AD (7%) or VaD (10%). DLB patients with established parkinsonism 
had an annual increase in severity of 9%, but progression was more rapid (49% in 
1 year) in patients with early parkinsonism. Parkinsonism was frequent at all 
severities in DLB patients, but usually only present in other dementias when 
MMSE <10.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000017240
PMID: 10867448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


632. QJM. 2000 Jul;93(7):391-423. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/93.7.391.

Impact of genomics on drug discovery and clinical medicine.

Emilien G(1), Ponchon M, Caldas C, Isacson O, Maloteaux JM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology, UniversitÃ© Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, 
Belgium. Gemilien@aol.com

Genomics, particularly high-throughput sequencing and characterization of 
expressed human genes, has created new opportunities for drug discovery. 
Knowledge of all the human genes and their functions may allow effective 
preventive measures, and change drug research strategy and drug discovery 
development processes. Pharmacogenomics is the application of genomic 
technologies such as gene sequencing, statistical genetics, and gene expression 
analysis to drugs in clinical development and on the market. It applies the 
large-scale systematic approaches of genomics to speed the discovery of drug 
response markers, whether they act at the level of the drug target, drug 
metabolism, or disease pathways. The potential implication of genomics and 
pharmacogenomics in clinical research and clinical medicine is that disease 
could be treated according to genetic and specific individual markers, selecting 
medications and dosages that are optimized for individual patients. The 
possibility of defining patient populations genetically may improve outcomes by 
predicting individual responses to drugs, and could improve safety and efficacy 
in therapeutic areas such as neuropsychiatry, cardiovascular medicine, 
endocrinology (diabetes and obesity) and oncology. Ethical questions need to be 
addressed and guidelines established for the use of genomics in clinical 
research and clinical medicine. Significant achievements are possible with an 
interdisciplinary approach that includes genetic, technological and therapeutic 
measures.

DOI: 10.1093/qjmed/93.7.391
PMID: 10874050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


633. Eur J Med Res. 2000 Jun 20;5(6):231-5.

Co-morbidity in Gaucher's disease results of a nationwide enquiry in Spain.

PÃ©rez-Calvo J(1), Bernal M, Giraldo P, Torralba MA, Civeira F, Giralt M, Pocovi 
M.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna B, Hospital ClÃ­nico Universitario, Avda S. Juan 
Bosco no 15, 50009 Zaragoza, Spain. mibh-jperez@hcu-lblesa.es.

SHORT INTRODUCTION: Gaucher's disease (GD) is an autosomal recessive disease 
produced by mutations of the Glucocerebrosidase gene. Carriers are considered to 
be healthy subjects because there is no manifestation of the disease, but they 
show signs of macrophage disfunction. The aim of the study was to determine if 
GD patients and non affected carriers risk suffering other diseases when 
compared to healthy non-carrier relatives.
DESIGN: Epidemiologic study of historic cohorts. The fact that they have one or 
two mutated alleles has been considered to be the risk factor leading to other 
conditions (Dementia, Parkinson disease, Ischemic stroke, Ischemic heart 
disease, Non rheumatic valvular disease, Cancer hematological and 
non-hematological, Pulmonary fibrosis, Tuberculosis, Gallstones and 
Schizophrenia). All people, patients, carriers and healthy controls shared the 
same genetical background and environmental influence. - Patients and relatives 
enrolled on the Spanish Gaucher Disease Registry were evaluated.
STATISTICS: For the Relative-Risk calculation the Mantel-Haenszel test was 
applied. Yates' correction was used when size sample was too small. A value of p 
<0.05 was accepted for statistical significance.
RESULTS: 370 people, from 79 different families, were surveyed. We received 
evaluable information from 45 families (56%), totalling 258 people (69%): 59 
healthy subjects (Mean age 32. 20, RANGE: 10-85; M 57.63%/F 42.37%), 132 
carriers (Mean age 35.91, RANGE: 1-79; M 56.82%/F 43.18%) and 67 patients (Mean 
age 32.16, Range: 1-76; M 44.78%/F 55.22%. - Relative Risk of suffering any 
disease with regard to Gaucher's status: Patient vs Healthy 9.69 (95% Confidence 
interval [CI] 2.00-63.99; p 0.0006). Patient vs Carrier 3.74 (CI 1.53-9.27; p 
0.001); Carrier vs Healthy 2.59 (CI 0. 52-12.50; p 0.21). Relative Risk of 
suffering any disease with regard to sex was 3.96 for female patients (CI 
1.01-16.75; p 0.02) and 1.34 for female carriers (CI 0.27-6.75; p = 0.68).
CONCLUSION: As a group, Gaucher's patients seem to have a greater risk of 
suffering other common unrelated diseases than carriers or healthy relatives. 
This excess of risk is particularly higher among female patients and can not be 
explained in terms of differences in age. Carrier status doesn't seem to highten 
the risk of suffering other diseases.

PMID: 10882637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


634. Brain Pathol. 2000 Jul;10(3):378-84. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2000.tb00269.x.

Lewy bodies in Alzheimer's disease: a neuropathological review of 145 cases 
using alpha-synuclein immunohistochemistry.

Hamilton RL(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Department of Pathology, PA, 
USA. hamilton@np.awing.upmc.edu

Antibodies to alpha-synuclein (AS) now provide a sensitive and specific method 
for the detection of Lewy bodies (LBs) and their use will allow a more accurate 
determination of the prevalence of LBs in Alzheimer's Disease (AD). Studies 
using AS immunohistochemistry (IHC) have found LBs in the amygdala of over 60% 
early onset familial AD and in 50% of Down's syndrome patients with AD, however, 
no studies have reported the use of AS IHC to detect LBs in a large cohort of 
sporadic AD. This study examined 145 sporadic AD cases diagnosed using CERAD 
criteria from 1995-1999 for the presence of LBs using AS IHC. AS IHC detected 
LBs in 88/145 (60.7%) of sporadic AD cases. Similarly, LBs were found in 56.8% 
of the 95 cases fulfilling the more stringent NIA-RI criteria for the diagnosis 
of AD (Braak stage 5-6). In all cases with LBs, the amygdala was involved and 
LBs were always most numerous in this area, however, in some cases LBs in the 
substantia nigra were rare or not present. In conclusion, this study found that 
AS IHC detects LBs in the majority of sporadic AD cases and that the amygdala is 
the most commonly affected region.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2000.tb00269.x
PMCID: PMC8098522
PMID: 10885656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


635. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jul 26;1502(1):95-109. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00036-3.

Properties of NACP/alpha-synuclein and its role in Alzheimer's disease.

Iwai A(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research, Pharmacology Laboratories, Institute for Drug 
Discovery Research, Yamanouchi Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan. iwai@yamanouchi.co.jp

The precursor of the non-amyloid beta/A4 protein (non-Abeta) component of 
Alzheimer's disease amyloid (NACP)/alpha-synuclein is the human homologue of 
alpha-synuclein, a member of a protein family which includes alpha-, beta- and 
gamma-synuclein. This protein is thought to be involved in neuronal plasticity 
because of its unique expression, mainly in the telencephalon during maturation. 
Consequently, disarrangement of NACP/alpha-synuclein might disrupt synaptic 
activity, resulting in memory disturbance. Previous studies have shown that 
damage to synaptic terminals is closely associated with global cognitive 
impairment and is an early event in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. 
Although the relationship between synaptic damage and amyloidogenesis is not 
clear, some proteins at the synaptic site have been implicated in both neuronal 
alteration and amyloid formation. Indeed, abnormal accumulation of both 
NACP/alpha-synuclein and Abeta precursor protein occurs at synapses of 
Alzheimer's patients. Other evidence suggests that NACP/alpha-synuclein is a 
component of the Lewy bodies found in patients with Parkinson's disease or 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and that a point mutation in this protein may be the 
cause of familial Parkinson's disease. Consequently, abnormal transport, 
metabolism or function of NACP/alpha-synuclein appears to impair synaptic 
function, which induces, at least in part, neuronal degeneration in several 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(00)00036-3
PMID: 10899435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


636. Curr Pharm Des. 2000 Aug;6(12):1287-312. doi: 10.2174/1381612003399725.

Drugs with estrogen-like potency and brain activity: potential therapeutic 
application for the CNS.

Cyr M(1), Calon F, Morissette M, Grandbois M, Di Paolo T, Callier S.

Author information:
(1)Oncology and Molecular Endocrinology Research Center, and FacultÃ© de 
pharmacie, UniversitÃ© Laval, QuÃ©bec, G1V 4G2, Canada.

Numerous reports, ranging from molecular investigations to clinical studies, 
demonstrate the potency of estrogens to modulate brain function and their 
implications in schizophrenia and depression. Alterations of dopaminergic, 
cholinergic, GABAergic, glutamatergic and serotonergic neurotransmission through 
estrogen-mediated mechanisms have been consistently established. Moreover, 
studies using in vivo and in vitro models as well as epidemiological data 
suggest that estrogens provide neuroprotection of central nervous system (CNS) 
cells implicated in the etiology of neurodegenerative disorders such as 
Alzheimer s (AD) and Parkinson s (PD) diseases. Numerous genomic or non-genomic 
mechanisms of actions of estrogens in the brain have been documented implicating 
classical nuclear estrogen receptors as well as possible estrogen membrane 
receptors, antioxidant activity of steroids, their effect on fluidity as well as 
on antiapoptotic proteins and growth factors. Selective estrogen receptor 
modulators (SERMs) have estrogenic and/or antiestrogenic activity depending on 
the target tissue. Hence, SERMs have the same beneficial effect as estrogen in 
skeleton and cardiovascular systems but act as antagonists in breast and uterus. 
The finding of beneficial side effects of SERMs in the CNS might improve their 
risk-benefit ratio in traditional indications. In this review, we will survey 
schizophrenia and depression as examples of mental diseases and AD and PD as 
neurodegenerative diseases. We will review brain effects of estrogens, steroids 
possibly acting as pro-drugs of estrogens such as testosterone and 
dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) and present novel findings with SERMs. Drugs with 
estrogen activity in the brain may have therapeutic potential either by 
modulating brain neurotransmitter transmission or through neuroprotective 
activity.

DOI: 10.2174/1381612003399725
PMID: 10903393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


637. Neurology. 2000 Jul 25;55(2):302-4. doi: 10.1212/wnl.55.2.302.

Mitochondrial DNA haplogroups and susceptibility to AD and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Chinnery PF(1), Taylor GA, Howell N, Andrews RM, Morris CM, Taylor RW, McKeith 
IG, Perry RH, Edwardson JA, Turnbull DM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

The authors analyzed the relationship between nuclear genetic risk factors 
(apolipoprotein E genotype) and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequence variants in 
pathologically proved cases of AD (n = 185), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB; n = 
84), and control subjects (n = 179). Specific European mtDNA haplogroups and the 
A4336G mutation were not associated with an increased risk of AD. mtDNA 
haplogroup H was overrepresented in the DLB patients when compared with control 
subjects. Additional studies are needed to clarify the significance of the 
association.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.55.2.302
PMID: 10908912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


638. Nature. 2000 Jul 13;406(6792):195-9. doi: 10.1038/35018098.

A one-hit model of cell death in inherited neuronal degenerations.

Clarke G(1), Collins RA, Leavitt BR, Andrews DF, Hayden MR, Lumsden CJ, McInnes 
RR.

Author information:
(1)Program in Developmental Biology, The Research Institute, Hospital for Sick 
Children, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 Jul 13;406(6792):137, 139.

In genetic disorders associated with premature neuronal death, symptoms may not 
appear for years or decades. This delay in clinical onset is often assumed to 
reflect the occurrence of age-dependent cumulative damage. For example, it has 
been suggested that oxidative stress disrupts metabolism in neurological 
degenerative disorders by the cumulative damage of essential macromolecules. A 
prediction of the cumulative damage hypothesis is that the probability of cell 
death will increase over time. Here we show in contrast that the kinetics of 
neuronal death in 12 models of photoreceptor degeneration, hippocampal neurons 
undergoing excitotoxic cell death, a mouse model of cerebellar degeneration and 
Parkinson's and Huntington's diseases are all exponential and better explained 
by mathematical models in which the risk of cell death remains constant or 
decreases exponentially with age. These kinetics argue against the cumulative 
damage hypothesis; instead, the time of death of any neuron is random. Our 
findings are most simply accommodated by a 'one-hit' biochemical model in which 
mutation imposes a mutant steady state on the neuron and a single event randomly 
initiates cell death. This model appears to be common to many forms of 
neurodegeneration and has implications for therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1038/35018098
PMID: 10910361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


639. Acta Neuropathol. 2000 Jul;100(1):1-12. doi: 10.1007/s004010051186.

Senile dementia associated with amyloid beta protein angiopathy and tau 
perivascular pathology but not neuritic plaques in patients homozygous for the 
APOE-epsilon4 allele.

Vidal R(1), Calero M, Piccardo P, Farlow MR, Unverzagt FW, MÃ©ndez E, 
JimÃ©nez-Huete A, Beavis R, Gallo G, Gomez-Tortosa E, Ghiso J, Hyman BT, 
Frangione B, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, New York University School of Medicine, NY 10016, 
USA.

Amyloid beta protein deposition in cortical and leptomeningeal vessels, causing 
the most common type of cerebral amyloid angiopathy, is found in sporadic and 
familial Alzheimer's disease (AD) and is the principal feature in the hereditary 
cerebral hemorrhage with amyloidosis, Dutch type. The presence of the 
Apolipopriotein E (APOE)-epsilon4 allele has been implicated as a risk factor 
for AD and the development of cerebral amyloid angiopathy in AD. We report 
clinical, pathological and biochemical studies on two APOE-epsilon4 homozygous 
subjects, who had senile dementia and whose main neuropathological feature was a 
severe and diffuse amyloid angiopathy associated with perivascular tau 
neurofibrillary pathology. Amyloid beta protein and ApoE immunoreactivity were 
observed in leptomeningeal vessels as well as in medium-sized and small vessels 
and capillaries in the parenchyma of the neocortex, hippocampus, thalamus, 
cerebellum, midbrain, pons, and medulla. The predominant peptide form of amyloid 
beta protein was that terminating at residue Val40, as determined by 
immunohistochemistry, amino acid sequence and mass spectrometry analysis. A 
crown of tau-immunopositive cell processes was consistently present around blood 
vessels. DNA sequence analysis of the Amyloid Precursor Protein gene and 
Presenilin-1 (PS-1) gene revealed no mutations. In these APOE-epsilon4 
homozygous patients, the pathological process differed from that typically seen 
in AD in that they showed a heavy burden of perivascular tau-immunopositive cell 
processes associated with severe amyloid beta protein angiopathy, 
neurofibrillary tangles, some cortical Lewy bodies and an absence of neuritic 
plaques. These cases emphasize the concept that tau deposits may be 
pathogenetically related to amyloid beta protein deposition.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010051186
PMID: 10912914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


640. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 3;275(44):34328-34. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M004345200.

alpha-Synuclein membrane interactions and lipid specificity.

Jo E(1), McLaurin J, Yip CM, St George-Hyslop P, Fraser PE.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Neurodegenerative Diseases, University of Toronto, 
Ontario, Canada. euijung.jo@utoronto.ca

With the discovery of missense mutations (A53T and A30P) in alpha-synuclein 
(alpha-Syn) in several families with early onset familial Parkinson's disease, 
alpha-Syn aggregation and fibril formation have been thought to play a role in 
the pathogenesis of alpha-synucleinopathies, such as Parkinson's disease, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and multiple system atrophy. As previous reports have 
suggested that alpha-Syn plays a role in lipid transport and synaptic membrane 
biogenesis, we investigated whether alpha-Syn binds to a specific lipid ligand 
using thin layer chromatography overlay and examined the changes in its 
secondary structure using circular dichroism spectroscopy. alpha-Syn was found 
to bind to acidic phospholipid vesicles and this binding was significantly 
augmented by the presence of phosphatidylethanolamine, a neutral phospholipid. 
We further examined the interaction of alpha-Syn with lipids by in situ atomic 
force microscopy. The association of soluble wild-type alpha-Syn with planar 
lipid bilayers resulted in extensive bilayer disruption and the formation of 
amorphous aggregates and small fibrils. The A53T mutant alpha-Syn disrupted the 
lipid bilayers in a similar fashion but at a slower rate. These results suggest 
that alpha-Syn membrane interactions are physiologically important and the lipid 
composition of the cellular membranes may affect these interactions in vivo.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M004345200
PMID: 10915790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


641. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Aug 1;97(16):9226-33. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.97.16.9226.

Positron emission tomography provides molecular imaging of biological processes.

Phelps ME(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Pharmacology, Crump Institute for 
Molecular Imaging, University of California Los Angeles School of Medicine, Box 
951735, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1735, USA. mphelps@mednet.ucla.edu

Diseases are biological processes, and molecular imaging with positron emission 
tomography (PET) is sensitive to and informative of these processes. This is 
illustrated by detection of biological abnormalities in neurological disorders 
with no computed tomography or MRI anatomic changes, as well as even before 
symptoms are expressed. PET whole body imaging in cancer provides the means to 
(i) identify early disease, (ii) differentiate benign from malignant lesions, 
(iii) examine all organs for metastases, and (iv) determine therapeutic 
effectiveness. Diagnostic accuracy of PET is 8-43% higher than conventional 
procedures and changes treatment in 20-40% of the patients, depending on the 
clinical question, in lung and colorectal cancers, melanoma, and lymphoma, with 
similar findings in breast, ovarian, head and neck, and renal cancers. A 
microPET scanner for mice, in concert with human PET systems, provides a novel 
technology for molecular imaging assays of metabolism and signal transduction to 
gene expression, from mice to patients: e.g., PET reporter gene assays are used 
to trace the location and temporal level of expression of therapeutic and 
endogenous genes. PET probes and drugs are being developed together-in low mass 
amounts, as molecular imaging probes to image the function of targets without 
disturbing them, and in mass amounts to modify the target's function as a drug. 
Molecular imaging by PET, optical technologies, magnetic resonance imaging, 
single photon emission tomography, and other technologies are assisting in 
moving research findings from in vitro biology to in vivo integrative mammalian 
biology of disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.97.16.9226
PMCID: PMC16850
PMID: 10922074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


642. Muscle Nerve. 2000 Aug;23(8):1250-6. doi: 
10.1002/1097-4598(200008)23:8<1250::aid-mus14>3.0.co;2-w.

Quantitative electromyography of the external anal sphincter in Parkinson's 
disease and multiple system atrophy.

Libelius R(1), Johansson F.

Author information:
(1)Division of Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Pharmacology and Clinical 
Neuroscience, UmeÃ¥ University Hospital, Sweden. rolf.libelius@neuro.umu.se

The distinction of multiple system atrophy (MSA) from Parkinson's disease (PD) 
can be difficult, especially early in the disease. In MSA degeneration of sacral 
anterior horn cells (Onuf's nucleus) results in denervation-reinnervation of 
anal and urethral sphincter muscles, which can be recognized as neurogenic 
electromyographic (EMG) changes of motor unit potentials. Sphincter EMG has 
therefore been recommended as a test for distinguishing MSA from PD. Our results 
confirm the presence of marked neurogenic EMG changes of the external anal 
sphincter muscle in patients with probable MSA compared to healthy controls. 
However, in patients with probable PD, our quantitative EMG data show a scatter 
from normal to marked neurogenic changes and the degree of EMG abnormality is 
correlated to the duration of the disease. Thus an abnormal sphincter EMG cannot 
be taken as a strong indicator of MSA rather than PD in the individual patient, 
especially in long-standing cases.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-4598(200008)23:8<1250::aid-mus14>3.0.co;2-w
PMID: 10918263 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


643. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1998 Feb;78(2):124-7.

[Community investigation of the activities of daily living (ADL) and medical 
conditions of the elderly in Shanghai].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang M(1), Zhu Z, Chen P.

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Mental Health Center.

OBJECTIVE: To study the ADL status and prevalence of medical conditions in aged 
population in Shanghai, and to analyze the impact of dementia syndrome and other 
illnesses to ADL performance.
METHODS: Both the Chinese version of ADL scale (five items) and the list of 
self-reported illnesses questionnaire (32 conditions) were used in the survey. 
After screening and case-identification, 3745 noninstitutionalized aged 
residents, who were 65 years and older, were included in the analysis sample. A 
separate multiple logistic regression model was used in both groups (65-74 years 
and over-75), observing the effect of age, gender, education and medical 
conditions (as control variables) on ADL dependence.
RESULTS: The prevalence rate of functional dependence in ADL was 8.28%, and the 
prevalence curve was doubled steeply along with each ten years. The most 
prevalent medical conditions (> 20%) were hypertention, heart disease, 
cataract/glaucoma and artheritis/rheumatism, whereas, dementing disorder was 
4.61%. Of all illnesses, stroke, Parkinson's disease, dementia, diabetes and 
emphysema were the most important predictors of ADL dependence in both aged 
groups. In the group more than 75 years old, cancer, arteriosclerosis and 
hypertension seemed to be strongly related to ADL dependence, dementia syndrome 
was one of the remarkable risk factors.
CONCLUSION: Dementing disorders such as Alzheimer's disease may lead to severe 
disturbance of ADL performance in the aged, therefore, the community 
rehabilitative measures and health care services should be stressed by the 
society to improve the quality of life of the elderly.

PMID: 10923424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


644. Mov Disord. 2000 Jul;15(4):705-8. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200007)15:4<705::aid-mds1016>3.0.co;2-b.

Adult Chediak-Higashi parkinsonian syndrome with dystonia.

Hauser RA(1), Friedlander J, Baker MJ, Thomas J, Zuckerman KS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of South Florida, Tampa, USA.

Chediak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) is a rare autosomal-recessive disorder 
characterized by immune deficiency, partial oculocutaneous albinism, and large 
eosinophilic, peroxidase-positive inclusion bodies in granule-containing cells. 
The adult form of CHS manifests during late childhood to early adulthood and is 
marked by various neurologic sequelae, including parkinsonism, dementia, 
spinocerebellar degeneration, and peripheral neuropathy. We report the case of a 
29-year-old man with adult CHS who exhibited a progressive asymmetric 
parkinsonism, including rest tremor, and axial, cervical, and appendicular 
dystonia. The diagnosis was confirmed by the presence of characteristic large 
peroxidase-positive granules within leukocytes and markedly decreased natural 
killer cell function. Levodopa/carbidopa and amantadine provided benefit for 
tremor. CHS, although rare, should be considered in the differential diagnosis 
of young adult parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200007)15:4<705::aid-mds1016>3.0.co;2-b
PMID: 10928582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


645. J Cogn Neurosci. 2000 May;12(3):505-19. doi: 10.1162/089892900562174.

A computational model of information processing in the frontal cortex and basal 
ganglia.

Amos A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Western Australia, W.A, Australia. 
andrewa@freud.psy.uwa.edu.au

Performance on the Wisconsin Card Sort Test (WCST) of patients with 
schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease (PD), and Huntington's disease (HD) was 
simulated by a neural network model constructed on principles derived from 
neuroanatomic loops from the frontal cortex through the basal ganglia and 
thalamus. The model provided a computational rationale for the empirical pattern 
of perseverative errors associated with frontal cortex dysfunction and random 
errors associated with striatal dysfunction. The model displayed perseverative 
errors in performance when the gain parameter of the activation function in 
units representing frontal cortex neurons was reduced as an analog of reduced 
dopamine release. Random errors occurred when the gain parameter of the 
activation function in units representing striatal neurons was reduced, or when 
the activation level was itself reduced as an analog of a striatal lesion. The 
model demonstrated that the perseveration of schizophrenic, Huntington's, and 
demented Parkinsonian patients may be principally due to ineffective inhibition 
of previously learned contextual rules in the frontal cortex, while the random 
errors of Parkinson's and Huntington's patients are more likely to be due to 
unsystematic errors of matching in the striatum. The model also made specific, 
empirically falsifiable predictions that can be used to explore the utility of 
these putative mechanisms of information processing in the frontal cortex and 
basal ganglia.

DOI: 10.1162/089892900562174
PMID: 10931775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


646. Nat Genet. 2000 Aug;25(4):402-5. doi: 10.1038/78078.

Neurofibrillary tangles, amyotrophy and progressive motor disturbance in mice 
expressing mutant (P301L) tau protein.

Lewis J(1), McGowan E, Rockwood J, Melrose H, Nacharaju P, Van Slegtenhorst M, 
Gwinn-Hardy K, Paul Murphy M, Baker M, Yu X, Duff K, Hardy J, Corral A, Lin WL, 
Yen SH, Dickson DW, Davies P, Hutton M.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet 2000 Sep;26(1):127.

Neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) composed of the microtubule-associated protein tau 
are prominent in Alzheimer disease (AD), Pick disease, progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Mutations in the gene (Mtapt) 
encoding tau protein cause frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), thereby proving that tau dysfunction can directly 
result in neurodegeneration. Expression of human tau containing the most common 
FTDP-17 mutation (P301L) results in motor and behavioural deficits in transgenic 
mice, with age- and gene-dose-dependent development of NFT. This phenotype 
occurred as early as 6.5 months in hemizygous and 4.5 months in homozygous 
animals. NFT and Pick-body-like neuronal lesions occurred in the amygdala, 
septal nuclei, pre-optic nuclei, hypothalamus, midbrain, pons, medulla, deep 
cerebellar nuclei and spinal cord, with tau-immunoreactive pre-tangles in the 
cortex, hippocampus and basal ganglia. Areas with the most NFT had reactive 
gliosis. Spinal cord had axonal spheroids, anterior horn cell loss and axonal 
degeneration in anterior spinal roots. We also saw peripheral neuropathy and 
skeletal muscle with neurogenic atrophy. Brain and spinal cord contained 
insoluble tau that co-migrated with insoluble tau from AD and FTDP-17 brains. 
The phenotype of mice expressing P301L mutant tau mimics features of human 
tauopathies and provides a model for investigating the pathogenesis of diseases 
with NFT.

DOI: 10.1038/78078
PMID: 10932182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


647. Ital J Neurol Sci. 1999 Oct;20(5):287-96. doi: 10.1007/s100720050043.

Assessing olfaction in the Italian population: methodology and clinical 
application.

Parola S(1), Liberini P.

Author information:
(1)Section of Clinical Neurophysiology, Brescia General Hospital, Italy.

Disorders of the sense of smell are receiving growing clinical as well as 
experimental attention. Indeed, several neurological conditions have been 
associated with peripheral or central deficits of the olfactory system. In 
recent years, particular emphasis has been attributed to the early and severe 
olfactory impairment in neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's dementia 
and Parkinson's disease. Olfactory assessment has also been included in 
comprehensive pre- and post-surgical evaluations of temporal lobe epilepsy. 
Moreover, the request for standardized methods of olfactory evaluation by 
forensic and occupational medicine is greatly increasing. Despite this 
requirement, there is no agreement in the Italian neurological community on 
olfactory assessment. This lack prompted us to generate a battery of 
standardized tests capable of bypassing cross-cultural differences in olfactory 
assessment and to be potentially useful in the clinical as well as experimental 
settings. Procedures of assessment of olfactory acuity (detection threshold), 
identification (multiple choice odor naming), discrimination (differentiation 
between similar/dissimilar odorants) and memory (recognition of a substance 
previously smelled) are fully described. In order to control bias factors 
depending upon the nature of the investigated disorder and the applied olfactory 
tasks, a minimal complementary neuropsychological assessment is recommended.

DOI: 10.1007/s100720050043
PMID: 10933437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


648. Neuropathology. 2000 Mar;20(1):1-7. doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1789.2000.00269.x.

Clinicopathological studies on diffuse Lewy body disease.

Kosaka K(1), Iseki E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yokohama City University, Yokohama, Japan.

With reports of dementia cases with numerous cortical Lewy bodies and our 
proposal that this be named 'diffuse Lewy body disease' (DLBD), this condition 
has received a great deal of attention, first in Japan and subsequently in 
Europe and North America. In the early 1990s, similar types of nomenclature were 
considered, and at the First International Workshop in 1995, it was proposed 
that 'dementia with Lewy bodies' be used as a generic term for Lewy body 
dementia, including the DLBD form. We review our previous clinicopathological 
findings and describe our recent immunohistochemical studies on DLBD.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1789.2000.00269.x
PMID: 10935431 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


649. Behav Brain Res. 2000 Aug;113(1-2):117-20. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(00)00206-0.

Smoking and Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease: review of the epidemiological 
studies.

Fratiglioni L(1), Wang HX.

Author information:
(1)Stockholm Gerontology Research Center, NEUROTEC, Karolinska Institute, 
Huddinge University Hospital, Sweden. laura.fratiglioni@neurotec.ki.se

The relationship between smoking and neurological diseases has always been 
controversial. Even the expected association between smoking and increased risk 
for cerebrovascular disease has been debated for years. It was at the end of the 
1980s that smoking became definitively accepted as a risk factor for ischemic 
stroke. More recently, two other neurological diseases have been studied in 
relation to smoking: Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Many 
epidemiological studies have found a highly significant negative association 
between cigarette smoking and these two neurodegenerative disorders. The risk of 
AD or PD in nonsmokers has generally been about twice that of smokers. That is, 
patients with AD or PD are approximately 50% less likely to have smoked 
cigarettes during their lifetime than are age- and gender-matched controls. 
Alternatively, cigarette smokers are 50% less likely to have PD or AD than are 
age- and gender-matched nonsmokers. This statistically significant negative 
association has been interpreted as suggesting that cigarette smoking exerts an 
undefined, biologic, neuroprotective influence against the development of PD and 
AD. A review of all studies that either support or refute this hypothesis is 
presented separately for PD and AD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-4328(00)00206-0
PMID: 10942038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


650. Clin Genet. 2000 Jul;58(1):50-6. doi: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2000.580108.x.

Atypical movement disorders in the early stages of Huntington's disease: 
clinical and genetic analysis.

Squitieri F(1), Berardelli A, Nargi E, Castellotti B, Mariotti C, Cannella M, 
Lavitrano ML, de Grazia U, Gellera C, Ruggieri S.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Institute I.N.M. I.R.C.C.S. Neuromed, Pozzilli (IS), Italy. 
neurogen@neuromed.it

Huntington's disease (HD) is notably difficult to diagnose in the early stages. 
One reason is that the early clinical manifestations of HD vary widely and 
sometimes have an atypical onset. In this paper we primarily sought information 
on affected patients who initially presented with movement disorders other than 
chorea. We also investigated atypical motor presentations in relation to triplet 
CAG expansions. After reviewing the clinical records of two neurological 
centres, we identified patients with a final, documented diagnosis of HD and 
selected for study 205 patients according to their onset of motor 
manifestations. CAG repeats were analysed. Of the 205 patients studied, 15 had 
atypical motor symptoms at onset. In this group we identified three types of 
initial clinical manifestations other than chorea: parkinsonism, ataxia and 
dystonia. We conclude that HD patients may have different motor manifestations 
at the initiation of the illness. Patients with atypical movement disorders in 
the early stages have larger CAG expansions and an earlier age at onset than HD 
patients with typical onset chorea.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1399-0004.2000.580108.x
PMID: 10945661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


651. Semin Neurol. 2000;20(2):179-85. doi: 10.1055/s-2000-9826.

Chronic traumatic brain injury associated with boxing.

Jordan BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Brain Injury Program, Burke Rehabilitation Hospital, White Plains, New York 
10605-2523, USA.

Chronic traumatic brain injury (CTBI) associated with boxing occurs in 
approximately 20% of professional boxers. Risk factors associated with CTBI 
include increased exposure (i.e., duration of career, age of retirement, total 
number of bouts), poor performance, increased sparring, and apolipoprotein 
(APOE) genotype. Clinically, boxers exhibiting CTBI will present with varying 
degrees of motor, cognitive, and/or behavioral impairments. The severe form of 
CTBI is referred to as dementia pugilistica. The diagnosis of CTBI is dependent 
upon documenting a progressive neurological condition that is consistent with 
the clinical symptomatology of CTBI attributable to brain trauma and 
unexplainable by an alternative pathophysiological process. Pathologically, CTBI 
shares many characteristics with Alzheimer's disease (i.e., neurofibrillary 
triangles, diffuse amyloid plaques, acetylcholine deficiency, and/or tau 
immunoreactivity). The mainstay of treatment of CTBI is prevention, however 
medications used in the treatment of Alzheimer's disease and/or parkinsonism may 
be utilized.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2000-9826
PMID: 10946737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


652. Neurology. 2000 Aug 22;55(4):539-44. doi: 10.1212/wnl.55.4.539.

Motor impairment in PD: relationship to incident dementia and age.

Levy G(1), Tang MX, Cote LJ, Louis ED, Alfaro B, Mejia H, Stern Y, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the relationship of specific motor impairment in 
idiopathic PD to incident dementia.
BACKGROUND: The total Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor score at baseline 
has been associated with an increased risk of developing dementia in PD.
METHODS: A cohort of 214 nondemented community-dwelling patients with PD was 
followed annually with neurologic and neuropsychological evaluations. The 
association of baseline motor impairment with incident dementia was analyzed 
using Cox proportional hazards models. Facial expression, tremor, rigidity, and 
bradykinesia were analyzed as part of subscore A (indicative of dopaminergic 
deficiency); speech and axial impairment were analyzed as part of subscore B 
(indicative of predominantly nondopaminergic deficiency). The correlation 
between the six motor domains and age was also analyzed.
RESULTS: Of 173 patients followed for at least 1 year, 50 became demented 
according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, revised 
3rd edition (DSM III-R) criteria (mean follow-up, 3.6 +/- 2. 2 years). When both 
subscores A and B were entered into the Cox model, subscore B was associated 
with incident dementia (relative risk = 1.19; 95% CI, 1.09 to 1.30; p = 0.0001), 
in addition to gender, age, and education, whereas subscore A was not (relative 
risk = 1.03; 95% CI, 0.99 to 1.07; p = 0.19). Of the six motor domains, speech 
and bradykinesia were associated with incident dementia (p < 0.05), and axial 
impairment approached significance (p = 0.06). Only axial impairment was 
correlated with age (correlation coefficient = 0.32; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: The findings suggest that motor impairment mediated predominantly by 
nondopaminergic systems is associated with incident dementia in PD. Axial 
impairment may be the result of a combined effect of the disease and the aging 
process.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.55.4.539
PMID: 10953188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


653. Epidemiology. 2000 Sep;11(5):539-43. doi: 10.1097/00001648-200009000-00009.

Exposure to electromagnetic fields and risk of central nervous system disease in 
utility workers.

Johansen C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Cancer Epidemiology, the Danish Cancer Society, Copenhagen.

Occupational exposure to electromagnetic fields has been associated with 
neurological diseases such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, senile dementia, 
Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer disease. I studied the incidence of central 
nervous system diseases in 30,631 persons employed in Danish utility companies 
between 1900 and 1993. I linked the cohort to the nationwide, population-based 
Danish National Register of Patients and compared the numbers of cases of these 
diseases observed between 1978 and 1993 with the corresponding rates in the 
general population. In addition I fit to the data on utility workers a 
multiplicative Poisson regression model in relation to estimated levels of 
exposure to 50-Hz electromagnetic fields. Overall, there was an increase in risk 
for senile dementia and motor neuron diseases combined. The incidences of 
Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, and other diseases of the central nervous 
system were essentially unrelated to exposure to electromagnetic fields. A 
decreased risk of epilepsy compared with the general population probably 
reflects a healthy worker effect; I observed an increased risk of epilepsy based 
on internal comparisons. The increased risk for senile dementia and motorneuron 
diseases may be associated with above-average levels of exposure to 
electromagnetic fields.

DOI: 10.1097/00001648-200009000-00009
PMID: 10955406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


654. Exp Gerontol. 2000 Jul;35(4):461-71. doi: 10.1016/s0531-5565(00)00114-5.

The molecular genetics of the tauopathies.

van Slegtenhorst M(1), Lewis J, Hutton M.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

The identification of mutations in the tau gene in frontotemporal dementia and 
Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) demonstrated that there is a 
direct link between tau dysfunction and neurodegeneration. At least 11 missense 
mutations and a three base pair deletion (DeltaK280) have been identified in 
exons 9-13. Additionally, five splice site mutations have been found in intron 
10. The different FTDP-17 mutations have multiple effects on the biology and 
function of tau. These varied pathogenic mechanisms likely explain the wide 
range of clinical and neuropathological features observed in different families 
with FTDP-17. In addition to the tau mutations, a common extended haplotype in 
the tau gene also appears to be a risk factor in the development of the 
apparently sporadic tauopathies progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD). The mechanism by which this common variability 
in the tau gene influences the development of these neurodegenerative diseases 
is unclear; however, it further suggests a central role for tau in the 
pathogenesis of several neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(00)00114-5
PMID: 10959034 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


655. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2000;59:95-114. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6781-6_13.

Mechanisms of cell death in neurodegenerative disorders.

Jellinger KA(1), Stadelmann C.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Psychiatric Hospital, 
Vienna, Austria. kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

OBJECTIVE: Progressive cell loss in specific neuronal populations is the 
prominent pathological hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases, but its molecular 
basis remains unresolved. Apoptotic cell death has been implicated as a general 
mechanism in Alzheimer disease (AD) and other neurodegenerative disorders. 
However, DNA fragmention in neurons is too frequent to account for the 
continuous loss in these slowly progressive diseases.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In 9 cases of morphologically confirmed AD (CERAD 
criteria, Braak stages 5 or 6), 5 cases of Parkinson disease (PD) and 3 cases 
each of Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP), 
and Multiple System Atrophy (MSA), and 7 age-matched controls, the TUNEL method 
was used to detect DNA fragmentation, and immunohistochemistry for an array of 
apoptosis-related proteins (ARP), protooncogenes, and activated caspase-3 were 
performed.
RESULTS: In AD, a considerable number of hippocampal neurons showed DNA 
fragmentation with a 3 to 5.7 fold increase related to neurofibrillary tangles 
and amyloid deposits, but only exceptional neurons displayed apoptotic 
morphology (1 in 1100-5000) and cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for ARPs and 
activated caspase-3 (1 in 2600 to 5650 hippocampal neurons), whereas no neurons 
were labeled in age-matched controls. Caspase-3 immunoreactivity was seen in 
granules of granulovacuolar degeneration, only rarely colocalized with 
tau-immunoreactivity. In PD, DLB, and MSA, TUNEL positivity and expression of 
ARPs or activated caspase-3 was only seen in microglia, rare astrocytes and in 
oligodendroglia with cytoplasmic inclusions in MSA, but not in nigral or other 
neurons with or without Lewy bodies. In PSP, only single neurons but 
oligodendrocytes, some with tau deposits, in brainstem tegmentum and pontine 
nuclei were TUNEL-positive and expressed both ARPs and activated caspase-3.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide evidence for extremely rare apoptotic neuronal 
death in AD compatible with the progression of neuronal degeneration in this 
chronic disease. In other neurodegenerative disorders, apoptosis mainly involves 
microglia and oligodendroglia, while alternative mechanisms of neuronal death 
may occur. Susceptible cell populations in a proapoptotic environment show 
increased vulnerability towards metabolic and other pathogenic factors, with 
autophagy as a possible protective mechanism in early stages of programmed cell 
death. The intracellular cascade leading to cell death still awaits elucidation.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6781-6_13
PMID: 10961423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


656. Acta Neuropathol. 2000 Aug;100(2):145-52. doi: 10.1007/s004019900155.

Lewy body and Alzheimer pathology in a family with the amyloid-beta precursor 
protein APP717 gene mutation.

Rosenberg CK(1), Pericak-Vance MA, Saunders AM, Gilbert JR, Gaskell PC, Hulette 
CM.

Author information:
(1)Bryan Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Department of Medicine, Duke 
University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene cause one form of early 
onset familial Alzheimer's disease (AD). One such family has been studied 
genetically and neuropathologically and represents the basis of the present 
report. Four siblings with the APP717 Val to Ile mutation, aged 59, 65, 61 and 
64 years, apolipoprotein E (APOE) genotyped 2,4 (first three) and 2,3 
respectively, had severe AD, Braak stage VI with frequent neurofibrillary 
tangles in the primary visual cortex, Brodmann area 17. The first one also met 
McKeith criteria for the limbic stage of dementia with Lewy bodies but did not 
have substantia nigra Lewy bodies. The second two met McKeith criteria for the 
neocortical stage of dementia with Lewy bodies and both had substantia nigra 
Lewy bodies. The fourth had AD but no Lewy bodies. A cousin without the APP717 
mutation who was APOE 3, 4, developed dementia at age 60 and died at age 75. She 
had severe cerebrovascular atherosclerosis, less severe AD, Braak stage V, with 
sparing of area 17. She also had Lewy bodies in the substantia nigra and in the 
cortex and met McKeith criteria for neocortical stage of dementia with Lewy 
bodies. Extrapyramidal features were present in all five. Lewy bodies have been 
described in 53% of reported autopsies on individuals with the APP717 Val to Ile 
mutation coincident with dementia and AD neuropathologic changes. These 
observations suggest an association between the chromosome 21 APP mutation and 
Lewy body formation, possibly mediated by other environmental or genetic 
factors.

DOI: 10.1007/s004019900155
PMID: 10963361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


657. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000 Aug;48(8):938-42. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.tb06891.x.

Predictors of nursing home placement in Parkinson's disease: a population-based, 
prospective study.

Aarsland D(1), Larsen JP, Tandberg E, Laake K.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Rogaland Psychiatric Hospital, Central 
Hospital of Rogaland, Stavanger, Oslo, Norway.

OBJECTIVES: To examine the rate and predictors of nursing home placement in 
patients with Parkinson's disease.
DESIGN: Four-year prospective study.
SETTING: A population-based study in western Norway
PARTICIPANTS: 178 community-dwelling subjects with Parkinson's disease.
MEASUREMENTS: Main outcome measure was the time from baseline to nursing home 
admission. Baseline evaluation of motor symptoms (Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale, UPDRS), cognition (clinical dementia interview, Gottfries, Brane & 
Steen dementia scale, and Mini-Mental State Examination), depression (clinical 
interview and the Montgomery & Asberg Depression Rating Scale), and psychotic 
symptoms (UPDRS Thought Disorder item) were performed.
RESULTS: Forty-seven patients (26.4%) were admitted to a nursing home during the 
4-year study period. Institutionalized patients were older, had more advanced 
Parkinson's disease with more severe motor symptoms and impairment of activities 
of daily living, were cognitively more impaired, were more often living alone, 
and had more hallucinations than those who continued to live at home. Duration 
of disease, levodopa dose, and gender distribution did not differ between the 
two groups. A Cox proportional hazards linear regression analysis showed that 
old age, functional impairment, dementia, and hallucinations were independent 
predictors of nursing home admission.
CONCLUSIONS: Both motor and neuropsychiatric symptoms contributed to 
institutionalization, but the presence of hallucinations was the strongest 
predictor. This finding indicates it is possible that effective treatment of 
hallucinations may reduce the need for institutionalization in patients with 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2000.tb06891.x
PMID: 10968298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


658. Curr Opin Neurol. 2000 Aug;13(4):391-6. doi: 10.1097/00019052-200008000-00005.

Contribution of neuroimaging in the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and other 
dementias.

Scheltens P(1), Korf ES.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academisch Ziekenhuis VU, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands. p.scheltens@azvu.nl

This paper reviews the use of neuroimaging in the diagnosis of dementia, 
especially Alzheimer's disease. Computed tomography is still used to determine 
reversible causes of dementia; however, without clinical symptoms these causes 
are hard to find and computed tomography scanning is only cost-effective in a 
defined group of patients. Using magnetic resonance imaging, atrophy of the 
medial temporal lobe can be assessed volumetrically and visually, with a high 
correlation between the two methods. Medial temporal lobe atrophy is highly 
predictive of Alzheimer's disease, and correlates with neuropsychological 
performance and postmortem histologically measured volume. Cerebral volume 
changes over time seem to differentiate Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive 
impairment progressing to Alzheimer's disease from controls with high accuracy. 
Studies of the corpus callosum in dementia indicate a cortico-cortical 
disconnection caused by atrophy. Of the new techniques, functional magnetic 
resonance imaging seems the most promising. This technique can possibly play a 
role in predicting Alzheimer's disease in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment. The use of single-photon emission computed tomography and positron 
emission tomography in (early) differential diagnoses seems limited. Lower 
regional cerebral blood flow is related to the severity of dementia and 
survival. Iodine-123 iodobenzamide single-photon emission computed tomography in 
dementia with Lewy bodies seems promising. Current and future positron emission 
tomography studies concentrate on memory function and receptor imaging. The 
focus in neuroimaging, especially magnetic resonance imaging, has shifted to 
early diagnosis and monitoring of the disease course, with a special interest in 
predicting dementia in patients with mild cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200008000-00005
PMID: 10970055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


659. Brain Res. 2000 Sep 8;876(1-2):112-23. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)02635-4.

Visual feedback has differential effects on reaching movements in Parkinson's 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Ghilardi MF(1), Alberoni M, Rossi M, Franceschi M, Mariani C, Fazio F.

Author information:
(1)INB-CNR, Istituto Scientifico San Raffaele, UniversitÃ  di Milano, Milan, 
Italy. mg79@columbia.edu

We examine the role of visual feedback in the programming and execution of 
reaching movement in patients with Parkinson's disease without cognitive 
impairment and patients with Alzheimer's disease without extrapyramidal signs. 
Controls were normally aging subjects. All subjects moved a cursor to targets on 
a digitizing tablet without seeing their limb. Starting and target positions 
were always visible on a screen while, during movement, cursor position was 
either visible or blanked. They were instructed to make uncorrected movements, 
as fast and as accurate as possible without minimizing reaction time. In absence 
of visual feedback, movement accuracy in patients with AD was severely impaired. 
Hand paths of parkinsonian patients were as accurate as normal subjects' with 
similar temporal velocity profiles and movement speed. With cursor feedback, 
accuracy was the same in the three groups, although movement speed and transport 
phase in patients with Alzheimer's disease were significantly reduced compared 
to the other groups. Also, movements of parkinsonian patients showed shorter 
transport phase and lower mean velocity than controls'. The different 
characteristics of the motor performance suggests that in the two diseases 
visual information is used differently for both motor programming and execution: 
patients with Alzheimer's disease, while scarcely using feed forward commands, 
relied on continuous on-line external cues. The correlation of motor performance 
with cognitive impairment argues against the hypothesis of basal ganglia 
involvement in AD. The motor abnormalities we found may represent early 
subclinical manifestation of apraxic disturbance. Parkinsonian patients showed 
higher reliance on feedback commands only with cursor feedback: this could be 
explained by their difficulty in engaging effectively automatic routines when 
distractors are present.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)02635-4
PMID: 10973599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


660. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000 Sep;48(9):1169-70.

PTSD, dementia, and sleep disorder: a possible association.

Verghese J.

Comment on
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 2000 Jan;48(1):70-2.

PMID: 10983923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


661. Brain Dev. 2000 Sep;22 Suppl 1:S87-91. doi: 10.1016/s0387-7604(00)00130-3.

Autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation: 
clinicopathologic characteristics and molecular genetic identification.

Yamamura Y(1), Hattori N, Matsumine H, Kuzuhara S, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health Sciences, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Kasumi 
1-2-3, Minami-ku, Hiroshima, Japan.

Autosomal recessive early-onset parkinsonism with diurnal fluctuation (AR-EPDF, 
syn. autosomal recessive juvenile parkinsonism, PARK2) is one of the hereditary 
parkinsonian syndromes. We examined subjects consisting of 43 patients from 22 
families with AR-EPDF. The clinical features were relatively homogeneous, 
including the average age at onset of 26.1 years, beginning with dystonic gait 
disturbance, diurnal fluctuation of the symptoms (sleep benefit) unrelated to 
medication, dystonia (mainly foot dystonia), hyperactive tendon reflex, 
remarkable effect of levodopa and other antiparkinsonism drugs, susceptibility 
to dopa-induced dyskinesia, mild autonomic symptoms, absence of dementia, and 
slow progression of disease. Some patients had hysteric character or psychic 
symptoms provoked by medication. Pathologic study revealed neuronal loss in the 
substantia nigra pars compacta and locus coeruleus without Lewy body formation. 
We performed extensive molecular genetic analysis of the parkin gene in 16 
families to identify a total of six different deletional mutations. In AR-EPDF 
loss of newly discovered 'Parkin' protein is responsible for selective 
degeneration of the pigmented neurons in the substantia nigra and locus 
coeruleus. Compared with autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease, AR-EPDF appears 
to be more prevalent and present in several ethnic groups.

DOI: 10.1016/s0387-7604(00)00130-3
PMID: 10984666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


662. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2000 Sep;15(9):819-23. doi: 
10.1002/1099-1166(200009)15:9<819::aid-gps206>3.0.co;2-1.

Psychopathology at initial diagnosis in dementia with Lewy bodies versus 
Alzheimer disease: comparison of matched groups with autopsy-confirmed 
diagnoses.

Rockwell E(1), Choure J, Galasko D, Olichney J, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is believed to be the second most common form of 
dementia, after Alzheimer disease (AD). DLB has been reported to be associated 
with an increase in psychopathology; however, antemortem diagnosis of DLB cannot 
always be made with certainty. We searched the database of University of 
California, San Diego SOCARE (Seniors Only Care) outpatient program. There were 
26 autopsy-confirmed cases of DLB. We matched them individually with 26 
autopsy-confirmed cases of 'pure' AD on gender, ethnicity, and Mini-Mental State 
Examination score at the baseline evaluation. We compared the two groups on 
psychopathologic measures and possible risk factors for psychopathology based on 
the data obtained at the time of the initial diagnosis of dementia. Five 
psychiatric symptoms: hallucinations, delusions, anxiety, anhedonia, and loss of 
energy were significantly more common in DLB patients than in AD patients. DLB 
patients were younger at initial evaluation and death as compared to AD 
patients, but there was no difference in age of onset of dementia, level of 
education, or family or past history of any major neuropsychiatric disorder, 
prescription of psychotropic medications, or sensory impairment. Psychiatric 
symptoms were more common at time of initial diagnosis of dementia in DLB than 
in AD patients. This difference could not be attributed to any known risk 
factors for psychopathology examined. Psychopathology should be considered an 
integral part of DLB, and should be taken into account in the initial diagnosis 
of the type of dementia.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1099-1166(200009)15:9<819::aid-gps206>3.0.co;2-1
PMID: 10984728 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


663. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000 Oct;69(4):519-21. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.69.4.519.

Delirium episode as a sign of undetected dementia among community dwelling 
elderly subjects: a 2 year follow up study.

Rahkonen T(1), Luukkainen-Markkula R, Paanila S, Sivenius J, Sulkava R.

Author information:
(1)Brain Research and Rehabilitation Center Neuron, Kuopio, Finland. 
Terhi.Rahkonen@uku.fi

Cognitive decline is commonly stated as one of the main risk factors for 
delirium. The aim was to assess the importance of a delirium episode as a 
symptom of an underlying dementia among community dwelling healthy elderly 
people in a prospective 2 year follow up study. The study patients consisted of 
51 people living at home and older than 65 years of age, without severe 
underlying disorders including diagnosed dementia, admitted consecutively as 
emergency cases to hospital because of an acute delirious state and followed up 
for 2 years. The diagnosis of delirium and dementia were based on the DSM-III-R 
criteria. The community dwelling patients were evaluated and tested annually by 
a clinical investigator, a geriatric study nurse, and a neuropsychologist. The 
medical records of the institutionalised patients were also evaluated. Dementia 
was diagnosed immediately after the assurance that delirium symptoms had 
subsided in 14 out of 51 subjects (27%) and the additional 14 subjects were 
diagnosed as being demented during the 2 year follow up, 28 out of 51 patients 
(55%) altogether. Alzheimer's disease or mixed dementia was diagnosed in 14 out 
of 51 patients (27%), vascular dementia in 10 (20%), and dementia with Lewy 
bodies in two (4%). One case of alcoholic dementia and one case of a 
non-alcoholic hepatic encephalopathia were also found. A delirium episode is 
often the first sign of dementia requiring attention from medical and social 
professionals.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.69.4.519
PMCID: PMC1737142
PMID: 10990515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


664. Drug Saf. 2000 Sep;23(3):183-95. doi: 10.2165/00002018-200023030-00002.

A risk-benefit assessment of risperidone for the treatment of behavioural and 
psychological symptoms in dementia.

Zaudig M(1).

Author information:
(1)Windach Institute and Hospital of Neurobehavioural Research and Therapy 
(WINTR), Psychosomatic Hospital, Germany. zaudig@klinik.windach.de

The importance of behavioural and psychological symptoms in dementia (BPSD) is 
increasingly being recognised. Symptoms such as verbal and physical aggression, 
agitation, sleep disturbances and wandering are common, cause great distress to 
caregivers and are likely to lead to institutionalisation of patients. At 
present, these symptoms are also more amenable to treatment compared with the 
progressive intellectual decline caused by dementing illnesses. The care of 
individuals with BPSD involves a broad range of psychosocial treatments for the 
patient and his or her family. If pharmacotherapy is deemed necessary to manage 
BPSD, a careful balance must be struck between the benefits of symptom control 
and the inherent risks associated with most psychotropic agents in the elderly. 
Elderly patients in general, and patients with dementia in particular, are more 
sensitive to medication adverse effects, including anticholinergic effects, 
orthostatic hypotension, sedation, parkinsonism, tardive dyskinesia and 
cognitive impairment than younger patients with dementia or individuals without 
dementia. To date, treatment of symptoms of aggression and psychosis has relied 
on the empirical use of antidepressants, anxiolytics, typical antipsychotics 
(neuroleptics) and other agents. Treatment-limiting adverse effects are 
frequently reported with all of these agents. However, it is the typical 
antipsychotics and the atypical antipsychotic clozapine that are associated with 
the greatest risk of adverse effects in the elderly. The present review 
highlights the issues that limit the use of older psychotropic agents in the 
elderly, and presents an assessment of the available evidence concerning the 
efficacy, safety and tolerability of the atypical antipsychotic risperidone, in 
the treatment of BPSD in elderly patients with dementia. The extensive clinical 
development programme for risperidone has shown the drug to be effective and 
well tolerated in many fragile patients. As a result of its efficacy and safety 
profile, risperidone can be used for the treatment of behavioural and 
psychological symptoms in patients with dementia. Risperidone therefore 
represents a significant addition to the armamentarium for BPSD. While efforts 
continue in the development of treatment for the cognitive decline associated 
with dementia, treatment is now available for the noncognitive symptoms. By 
treating the latter, risperidone has the potential to be of substantial benefit 
to patients with dementia, their carers and the costs of healthcare.

DOI: 10.2165/00002018-200023030-00002
PMID: 11005702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


665. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2000 Nov 1;7(1):41-50. doi: 
10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00039-0.

Management of behavioral and psychiatric problems in Parkinson's disease.

Rabinstein AA(1), Shulman LM.

Author information:
(1)The Rosalyn Newman Scholar of Clinical Research in Parkinson's Disease Health 
Policy Fellow, Office of Congressman Pete Stark, United States House of 
Representatives, USA

Behavioral and psychiatric problems associated with idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease (PD) include cognitive dysfunction, drug-related psychosis, depression, 
anxiety, apathy, fatigue and sleep disturbance. These nonmotor symptoms are a 
significant cause of disability at all stages of illness. Cognitive dysfunction 
spans a continuum from circumscribed cognitive impairments to severe global 
dementia which can occur in up to 10-30% of advanced PD patients. Psychosis 
develops in 20-30% of PD patients receiving chronic antiparkinsonian therapy. 
Visual hallucinations and paranoid delusions are the most frequent symptoms. The 
gradual elimination of drugs of lesser priority that may affect cognition and/or 
cloud the sensorium constitutes the first step in the management of cognitive 
and psychotic symptoms. Atypical neuroleptic agents are an invaluable tool in 
those cases in which maximum drug regimen simplification is not adequate or 
results in unacceptable immobility. Depression and anxiety often go unrecognized 
although they are eminently treatable and may be important contributors to the 
morbidity of PD. They are present in 30-40% of PD patients and frequently occur 
together in association with other nonmotor symptoms such as apathy, fatigue and 
sleep disturbance. A combination of early recognition, counseling, 
antidepressant therapy, antianxiety and well-balanced antiparkinsonian therapy 
sets the stage for improved quality of life for patients with PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s1353-8020(00)00039-0
PMID: 11008195


666. Mov Disord. 2000 Sep;15(5):771-83. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200009)15:5<771::aid-mds1003>3.0.co;2-y.

Neuropsychologic assessment of patients for movement disorder surgery.

Saint-Cyr JA(1), TrÃ©panier LL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

The neuropsychologic evaluation of patients under consideration for movement 
disorder surgery is recognized as being an essential component of the 
preoperative process. Patients with early-stage concomitant dementia must be 
identified and the relative risk of postoperative cognitive decline evaluated. 
Knowledge of the patterns of an individual's strengths and weaknesses might also 
be a factor in deciding on a neurosurgical procedure. Although the advent of 
pallidal deep brain stimulation (DBS) has possibly resulted in reduced risk of 
induced cognitive impairment, even this procedure has been associated with 
negative sequelae. DBS within the subthalamic nucleus is becoming the method of 
choice and this may lead to cognitive and behavioral compromise, especially in 
the elderly patient. The team considering the establishment of neurosurgical 
treatment is often at a loss to decide how much neuropsychologic testing is 
required to determine relative risks of cognitive or behavioral morbidity as a 
consequence of the procedure. A brief summary of expected outcome and of 
pertinent family process and psychodynamic issues are addressed. This article is 
intended to serve as a guide to permit clinicians to choose the appropriate 
length and depth of neuropsychologic assessment, but also to highlight the 
confounding factors often present in these patients.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200009)15:5<771::aid-mds1003>3.0.co;2-y
PMID: 11009179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


667. Mov Disord. 2000 Sep;15(5):819-25. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200009)15:5<819::aid-mds1009>3.0.co;2-p.

Influence of strict, intermediate, and broad diagnostic criteria on the age- and 
sex-specific incidence of Parkinson's disease.

Bower JH(1), Maraganore DM, McDonnell SK, Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA.

We studied the influence of three sets of diagnostic criteria on the age- and 
sex-specific incidence of Parkinson's disease (PD) among residents of Olmsted 
County, Minnesota, for the period 1976 to 1990. Incidence cases of parkinsonism 
were detected using the medical records-linkage system of the Rochester 
Epidemiology Project. PD was separated from other types of parkinsonism using 
strict, intermediate, and broad criteria. We found 154 incident cases of PD 
using the strict criteria, 215 using the intermediate criteria, and 266 using 
the broad criteria. The incidence rate was consistently higher for men across 
all ages with all three sets of criteria; however, sex differences were more 
striking at older ages when using the broad criteria. In men above age 79 years, 
the incidence rate of PD declined with strict criteria, remained stable with 
intermediate criteria, and increased with broad criteria. The impact of 
diagnostic criteria on the age-specific incidence curve was less striking for 
women. When using the broad criteria, the risk of PD increased constantly with 
age in both sexes, suggesting that PD is an aging-related disease. Our findings 
suggest that the diagnostic criteria used to separate PD from other types of 
parkinsonism influence the magnitude of PD incidence and its distribution by age 
and sex.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200009)15:5<819::aid-mds1009>3.0.co;2-p
PMID: 11009185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


668. J Med Genet. 2000 Oct;37(10):766-70. doi: 10.1136/jmg.37.10.766.

Dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase 1 (DCP1) and butyrylcholinesterase (BCHE) gene 
interactions with the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele as risk factors in 
Alzheimer's disease and in Parkinson's disease with coexisting Alzheimer 
pathology.

Mattila KM(1), Rinne JO, RÃ¶yttÃ¤ M, Laippala P, PietilÃ¤ T, Kalimo H, Koivula T, 
Frey H, LehtimÃ¤ki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere 
University Hospital, Finn-Medi 2, Third Floor, PO Box 2000, FIN-33521 Tampere, 
Finland. klkama@uta.fi

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are genetically 
heterogeneous. Dipeptidyl carboxypeptidase 1 (DCP1) and butyrylcholinesterase 
(BCHE) genes may modify the risk of these disorders. We investigated whether 
common polymorphisms present in these genes operate as risk factors for AD and 
PD in Finnish subjects, independently or in concert with the apolipoprotein E 
epsilon4 allele (APOE epsilon4). Eighty late onset sporadic AD patients, 53 PD 
patients (34 of whom had concomitant AD pathology), and 67 control subjects were 
genotyped for the insertion (I)/deletion (D) polymorphism of DCP1 and the K 
variant of BCHE. In logistic regression analysis, the DCP1 *I allele in 
combination with APOE epsilon4 significantly increased the risk of AD (OR 30.0, 
95% CI 7.3-123.7), compared to subjects carrying neither of the alleles. Similar 
analysis showed that the risk of AD was significantly increased in subjects 
carrying both the BCHE wild type (*WT/*WT) genotype and epsilon4 (OR 9.9, 95% CI 
2.9-33.8), compared to those without this BCHE genotype and epsilon4. Further, 
the risk of PD with AD pathology was significantly increased for carriers of 
DCP1 *I and epsilon4 (OR 8.0, 95% CI 2.1-31.1). We thus conclude that, in Finns, 
interaction between DCP1 *I and epsilon4 increases the risk of AD as well as of 
PD with coexisting Alzheimer pathology, which underlines the importance of the 
DCP1 I/D polymorphism in the development of Alzheimer neuropathology, whereas 
the wild type BCHE genotype in combination with epsilon4 had a combined effect 
with regard to the risk of AD.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.37.10.766
PMCID: PMC1757160
PMID: 11015454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


669. Neurol India. 2000 Sep;48(3):239-42.

P300 in newly diagnosed non-dementing Parkinson's disease: effect of 
dopaminergic drugs.

Prabhakar S(1), Syal P, Srivastava T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Postgraduate Institute of Medical Education and 
Research, Chandigarh, 160012, India.

Changes in cognitive function are an integral part of the clinical presentation 
of Parkinson's Disease (PD). P300 potential studies in early stages of 
Parkinson's disease are lacking and effect of L-dopa therapy on these potentials 
is controversial. In this study, changes in P300 potentials in early stages of 
PD and effects of dopaminergic therapy were investigated. P300 waves were 
elicited by standard auditory 'odd ball' paradigm and were recorded before the 
start of therapy and 15 days, 3 and 6 months after the start of L-dopa therapy 
in 25 newly diagnosed patients with idiopathic PD. All patients were classified 
according to Hoehn and Yahr scale. Minimental status examination (MMSE) was done 
in all. Control group had 20 normal subjects. The P300 latency was not 
significantly increased in early Parkinson's disease. This latency was reduced 
with dopaminergic therapy on 15th day, but increased later. Implications of the 
data are discussed.

PMID: 11025627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


670. Nervenarzt. 2000 Sep;71(9):700-8. doi: 10.1007/s001150050653.

[Ethical aspects of clinical neuroscience].

[Article in German]

Helmchen H(1).

Author information:
(1)Psychiatrische Klinik, Freien UniversitÃ¤t Berlin.

This paper deals with ethical implications of neuroscientific research on 
patients as well as with the application of its results in diagnosis and 
treatment for brain diseases, in which a considerable demand for research exists 
due to their high frequency, long duration, disabling consequences, and 
unsatisfactory or nonexistent treatment possibilities. Such indispensable 
research on patients calls forth the basic ethical tension between respect of 
autonomy and dignity of the sick individual (as well as the avoidance of somatic 
and psychic risks and burdens) and the ethically justified demand for flawless 
research in recognizing, preventing, reducing, or eliminating disability and 
suffering caused by disease. The demand for research today also results from the 
increasing orientation of insurance companies towards scientifically proven 
evidence of the efficacy and safety of medical interventions: "evidence-based 
medicine." This is illustrated by 3 examples: (1) use of fetal brain 
tissue/cells from planned abortions in patients in therapy-resistant final 
stages of Parkinson's disease and the effects of neurotransplantation on the 
recipients, (2) research with demented patients incompetent to give informed 
consent, and (3) predictive (presymptomatic, prenatal) testing in the genetic 
counseling of individuals from families with Huntington's chorea. We conclude 
that adherence to high ethical standards is of inestimable significance, not 
only for those participating in research but also for public acceptance of that 
research. This is particularly valid in Germany, where nonobservance and the 
undermining of ethical principles was grossly practiced in the first half of 
this century on the slippery descent into the abyss. Therefore, continued 
scrutiny with the increasing variety of ethical problems in medical research is 
demanded. However, this will be achieved not by taboos and prohibitive 
regulations but only through open discussion between scientists, particularly 
probands in research, patients' relatives, and the public. This leads to four 
demands: listening honestly and openly, both in single cases and in the public 
sector, training in recognition and consideration of ethical problems, and 
reducing unfavorable conditions such as complex bureaucratic regulations, 
negative public views, overzealous efficiency, and insufficient time. Sufficient 
numbers of qualified personnel are needed who are trained in listening and who 
will have the time to do so.

DOI: 10.1007/s001150050653
PMID: 11042864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


671. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2000 Nov-Dec;11(6):314-21. doi: 10.1159/000017260.

Acetylcholinesterase inhibition in dementia with Lewy bodies: results of a 
prospective pilot trial.

Querfurth HW(1), Allam GJ, Geffroy MA, Schiff HB, Kaplan RF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology at St. Elizabeth's Medical Center, Boston, MA 02135, 
USA. hquerfur@opal.tufts.edu

OBJECTIVE: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second commonest form of 
dementia. The response to acetylcholinesterase inhibition (AChEI) could be 
greater in DLB than in Alzheimer's disease (AD) because 
cholineacetyl-transferase levels are more reduced in the former. This 
preliminary trial seeks to compare performances in cognitive tasks before and 
after tacrine administration in DLB and AD subjects.
METHODS: Six DLB and 6 AD patients were enrolled in an open, nonrandomized, 
intervention trial using 80 mg/day tacrine. Patients met ADRDA or DLB consortium 
criteria for probable diseases. Subjects were matched for Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) score, age and sex. Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (DRS), 
Controlled Oral Word Association Test (FAS) and Boston Naming tests were 
administered at baseline and at 6 months into treatment.
RESULTS: AD and DLB groups did not differ in initial mean total DRS scores. In 
the primary analysis, both groups declined during the course of treatment (-7.3 
+/- 4.2 and -16.8 +/- 39.2 DRS points, respectively). Due to the large 
variability in DLB posttreatment scores, this group was divided post hoc into 
responders (DLBr) and nonresponders (DLBnr). The DLBr group outperformed the 
DLBnr group at baseline (p < 0.05) and, notably, in follow-up DRS test scores (p 
< 0.001). Two-way MANOVA comparing both DLB subgroups with either the entire AD 
cohort or similarly stratified AD subgroups showed a significant interaction (F 
= 7.6; p < 0.015), attributed mostly to declines in DLBnr group scores (p < 
0.01). Surprisingly, on DRS memory subscale and FAS tests, there were 
significant improvements in DLBr scores (p < 0.02). A baseline MMSE (or DRS 
memory) score >/=15 predicted a positive response to tacrine in DLB. 
Acceleration of parkinsonism occurred in all DLB subjects.
CONCLUSION: Results from a primary analysis of the therapeutic effect of 80 
mg/day tacrine in DLB and AD were negative. However, post hoc analysis showed 
that mild to moderate DLB responds favorably to AChEI relative to AD through 
stabilization of global cognitive decline and improvements in specific cognitive 
areas. These results could be useful in the planning of a more definitive study.

Copyright 2000 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000017260
PMID: 11044776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


672. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2000 Oct;15(10):911-6. doi: 
10.1002/1099-1166(200010)15:10<911::aid-gps217>3.0.co;2-t.

MRI volumetric correlates of white matter lesions in dementia with Lewy bodies 
and Alzheimer's disease.

Barber R(1), Gholkar A, Scheltens P, Ballard C, McKeith IG, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. Robert.Barber@ncl.ac.uk

The aim of the study was to examine the relationship between white matter 
changes on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), brain atrophy and ventricular 
dilation in late-life dementias. T(1)-weighted, T(2)-weighted, and proton 
density MRI scans were acquired in subjects with Alzheimer's disease (AD, N=25) 
and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB, N=27). Total brain and ventricular volumes 
were measured and white matter lesions rated using a semi-quantitative scale. 
Periventricular hyperintensities (PVH) were found to independently correlate 
with advancing age and increasing ventricular dilatation in all subjects. In 
contrast, deep white matter hyperintensities (DWMH) did not correlate with 
measures of brain atrophy, ventricular dilatation or age, but were associated 
with a history of hypertension. These findings support the hypothesis that PVH 
and DWMH are pathologically diverse and that white matter change in AD and DLB 
may be determined by similar processes. In particular, PVH appear to be linked 
to atrophic processes involving ventricular enlargement and DWMH to ischaemic 
risk factors.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/1099-1166(200010)15:10<911::aid-gps217>3.0.co;2-t
PMID: 11044873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


673. Exp Gerontol. 2000 Sep;35(6-7):821-30. doi: 10.1016/s0531-5565(00)00148-0.

Heme oxygenase-1: role in brain aging and neurodegeneration.

Schipper HM(1).

Author information:
(1)Bloomfield Centre for Research in Aging, Lady Davis Institute for Medical 
Research, Sir Mortimer B. Davis Jewish General Hospital, McGill University, 
Que., H3T 1E2, Montreal, Canada. czhs@musica.mcgill.ca

The mechanisms responsible for excessive iron deposition and mitochondrial 
insufficiency in the aging and degenerating nervous system remain poorly 
understood. Heme oxygenase-1 (HO-1) is a 32kDa stress protein that degrades heme 
to biliverdin, free iron and carbon monoxide. Our laboratory has shown that 
cysteamine, dopamine, beta-amyloid, IL-1beta and TNF-alpha up-regulate HO-1 
followed by mitochondrial sequestration of non-transferrin-derived 55Fe in 
cultured rat astroglia. In these cells and in rat astroglia transfected with the 
human HO-1 gene, mitochondrial iron trapping is abrogated by the HO-1 
inhibitors, tin-mesoporphyrin and dexamethasone. We determined that HO-1 
immunoreactivity is enhanced greatly in neurons and astrocytes of the 
hippocampus and cerebral cortex of Alzheimer subjects and co-localizes to senile 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT). HO-1 staining is also augmented in 
astrocytes and decorates neuronal Lewy bodies in the Parkinson nigra. 
Collectively, our findings suggest that HO-1 over-expression contributes to the 
pathological iron deposition and mitochondrial damage documented in these 
aging-related neurodegenerative disorders. We recently observed that, 
paradoxically, HO-1 mRNA levels are markedly suppressed in peripheral 
lymphocytes of patients with early sporadic Alzheimer disease and may thus 
provide a useful biological marker of this condition.

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(00)00148-0
PMID: 11053673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


674. Expert Opin Investig Drugs. 2000 Apr;9(4):871-83. doi: 10.1517/13543784.9.4.871.

Remacemide: current status and clinical applications.

Schachter SC(1), Tarsy D.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard 
Medical School, 330 Brookline Avenue, K-478, Boston, MA 02215, USA. 
sschacht@caregroup.harvard.edu

Remacemide (RMC) is a non-competitive, low-affinity N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor antagonist that does not cause the behavioural and neuropathological 
side effects seen with other NMDA receptor antagonists. RMC and its active 
metabolite, AR-R 12495 AR, which has moderate affinity for the NMDA receptor, 
also interact with voltage-dependent neuronal sodium channels. Both agents show 
efficacy in a variety of animal models of epilepsy, parkinsonism and cerebral 
ischaemia. There is no evidence for teratogenicity or genotoxicity. RMC delays 
the absorption of L-dopa and elevates the concentrations of drugs metabolised by 
the hepatic cytochrome P450 3A4 isoform. RMC and AR-R 12495 AR have moderate 
protein binding and linear pharmacokinetics. Controlled studies show evidence of 
efficacy in treating epilepsy and Parkinson's disease. Post-surgical outcomes in 
RMC-treated patients at risk for intra-operative cerebral ischaemia are also 
encouraging. Adverse effects are related to the gastrointestinal and central 
nervous systems. RMC is a promising drug with numerous potential applications 
for both acute or chronic conditions associated with glutamate-mediated 
neurotoxicity.

DOI: 10.1517/13543784.9.4.871
PMID: 11060716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


675. Neurobiology (Bp). 2000;8(2):179-99.

(-)Deprenyl (Selegiline): past, present and future.

Knoll J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Semmelweis University of Medicine, Budapest, 
Hungary.

(-)Deprenyl (Selegiline), the N-propargyl analogue of (-)methamphetamine, is the 
only drug in clinical case which, by enhancing the impulse propagation mediated 
release of noradrenaline and dopamine in the brain (catecholaminergic activity 
enhancer, CAE, effect), keeps in small doses without side-effects the 
catecholaminergic brain system on a higher activity level. (-)Deprenyl 
stimulates the catecholaminergic neurons selectively in the brain because, in 
contrast to PEA and the amphetamines which induce the continuous release of 
noradrenaline and dopamine from their intraneuronal stores, (-)deprenyl is 
devoid of this property. It is due to the CAE effect that a) the maintenance of 
rats on (-)deprenyl during the postdevelopmental phase of their life slows the 
age-related decline of sexual and learning performances and prolongs life 
significantly; b) patients with early, untreated Parkinson's disease maintained 
on (-)deprenyl need levodopa significantly later than their placebo-treated 
peers, and when on levodopa plus (-)deprenyl, they live significantly longer 
than patients on levodopa alone; and c) in patients with moderately severe 
impairment from Alzheimer's disease, treatment with (-)deprenyl slows the 
progression of the disease. It is reasonable to expect that a prophylactic low 
dose administration of a safe catecholaminergic activity enhancer substance 
during the postdevelopmental phase of life will slow the age-related decline of 
behavioral performances, delay natural death and decrease susceptibility to 
Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.

PMID: 11061214 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


676. Nihon Rinsho. 2000 Oct;58(10):1968-74.

[A prospect of treatment for Parkinson's disease in the 21st century].

[Article in Japanese]

Yanagisawa N(1).

Author information:
(1)Chubu National Hospital, National Institute for Longevity Sciences.

During the last half of the 20th century, medical treatment for Parkinson's 
disease (PD) showed remarkable progresses, resulting in marked prolongation of 
life and self-dependency of patients. In Japan, peak of ages of PD patients 
visiting all medical institutions was between 75 and 84 years of age(1993), with 
which course of illness is predicted to exceed twenty years in a large number of 
patients. As exploration of neuroprotective therapies for PD has not been 
successful yet, continuous progress in neuronal cell death in the substantia 
nigra result in loss of efficacy of medication, motor fluctuations and CNS side 
effects such as dyskinesia and psychosis in the long course of dopaminergic 
supplementation therapies. Future development of medical therapies for PD is 
expected in different ways. First, elaboration in controlled-release of 
DCI/levodopa, utilization of dopamine(DA) receptor agonists with different 
profiles in affinity to DA receptor subtypes and half-time of blood 
concentration, and utilization of COMT inhibitors. Second, neuroprotection with 
MAO-B inbitators or DA receptor agonists. Neuroprotective function is expected 
in animal studies for these substances but clinical usefulness should be 
verified with randomised controlled trials. Third, treatment for extra-motor 
symptoms such as dementia, cognitive disorders, depression, autonomic 
disturbances such as orthortatic hypotension and bladder disturbances, which is 
essential for maintenance of quality of life of patients with long course of 
illness. Gene therapy, neuroprotection before development of symptoms in PD may 
be attained within the first few decades of the next century. In this respect, 
establishment of preclinical diagnosis with neuroimaging and sensitive motor and 
psychological tests is imperative.

PMID: 11068433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


677. Nihon Rinsho. 2000 Oct;58(10):2055-60.

[Drug therapy of patients with early-stage parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T.

A guideline regarding the initial therapy for parkinsonian patients is described 
in this article. The basis for the selection of levodopa or a dopamine(DA) 
agonist for the initial therapy should depend on the patients' clinical 
characteristics. Young age, less severe condition of the disease, and absence of 
dementia are the most important determining factors to initiate DA agonist 
therapy. In this therapy, the dose should be based on the standard dose of the 
drug, which is obtained by previous clinical trials. In the case that the 
initial DA agonist therapy failed, or in the case that levodopa was initially 
used, the combined use of a DA agonist and levodopa should follow in the earlier 
period of the therapy.

PMID: 11068446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


678. Neurology. 2000 Oct 24;55(8):1224-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.55.8.1224.

A Japanese patient with frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism by a tau P301S 
mutation.

Yasuda M(1), Yokoyama K, Nakayasu T, Nishimura Y, Matsui M, Yokoyama T, Miyoshi 
K, Tanaka C.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Aging Brain and Cognitive Disorders, Himeji, Japan. 
yasuda@hiabcd.go.jp

The authors report a patient carrying a missense mutation in exon 10 of tau that 
causes a substitution at codon 301 (P301S). Although the patient shares the 
rapidly progressive frontotemporal dementia of the other reported pedigrees with 
P301S, the clinical phenotype is unique in that parkinsonism was a major symptom 
in the early stage and because behavioral symptoms with dementia became 
prominent 2 years after the onset of the disease. This study substantiates the 
notion that tau mutations at codon 301 can show various phenotypes.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.55.8.1224
PMID: 11071507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


679. Med J Malaysia. 1999 Dec;54(4):541-9; quiz 550.

Diagnosis and management of Alzheimer's disease--an update.

Srinivas P(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) has become recognised as a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality in the ageing population worldwide. Over 20 million people worldwide 
are affected by AD, which ensures that the disease imposes a major economic 
burden. Alzheimer's disease is a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with 
characteristic clinical and neuropathological features. Neurofibrillary tangles, 
neuritic plaques and amyloid angiopathy occur in varying severity in brains of 
patient's with Alzheimer's disease. Biological markers of AD allowing an early 
definitive premorbid diagnoses are currently not available. Memory loss for 
recent events is invariable and often the earliest prominent symptom. Language 
disorders, difficulties with complex tasks, depression, psychotic symptoms and 
behavioral changes are other common manifestations of AD. Diagnosis involves the 
early detection of cognitive decline and ruling out other causes of dementia 
like vascular dementia, Lewy body dementia, fronto-temporal degeneration or 
reversible causes like hypothyroidism. Acetylcholinesterase inhibitors have 
shown to be effective in mild to moderate AD in improving the cognitive function 
of patients in clinical trials. Caregiver intervention programs have 
considerable potential to improve both the caregiver and patient quality of 
life.

PMID: 11072482 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


680. Arch Neurol. 2000 Nov;57(11):1561-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.57.11.1561.

Apolipoprotein E and neuromuscular disease: a critical review of the literature.

Bedlack RS(1), Strittmatter WJ, Morgenlander JC.

Author information:
(1)PO Box 3403, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27710, USA. 
bedla001@mc.duke.edu

Molecular mechanisms that alter the incidence and rate of neuromuscular disease 
progression are, in many cases, only partially understood. Several recent 
studies have asked whether apolipoprotein E (apoE for the protein, APOE for the 
gene) influences these aspects of specific neuromuscular disorders, as it does 
in central nervous system disorders such as Alzheimer disease. Although these 
studies are open to methodological criticism, several interesting trends have 
emerged. First, the APOE4 allele seems to be associated with an increased risk 
for developing certain neuromuscular diseases, including diabetic neuropathy and 
human immunodeficiency viral neuropathy. Second, this allele appears to be 
associated with faster progression of some neuromuscular diseases, including 
diabetic neuropathy and possibly motor neuron disease. Third, the APOE2 allele 
seems to confer protection against developing certain neuromuscular diseases, 
including the amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)/parkinsonism/dementia complex 
of Guam. Finally, this allele is associated with a better prognosis in 
neuromuscular diseases such as motor neuron disease. The effect of various APOE 
alleles on neuromuscular diseases therefore parallels their influence on central 
nervous system diseases. Arch Neurol. 2000;57:1561-1565

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.57.11.1561
PMID: 11074787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


681. J Neuropsychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2000 Fall;12(4):425-50. doi: 
10.1176/jnp.12.4.425.

A review of the cognitive and behavioral symptoms in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Simard M(1), van Reekum R, Cohen T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Dementia with Lewy bodies is a relatively common cause of dementia. Much has 
been learned about this disorder, yet much remains to be elucidated, especially 
in regard to early clinical diagnosis. To clarify the future research agenda in 
this area, the authors critically appraise the literature on cognitive and 
behavioral changes in DLB and provide a brief overview of the history of DLB, 
the main pathological changes, and the findings related to extrapyramidal 
symptoms and treatment issues. Twenty-one studies on cognition and 47 on 
behavioral changes in DLB are reviewed. Impairments of working memory and 
visuospatial functions, visual hallucinations, and depression (or symptoms of 
depression such as apathy and anxiety) have been identified as early indicators 
of DLB. However, longitudinal and cross-sectional data are lacking, particularly 
for different aspects of working memory, visual perception, and non-psychotic 
behavioral symptoms.

DOI: 10.1176/jnp.12.4.425
PMID: 11083160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


682. Transplantation. 2000 Nov 15;70(9):1382-9. doi: 
10.1097/00007890-200011150-00020.

No evidence for infection of human cells with porcine endogenous retrovirus 
(PERV) after exposure to porcine fetal neuronal cells.

Dinsmore JH(1), Manhart C, Raineri R, Jacoby DB, Moore A.

Author information:
(1)Diacrin, Inc., Charlestown, MA 02129, USA.

BACKGROUND: Recent demonstration of human cell infection in vitro with porcine 
endogenous retrovirus (PERV) has raised safety concerns for new therapies that 
involve transplantation of pig cells or organs to humans. To assess better the 
specific risk that may be associated with the transplantation of fetal pig 
neuronal cells to the central nervous system of patients suffering from 
intractable neurologic disorders (Parkinson's disease, Huntington's disease, and 
epilepsy), we have performed studies to determine whether there is evidence for 
in vivo or in vitro transmission of PERV from fetal pig neuronal cells to human 
cells.
METHODS: Ventral mesencephalon (VM) and lateral ganglionic eminence cells were 
isolated from fetal pigs and transplanted into patients with neurological 
conditions as part of clinical studies. Blood samples taken from patients at 
various time points posttransplant were tested for evidence of PERV. In vitro 
studies to test for PERV infection of human cells after cocultivation with 
either fetal porcine ventral mesencephalon or porcine fetal lateral ganglionic 
eminence cells were also performed.
RESULTS: We found no evidence of PERV provirus integration in the DNA from PBMC 
of 24 neuronal transplant recipients. In addition, no PERV was released from 
cultured fetal porcine neuronal cultures, and there was no transfer of PERV from 
fetal pig neuronal cells to human cells in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate by both examination of transplant patient 
blood samples and in vitro studies that there is no evidence for transmission of 
PERV from porcine fetal neural cells to human cells.

DOI: 10.1097/00007890-200011150-00020
PMID: 11087157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


683. Neurology. 2000 Nov 14;55(9):1358-63. doi: 10.1212/wnl.55.9.1358.

Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism in a longitudinal study: two-fold higher 
incidence in men. ILSA Working Group. Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging.

Baldereschi M(1), Di Carlo A, Rocca WA, Vanni P, Maggi S, Perissinotto E, 
Grigoletto F, Amaducci L, Inzitari D.

Author information:
(1)Italian National Research Council (CNR CSFET-ILSA Study), Florence, Italy. 
baldereschi@mail.area.fi.cnr.it

OBJECTIVE: To determine the incidence of parkinsonism and PD in the Italian 
elderly, and to explore the relation with age and gender.
METHODS: In eight Italian municipalities, a population-based, parkinsonism-free 
cohort was followed for an average of 3 years. At the end of the follow-up, the 
cohort survivors were directly contacted (screening and clinical examination). 
Cohort members who had died were studied using death certificates, clinical 
records, and information gathered from relatives and general practitioners. 
Parkinsonism diagnosis and subtyping were made according to specified diagnostic 
criteria.
RESULTS: The cohort consisted of 4,341 individuals (65 to 84 years of age): 596 
died before the examination, 2,863 (76.4% of the survivors) completed the 
screening procedure, and 882 refused to participate. The authors found 68 
incident cases of parkinsonism: 42 PD (62%), 7 drug-induced parkinsonism (10%), 
8 parkinsonism in dementia (12%), 8 vascular parkinsonism (12%), and 3 
parkinsonism, unspecified (5.8%). Average annual incidence rate (per 100,000 
person-years) in the population aged 65 to 84 years, adjusted to the 1992 
Italian population, was 529.7 (95% CI, 400.5 to 658.9) for parkinsonism, and 
326.3 (95% CI, 224.1 to 427.5) for PD. Incidence rates for both parkinsonism and 
PD increased with age in both men and women; men had higher rates in every age 
group. Age-adjusted relative risk in men compared with women was 1.66 (95% CI, 
1.02 to 2.70) for parkinsonism and 2.13 (95% CI, 1.11 to 4.11) for PD.
CONCLUSIONS: Incidence of parkinsonism and PD increased with age, PD was the 
most common type of parkinsonism, and men had a risk of developing PD twice that 
of women.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.55.9.1358
PMID: 11087781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


684. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2000 Oct;22(5):580-6. doi: 
10.1076/1380-3395(200010)22:5;1-9;FT580.

Cognitive decline affects subject attrition in longitudinal research.

Levin BE(1), Katzen HL, Klein B, Llabre ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Miami, Coral Gables, FL, USA. 
blevin@umiami.ir.miami.edu

We evaluated prospectively 210 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) 
to determine whether cognitive deterioration and disease disability affect 
subject drop out. Subjects who refused to return for follow-up testing had a 
greater degree of bradykinesia and overall disability, more advanced disease, 
fewer years of education and greater depressive symptomatology. However, 
discriminant analysis indicated that performance on the neuropsychological 
measures, rather than PD severity, significantly predicted whether patients 
return for follow-up testing. Our findings indicate that cognitive impairment 
uniquely contributes to subject attrition, which may distort dementia estimates 
in PD.

DOI: 10.1076/1380-3395(200010)22:5;1-9;FT580
PMID: 11094393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


685. Brain Cogn. 2000 Dec;44(3):307-23. doi: 10.1006/brcg.1999.1124.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: a pure case.

Gurd JM(1), Herzberg L, Joachim C, Marshall JC, Jobst K, McShane RH, Hindley NJ, 
King EE.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Oxford, UK. gurd@ermine.ox.ac.uk

A pure case of autopsy-confirmed dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is described. 
The patient presented with distinctive verbal fluency deficits in the context of 
mild language impairment, intact recognition memory, and impaired paragraph 
recall. Neuroimaging (CT and SPECT) showed progressive medial temporal lobe 
atrophy. Neuropathology revealed Lewy bodies, degeneration in the substantia 
nigra, nucleus basalis of Meynert (Nakano & Hirano, 1984), and locus ceruleus, 
but no pathology characteristic of Alzheimer's disease. It is in this sense that 
the case is "pure" DLB. Early neuropsychological diagnosis of DLB is essential 
(Salmon et al., 1996) given the potentially fatal hazard of neuroleptics 
(McKeith et al., 1992) and the difficulties associated with clinical 
neurological diagnoses (Litvan et al., 1998).

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/brcg.1999.1124
PMID: 11104528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


686. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 1999;32 Suppl 6:187-91.

[Clinical applications of late negative evoked potentials--contingent negative 
variation (CNV)].

[Article in Polish]

Kochanowski J(1), Malara A, Broncel A, Skorupka U, Guzowska-Bartniak E.

Author information:
(1)Kliniki Neurologicznej SK WAM w Lodzi.

Contingent negative variation /CNV/ is a slow negative potential described first 
in 1964 by Walter et al. It is a correlate of cerebral activity in the frontal 
lobes connected with expectation of stimulus and frontal cortex preparation for 
the stimulus to come. CNV develops in the time between the warning signal /S1/ 
and the commanding signal /S2/. CNV contains two main components connected 
directly with brain function: the first one, so called early component, is 
connected with the process of orientation or warning /it is called also 
orientation wave/, the second one /late component/ is connected with the 
preparation for movement /expectation wave or preparatory wave/. The clinical 
application of CNV is for the evaluation of the correlation of potential changes 
with changes in cognitive functions occurring in various diseases. Numerous 
studies reported recently have confirmed the applicability of CNV on the 
diagnosis of dementia, Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, schizophrenia, anxiety 
states, chronic pains, including migraine.

PMID: 11107587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


687. Brain Res Brain Res Rev. 2000 Dec;34(3):119-36. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-0173(00)00043-6.

Evidence that Alzheimer's disease is a microvascular disorder: the role of 
constitutive nitric oxide.

de la Torre JC(1), Stefano GB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, 1363 Shinly, 
Suite 100, Escondido, CA 92026, USA. jdelator@nctimes.net

Evidence is fast accumulating which indicates that Alzheimer's disease is a 
vascular disorder with neurodegenerative consequences rather than a 
neurodegenerative disorder with vascular consequences. It is proposed that two 
factors need to be present for AD to develop: (1) advanced ageing, (2) presence 
of a condition that lowers cerebral perfusion, such as a vascular-risk factor. 
The first factor introduces a normal but potentially insidious process that 
lowers cerebral blood flow in inverse relation to increased ageing; the second 
factor adds a crucial burden which further lowers brain perfusion and places 
vulnerable neurons in a state of high energy compromise leading to a cascade of 
neuronal metabolic turmoil. Convergence of the two factors above will culminate 
in a critically attained threshold of cerebral hypoperfusion (CATCH). CATCH is a 
hemodynamic microcirculatory insufficiency that will destabilize neurons, 
synapses, neurotransmission and cognitive function, creating in its wake a 
neurodegenerative state characterized by the formation of senile plaques, 
neurofibrillary tangles, amyloid angiopathy and in some cases, Lewy bodies. 
Since any of a considerable number of vascular-related conditions must be 
present in the ageing individual for cognition to be disturbed, CATCH identifies 
an important aspect of the heterogeneic disease profile assumed to be present in 
the AD syndrome. It is proposed that CATCH initiates AD by distorting regional 
brain capillary structure involving endothelial cell shape changes and 
impairment of nitric oxide (NO) release which affect signaling between the 
immune, cardiovascular and nervous systems. Evidence is presented that in many 
tissues there is a basal level of NO being produced and that the actions of 
several signaling molecules may initiate increases in basal NO levels. Moreover, 
these temporary increases in basal NO levels exert inhibitory cellular actions, 
via cellular conformational changes. Findings indicate that (a) constitutive NO 
is responsible for a basal or 'tonal' level of NO; (b) this NO keeps particular 
types of cells in a state of inhibition and (c) activation of these cells occurs 
through disinhibition. Consequently, tissues not maintaining a basal NO level 
are more prone to excitatory, immune, vascular and neural influences. Under such 
circumstances, these tissues cannot be down-regulated to normal basal levels, 
thus prolonging their excitatory state. Thus, the clinical convergence of 
advanced ageing in the presence of a chronic, pre-morbid vascular risk factor, 
can, in time, contribute to an endotheliopathy involving basal NO deficit, to 
the degree where regional metabolic dysfunction leads to cognitive meltdown and 
to progressive neurodegeneration characteristic of Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0165-0173(00)00043-6
PMID: 11113503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


688. Novartis Found Symp. 2000;231:7-15; discussion 16-20. doi: 
10.1002/0470870834.ch2.

Cell replacement strategies for neurodegenerative disorders.

BjÃ¶rklund A(1).

Author information:
(1)Wallenberg Neuroscience Center, Department of Physiological Sciences, Lund 
University, SÃ¶lvegatan 17, S-223 62 Lund, Sweden.

Cell transplantation has over the last two decades emerged as a promising 
approach for restoration of function in neurodegenerative diseases, in 
particular Parkinson's and Huntington's disease. Clinical trials have so far 
focused on the use of implants of embryonic mesencephalic tissue containing 
already fate-committed dopaminergic neuroblasts with the capacity to develop 
into fully mature dopamine neurons in their new location in the host brain. 
However, the recent demonstration that immature neural progenitor cells with 
multipotent properties can be isolated from both the developing and adult CNS 
and that these cells can be maintained and propagated in culture, has provided a 
new interesting tool for restorative cell replacement and gene transfer 
therapies. Embryonic stem cells, obtained from the early stages of embryonic 
development, and neural stem cells, obtained from the developing brain, may 
provide renewable sources of cells for therapeutic purposes, and could 
eventually offer a powerful alternative to primary fetal CNS tissue in clinical 
transplantation protocols. The purpose of this review is to discuss the 
prospects of the emerging progenitor cell technology for cell replacement and 
restorative therapies in neurodegenerative diseases, and consider some of the 
critical issues that must be solved in order to make progenitor cells useful in 
studies of brain repair.

DOI: 10.1002/0470870834.ch2
PMID: 11131546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


689. Gac Med Mex. 2000 Nov-Dec;136(6):573-84.

[Neurovegetative diseases in dementia].

[Article in Spanish]

Navarrete E(1), ProspÃ©ro O, Hudson R, Guevara R.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de FisiologÃ­a, Facultad de Medicina, UNAM, Apdo. Postal 
70250MÃ©xico, 04510, D.F.

Dementia is the result of the dysfunction and death of cells in the central and 
peripheral nervous system. Of diverse etiology, these processes are insidious in 
their onset and are characterized by a progressive neural depletion resulting in 
a range of cognitive deficits, including a deterioration in the capacity to 
learn and a tendency to forget what has been learned. Neurodegenerative diseases 
resulting in dementia include: Alzheimer, Parkinson, Huntington, Pick, and 
Creutzfeld Jakob, as well as dementias with multiple etiologies. The population 
with the highest probability of suffering from one of these diseases are those 
over 50 years of age, because they have reduced circulating levels of gonadal 
hormones, one of several risk factors associated with the onset of dementia. 
Anatomical areas most commonly affected include the hippocampus, the primary 
motor and somatosensory areas, various limbic structures, and the 
parieto-temporal, frontal, and entorhinal corticies. Affliction of this last 
area has been suggested to account for the early olfactory dysfunction often 
shown by patients after the onset of Alzheimer and Parkinson, leading to the 
suggestion that olfactory testing could be useful in the early diagnosis of such 
neurodegenerative diseases.

PMID: 11131859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


690. Neuropathology. 2000 Sep;20(3):239-45. doi: 10.1046/j.1440-1789.2000.00343.x.

An autopsy case of Alzheimer's disease presenting with primary progressive 
aphasia: a clinicopathological and immunohistochemical study.

Li F(1), Iseki E, Kato M, Adachi Y, Akagi M, Kosaka K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Yokohama City University School of Medicine, 
Yokohama, Japan.

This report describes an autopsied Alzheimer's disease (AD) patient with primary 
progressive aphasia (PPA) as an early symptom. The patient developed a 
progressive speech disturbance at the age of 70 years, and difficulty in 
comprehension became apparent 2 years later. Magnetic resonance imaging scan 
disclosed asymmetrical brain atrophy, predominantly on the left temporal lobe. 
At the age of 74 years, the patient's dementia rapidly progressed with 
parkinsonism and he died after a disease duration of 6 years. At autopsy, the 
brain showed a marked temporo-frontal lobe atrophy, predominantly on the left 
side. There was severe neuronal loss with gliosis and tissue rarefaction in the 
atrophied cerebral cortex and amygdala. Many neurofibrillary tangles with 
neuropil threads were found in the cerebral cortex. Numerous amyloid deposits 
were distributed throughout the cerebral cortex, accompanied by amyloid 
angiopathies. This patient was clinically diagnosed with temporal lobe-dominant 
Pick's disease, although the possibility of corticobasal degeneration was made. 
The neuropathological diagnosis was AD with asymmetrical brain atrophy and 
widespread amyloid angiopathies.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1789.2000.00343.x
PMID: 11132942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


691. Neurology. 2001 Jan 9;56(1):8-13. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.1.8.

Welding-related parkinsonism: clinical features, treatment, and pathophysiology.

Racette BA(1), McGee-Minnich L, Moerlein SM, Mink JW, Videen TO, Perlmutter JS.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Neurological Surgery (Neurology), Washington 
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA. 
racetteb@neuro.wustl.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2001 Jan 9;56(1):4-5.
    Neurology. 2001 Sep 11;57(5):936; author reply 936-7.
    Neurology. 2001 Sep 11;57(5):936-7.
    Neurology. 2001 Nov 13;57(9):1738-9.
    Neurology. 2005 Jun 28;64(12):2001-3.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether welding-related parkinsonism differs from 
idiopathic PD.
BACKGROUND: Welding is considered a cause of parkinsonism, but little 
information is available about the clinical features exhibited by patients or 
whether this is a distinct disorder.
METHODS: The authors performed a case-control study that compared the clinical 
features of 15 career welders, who were ascertained through an academic movement 
disorders center and compared to two control groups with idiopathic PD. One 
control group was ascertained sequentially to compare the frequency of clinical 
features, and the second control group was sex- and age-matched to compare the 
frequency of motor fluctuations.
RESULTS: Welders were exposed to a mean of 47,144 welding hours. Welders had a 
younger age at onset (46 years) of PD compared with sequentially ascertained 
controls (63 years; p < 0.0001). There was no difference in frequency of tremor, 
bradykinesia, rigidity, asymmetric onset, postural instability, family history, 
clinical depression, dementia, or drug-induced psychosis between the welders and 
the two control groups. All treated welders responded to levodopa. Motor 
fluctuations and dyskinesias occurred at a similar frequency in welders and the 
two control groups. PET with 6-[18F]fluorodopa obtained in two of the welders 
showed findings typical of idiopathic PD, with greatest loss in posterior 
putamen.
CONCLUSIONS: Parkinsonism in welders is distinguished clinically only by age at 
onset, suggesting welding may be a risk factor for PD. These preliminary data 
cannot exclude a genetic contribution to susceptibility in these exposed 
individuals.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.1.8
PMID: 11148228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


692. Neurology. 2001 Jan 9;56(1):17-24. doi: 10.1212/wnl.56.1.17.

Competency to consent to medical treatment in cognitively impaired patients with 
Parkinson's disease.

Dymek MP(1), Atchison P, Harrell L, Marson DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Chicago, IL, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2001 Jun 26;56(12):1782-3.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate capacity to consent to medical treatment (competency) 
in cognitively impaired patients with PD.
BACKGROUND: Although competency has been studied empirically in patients with 
cortical dementia (AD), no empirical studies have examined competency in 
patients with PD or other subcortical neurodegenerative disorders.
METHODS: Patients with PD with cognitive impairment (n = 20) and older controls 
(n = 20) were compared using a standardized competency measure (Capacity to 
Consent to Treatment Instrument [CCTI]) and neuropsychological test measures. 
The CCTI tests competency performance and assigns outcomes (capable, marginally 
capable, incapable) under four different legal standards (LS).
RESULTS: Patients with PD performed below controls on the four LS: capacity to 
evidence a treatment choice (LS1) (p < 0.03), capacity to appreciate 
consequences of a treatment choice (LS3) (p < 0.03), capacity to provide 
rational reasons for a treatment choice (LS4) (p < 0.0001), and capacity to 
understand the treatment situation and choices (LS5) (p < 0.0001). With respect 
to competency outcomes, patients with PD demonstrated increasing compromise 
(marginally capable or incapable outcomes) across the four standards: LS1 (25%), 
LS3 (45%), LS4 (55%), and LS5 (80%). In the PD group, simple measures of 
executive function (the Executive Interview) and to a lesser extent 
memory/orientation (Dementia Rating Scale, Memory subscale) were key predictors 
of competency performance and outcome on the LS.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitively impaired patients with PD are likely to have impaired 
consent capacity, and are at risk of losing competency over the course of their 
neurodegenerative illness. Patients with PD have particular difficulty meeting 
more stringent, clinically relevant competency standards that tap reasoning 
skills and comprehension of treatment information. Executive dysfunction appears 
to be a primary neurocognitive mechanism for competency loss in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.56.1.17
PMID: 11148230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


693. Biol Psychiatry. 2001 Jan 15;49(2):130-6. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(00)00944-6.

Cognitive impairment in depression is not associated with neuropathologic 
evidence of increased vascular or Alzheimer-type pathology.

O'Brien J(1), Thomas A, Ballard C, Brown A, Ferrier N, Jaros E, Perry R.

Author information:
(1)Newcastle General Hospital, Wolfson Research Centre, Institute for the Health 
of the Elderly, Westgate Road, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Newcastle upon 
Tyne NE4 6BE, UK.

BACKGROUND: Cognitive impairment is common in depression, but underlying 
mechanisms remain unknown. We examined whether increases in Alzheimer-type or 
vascular pathology are associated with cognitive impairments in elderly 
depressed subjects.
METHODS: Eleven subjects who had died during a well-documented episode of DSM-IV 
major depression were included. Neuropathologic assessments, blind to group 
membership, included standardized assessment of neuritic plaques, 
neurofibrillary tangles, and Lewy Bodies in frontal, temporal, parietal, and 
occipital cortices. Braak staging of Alzheimer pathology was also performed. 
Cerebral microvascular disease was scored according to a previously validated 
scale, and a score for cerebral and systemic atheroma of large and medium sized 
arteries was obtained.
RESULTS: No subject had Lewy bodies. Plaque and tangle counts for all subjects 
were well within published norms for age-matched control subjects. There were no 
significant differences in plaque or tangle counts between subjects who were 
cognitively impaired (n = 5) and those who were nonimpaired (n = 6) during their 
depressive illness. Similarly, neither total microvascular pathology nor deep 
frontal microvascular pathology differed between the two groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the liability for some patients to 
develop cognitive impairment during a depressive episode is not related to an 
increase in Alzheimer-type or vascular neuropathologic change. This indicates 
that other mechanisms must underlie both the cognitive impairment associated 
with depression and the observation that depression is a risk factor for 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(00)00944-6
PMID: 11164759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


694. Biol Psychiatry. 2001 Jan 15;49(2):137-45. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(00)00952-5.

Suicide and Alzheimer's pathology in the elderly: a case-control study.

Rubio A(1), Vestner AL, Stewart JM, Forbes NT, Conwell Y, Cox C.

Author information:
(1)University of Rochester School of Medicine, Medical Center, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 601 Elmwood Avenue, P.O. Box 626, Rochester, 
NY 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: The single most important risk factor for Alzheimer's pathology is 
age. Elderly individuals are also at increased risk for suicide, but 
comprehensive studies of the association between Alzheimer's pathology and 
suicide are lacking. We designed the current study to determine if Alzheimer's 
disease changes are overrepresented in elderly people committing suicide.
METHODS: The design is a case-control study. Cases (n = 28) were subjects older 
than 60 years of age who completed suicide. For each case, two age- and 
gender-matched individuals who died naturally were selected as control subjects 
(n = 56). Neuropathologic examination of hippocampal sections was performed 
blindly and included a modified Braak scoring system and semiquantitative 
assessment of neurofibrillary tangles, amyloid deposition, Lewy bodies, and 
Lewy-associated neurites. Data were analyzed by conditional logistic regression.
RESULTS: The brains of individuals who committed suicide had higher modified 
Braak scores than those of matching control subjects (p =.0028). The number of 
neurofibrillary tangles in CA1 was not an independent predictor of suicide 
status in the statistical analysis (p =.16), although the distribution was more 
highly skewed among the cases (75th percentile of 10.5 for cases, vs. 2 for 
control subjects).
CONCLUSIONS: Severe Alzheimer's disease pathology is overrepresented in elderly 
patients who complete suicide.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(00)00952-5
PMID: 11164760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


695. Bioelectromagnetics. 2001;Suppl 5:S132-43. doi: 
10.1002/1521-186x(2001)22:5+<::aid-bem1029>3.3.co;2-m.

Neurodegenerative diseases, suicide and depressive symptoms in relation to EMF.

Ahlbom A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. 
ANders.Ahlbom@imm.ki.se

In 1979 the first study was published which indicated that environmental 
exposure to power frequency, electric and magnetic fields (EMF), might increase 
the risk of chronic disease. This was a study on cancer. However, this research 
area has gradually evolved and come also to include outcomes other than cancer. 
The purpose of this paper is to provide a better understanding of the literature 
on neurodegenerative diseases and on suicide and depressive symptoms in relation 
to EMF by using a meta-analysis technique. It is concluded that for amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, there are relatively strong data indicating that electric 
utility work may be associated with an increased risk. However, EMF exposure is 
only one of several possible explanations to this. For Alzheimer's disease the 
combined data on an association with EMF are weaker than that for ALS. For 
suicide an overall assessment yields the conclusion that the support for an 
association is weak. For depressive symptoms the assessment is more complex, but 
the overall conclusion is nevertheless that the evidence is relatively weak. For 
other diseases, such as Parkinson's, there is not enough information for an 
assessment.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1521-186x(2001)22:5+<::aid-bem1029>3.3.co;2-m
PMID: 11170123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


696. Front Biosci. 2001 Feb 1;6:D135-53. doi: 10.2741/foster.

Selective attention in Alzheimer's disease.

Foster JK(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Western Australia, Perth WA 6009, 
Australia. jonathan@psy.uwa.edu.au

This chapter presents a review of selective attention functioning in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The primary focus is on work conducted into this complex topic 
within the author and colleagues' laboratories (i.e. studies of simple and 
conjoined visual search). Findings obtained by the author and colleagues 
investigating simple and conjoined feature visual search in AD are related to 
findings obtained in the same laboratories in the healthy elderly and in 
patients with Parkinson's disease. Selective attention is a complex, 
multifactorial entity. Impairment of selective attention may be an early feature 
of AD and a prominent clinical characteristic of some patients. However, there 
are currently few reliable clinical measures of attentional dysfunction in AD. 
The experimental literature implicates some aspects of selective attention more 
reliably in AD than others. With respect to our own empirical studies, more 
effortful or controlled aspects of selective attention (as characterized by 
conjoined feature visual search) are impaired in AD. Furthermore, on the basis 
of our experimental observations, these aspects of selective attention appear to 
be disproportionately impaired relative to deficits in other cognitive domains 
that have previously been reported in the AD literature. By contrast, conjoined 
feature visual search deficits were not observed in our studies in patients with 
Parkinson's disease. The selective attention deficits that we have noted in AD 
patients represent an extension of the types of impairments that we have also 
observed in healthy aging; that is, compared with the healthy elderly, AD 
patients were quantitatively but not qualitatively more impaired on conjoined 
feature visual search. This is an important observation. The ways in which these 
findings relate to the wider AD selective attention literature are also 
considered, drawing out several common theoretical strands across a range of 
empirical studies.

DOI: 10.2741/foster
PMID: 11171548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


697. Eur J Pharmacol. 2001 Feb 9;413(1):11-29. doi: 10.1016/s0014-2999(00)00939-0.

Pharmacogenomics of neurodegenerative diseases.

Maimone D(1), Dominici R, Grimaldi LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ospedale Garibaldi, Piazza S. Maria di GesÃ¹ 5, 95123 
Catania, Italy.

Current knowledge of sporadic degenerative disorders suggests that, despite 
their multifactorial etiopathogenesis, genetics plays a primary role in 
orchestrating the pathological events, and even dramatically changes the disease 
phenotype from patient to patient. Genes may act as susceptibility factors, 
increasing the risk of disease development, or may operate as regulatory 
factors, modulating the magnitude and severity of pathogenic processes or the 
response to drug treatment. The goal of pharmacogenomics is the application of 
this knowledge to elaborate more specific and effective treatments and to tailor 
therapies to individual patients according to their genetic profile. Here, we 
outline the leading theories on the etiopathogenesis of neurodegenerative 
diseases, including amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and 
Alzheimer disease, and we review the potential role of genetic variations, such 
as gene mutations and polymorphisms, in each context. We also suggest potential 
targets for new therapeutic approaches and variability factors for current 
treatments based on genotype features. Finally, we propose a few options of 
preventive therapeutic interventions in patients with a high genetic risk of 
disease.

DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(00)00939-0
PMID: 11173059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


698. Gan To Kagaku Ryoho. 2000 Dec;27 Suppl 3:630-2.

[Continuous nursing of incurable patients at home--the case of a patient with 
Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Hoshiyama E(1), Yoshimura S, Ota K.

Author information:
(1)7B Ward, Tottori University Hospital.

At the Department of Neurology and Internal Medicine at our hospital, there are 
22 outpatients who are nursed at home. Their diseases are Parkinson's disease, 
spinal cerebellar degeneration, dementia and other diseases. The problem is how 
we should care for and support these patients in the future, now that the 
official Care Insurance System has started. We discuss how we could support such 
patients, through the case of a patient suffering from Parkinson's disease. The 
patient was a 69-year-old female. In 1991, she developed Parkinson's disease, 
accompanied with trembling in her right upper limb. Her condition was controlled 
at our hospital. Is April 1999, she lost strength in her right thigh without any 
previous notice, so she was hospitalized for treatment. For a period, she became 
aggressive from hallucinations and delusions and she had to be taken care of all 
day. Her only daughter lived apart and her 72-year-old husband was also 
suffering from Parkinson's disease. In spite of such conditions, she hoped to 
receive home care and her husband accepted that. We asked what they would want 
us to do. We had meetings together with the staff of the local administration, 
doctors, nurses, and pharmacists. The report from our hospital staff says, "It 
may be difficult for only her family to support her. She needs other supporting 
systems." She came to our hospital twice a month. We made an effort to 
understand her condition with the help of the report of a visiting nurse. 
However, her illusions and delusions made it difficult even to utilize the 
short-stay. Her husband sometimes uses violence and says. "I can't stand this 
any more--her unrest, micturition at night and refusal to eat." Nevertheless, 
she continues to say "I want to stay at home." They have had considerable 
trouble. The following are necessary for home care of some patients. 1. 
Understanding what a patient and her family want to do. Cooperating with the 
staff of the administration, in consideration of the Care Insurance System. 2. 
Studying with incurable neurology patients using pamphlets or other materials 
and supporting them, 3. Discussing how to act in concert with patients at home 
and outpatients at the hospital involving a risk without MSW.

PMID: 11190307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


699. Drugs Aging. 2000 Nov;17(5):363-84. doi: 10.2165/00002512-200017050-00004.

Antipsychotic-Induced movement disorders in the elderly: epidemiology and 
treatment recommendations.

Caligiuri MR(1), Jeste DV, Lacro JP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
California 92093, USA. mcaligiuri@ucsd.edu

We reviewed the epidemiological aspects of antipsychotic-induced movement 
disorders as they pertain to older patients. The incidence and prevalence of 
drug-induced parkinsonism and tardive dyskinesia (TD) are significantly greater 
in the older patient than in the younger patient whereas akathisia seems to 
occur evenly across the age spectrum and dystonia is uncommon among older 
patients. The literature on risk factors associated with treatment-emergent 
movement disorders is highly variable. Treatment practices vary across the age 
range and the interaction between age and antipsychotic dosage confounds our 
understanding of the relative importance of treatment-related risk factors. 
However, there is general agreement that pre-existing extrapyramidal signs (EPS) 
increase the vulnerability of the patient to developing significant drug-induced 
movement disorders. Elderly patients with dementia are at greater risk than 
patients without dementia for persistent drug-induced EPS. Management of 
drug-induced movement disorders in the older patient requires careful 
consideration of the contraindications imposed by such agents as 
anticholinergics and beta-blockers. At present, well-controlled double-blind 
studies of second-generation antipsychotics such as clozapine, risperidone. 
olanzapine or quetiapine for reducing the risk of treatment-emergent movement 
disorders in the elderly have not been published. However, open-label studies of 
atypical antipsychotics demonstrate a markedly lower incidence of both EPS and 
TD compared with conventional antipsychotic treatment in the elderly. There is 
emerging literature in support of atypical antipsychotics for the treatment of 
existing drug-induced movement disorders. More controversial is the use of 
adjunctive antioxidants in newly treated patients who are vulnerable to 
drug-induced movement disorders. While the evidence is mixed in support of 
antioxidants for the treatment of TD, the possibility remains that prophylactic 
use of antioxidants may help reduce the incidence of TD. The development of a 
drug-induced movement disorder often reduces the quality of life in an elderly 
patient. Effective pharmacological management requires cooperation from the 
patient and family, which can be fostered early in the patient's care through 
proper informed consent. The risks and benefits of antipsychotic treatment in 
the elderly patient need to be communicated to the patient and family. At the 
present time, there is no consistently effective treatment for patients with TD 
once it develops. Therefore, attention should focus on its prevention and close 
monitoring.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-200017050-00004
PMID: 11190417 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


700. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2000;920:63-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06906.x.

Molecular genetics of chromosome 17 tauopathies.

Hutton M(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA. 
hutton.michael@mayo.edu

The identification of mutations in the gene encoding the microtubule associated 
protein tau in frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17) demonstrated that tau dysfunction can lead to neurodegeneration. At 
least 11 missense mutations and 1 deletion mutation (delta K280) have been 
identified in exons 9-13 that encode the microtubule binding domains of tau. In 
addition, five mutations have been found close to the 5' splice site of exon 10. 
The different FTDP-17 mutations have multiple effects on the biology and 
function of tau. These varied pathogenic mechanisms likely explain the wide 
range of clinical and neuropathological features observed in different families 
with FTDP-17. In addition to the highly penetrant mutations that are found in 
large families with FTDP-17, a common extended haplotype in the tau gene also 
appears to be a risk factor in the development of the apparently sporadic 
tauopathy, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). The mechanism by which this 
common variability in the tau gene influences the development of PSP is unclear; 
however, it further suggests a central role for tau in the pathogenesis of 
several neurodegenerative conditions including Alzheimer's disease (AD).

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2000.tb06906.x
PMID: 11193178 [Indexed for MEDLINE]