2601. Med Hypotheses. 2011 Oct;77(4):633-7. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.07.002. Epub 2011 
Jul 30.

The potential value of early screening for neurological deficits in participants 
in certain sports.

Sosa I(1), Linic IS, Petaros A, Desnica A, Bosnar A.

Author information:
(1)Rijeka University Medical Faculty, Department of Forensic Medicine and 
Criminalistics, and Neurology Clinic, Rijeka University Hospital, Croatia. 
isosa@medri.hr

Physicians occasionally encounter the punch-drunk syndrome among boxers after 
longlasting careers characterized by blows to the head. The list of sports 
leading to punch-drunk syndrome is rapidly increasing, making it a notable 
public health problem. A lack of specific findings leads to defects in reporting 
the condition, and consequently to delay in treatment. Although the rigorous 
enforcement of sport rules and constant improvements of sporting equipment have 
decreased the occurrence of the syndrome, early detection of punch-drunk 
syndrome is crucial and would have comprehensive benefits. Two groups of signs 
and symptoms can be identified: dementia and Parkinsonism. A prompt diagnosis 
with a correct classification of the suspected cases is crucial. Therefore, we 
offer an overview of the symptomatology as well as proposing the introduction of 
a screening method among risk groups based on generic and minute neurological 
examination and dementia testing.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.07.002
PMID: 21803503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2602. Front Neurol. 2011 Jul 11;2:42. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00042. eCollection 2011.

Brainstem: neglected locus in neurodegenerative diseases.

Grinberg LT(1), Rueb U, Heinsen H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California at 
San Francisco San Francisco, CA, USA.

The most frequent neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) are Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and frontotemporal lobar degeneration associated with 
protein TDP-43 (FTLD-TDP). Neuropathologically, NDs are characterized by 
abnormal intracellular and extra-cellular protein deposits and by 
disease-specific neuronal death. Practically all terminal stages of NDs are 
clinically associated with dementia. Therefore, major attention was directed to 
protein deposits and neuron loss in supratentorial (telencephalic) brain regions 
in the course of NDs. This was also true for PD, although the pathological 
hallmark of PD is degeneration of pigmented neurons of the brainstem's 
substantia nigra (SN). However, PD pathophysiology was explained by dopamine 
depletion in the telencephalic basal ganglia due to insufficiency and 
degeneration of the projection neurons located in SN. In a similar line of 
argumentation AD- and FTLD-related clinical deficits were exclusively explained 
by supratentorial allo- and neo-cortical laminar neuronal necrosis. Recent 
comprehensive studies in AD and PD early stages found considerable and 
unexpected involvement of brainstem nuclei, which could have the potential to 
profoundly change our present concepts on origin, spread, and early clinical 
diagnosis of these diseases. In contrast with PD and AD, few studies addressed 
brainstem involvement in the course of the different types of FTLD-TDP. Some of 
the results, including ours, disclosed a higher and more widespread pathology 
than anticipated. The present review will focus mainly on the impact of 
brainstem changes during the course of the most frequent NDs including PD, AD, 
and FTLD-TDP, with special emphasis on the need for more comprehensive research 
on FTLDs.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2011.00042
PMCID: PMC3135867
PMID: 21808630


2603. Brain. 2011 Nov;134(Pt 11):3146-66. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr177. Epub 2011 Aug 2.

The role of dopaminergic imaging in patients with symptoms of dopaminergic 
system neurodegeneration.

Cummings JL(1), Henchcliffe C, Schaier S, Simuni T, Waxman A, Kemp P.

Author information:
(1)University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA. cumminj@ccf.org

Diagnosis of neurological and psychiatric conditions associated with 
disturbances of dopaminergic functioning can be challenging, especially in the 
early stages, and may be assisted with biomarkers such as dopamine system 
imaging. Distinguishing between Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies is a major diagnostic challenge. Clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's 
disease is straightforward with classic presentation, but accurate distinction 
among Parkinsonian variants may be difficult; non-Parkinson's disease conditions 
are commonly misdiagnosed as Parkinson's disease, and ~20% of patients with 
Parkinson's disease are not clinically diagnosed despite coming to medical 
attention. Early and accurate diagnosis is desirable to improve management. 
Imaging of the dopamine transporter using single-photon emission computed 
tomography may be of particular utility in this regard. Abnormal imaging 
indicates underlying nigrostriatal neurodegeneration, supportive of a diagnosis 
of Parkinson's disease, atypical parkinsonism or dementia with Lewy bodies, and 
identifies patient groups in whom dopaminergic therapy may be beneficial. Normal 
imaging supports diagnosis of a condition not involving nigrostriatal 
neurodegeneration such as Alzheimer's disease, essential tremor or drug-induced 
parkinsonism and hence a different therapeutic approach. In patients in whom 
there was diagnostic uncertainty between degenerative parkinsonism and 
non-degenerative tremor disorders, baseline imaging with the dopamine 
transporter ligand [(123)I]ioflupane (DaTscan™) has shown 78% sensitivity and 
97% specificity with reference to clinical diagnosis at 3 years, versus 93% and 
46%, respectively, for baseline clinical diagnosis. In a Phase III trial of 
[(123)I]ioflupane in patients with initial clinical diagnosis of probable or 
possible dementia with Lewy bodies or non-Lewy body dementia, mean specificity 
for excluding non-Lewy body dementia (predominantly Alzheimer's disease) was 
90.4%. Using clinical diagnosis as a reference against which to assess 
sensitivity and specificity of dopamine transporter imaging is a limitation, but 
definitive diagnosis via pathological confirmation is generally not feasible. In 
a series of patients with post-mortem brain examination, imaging using 
[(123)I]ioflupane has demonstrated higher sensitivity (88%) and specificity 
(100%) for differentiating dementia with Lewy bodies from non-Lewy body dementia 
than clinical diagnosis (75% and 42%, respectively). Dopaminergic system imaging 
may be particularly valuable in patients with clinically inconclusive 
parkinsonism or a clinical diagnosis of possible dementia with Lewy bodies; it 
is not helpful in differentiating between Parkinson's disease and atypical 
parkinsonism, although postsynaptic dopaminergic imaging may be of utility. 
Other potential uses of dopamine transporter imaging include identification of 
patients with premotor Parkinson's disease, monitoring disease progression in 
testing novel therapeutics, and as an inclusion criterion for entry into 
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr177
PMID: 21810889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2604. Drugs Aging. 2011 Aug 1;28(8):605-15. doi: 10.2165/11591320-000000000-00000.

Disease modification in Parkinson's disease.

Henchcliffe C(1), Severt WL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neuroscience, Weill Medical College of Cornell 
University, New York, USA. clh2007@med.cornell.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) is an age-related, progressive, multisystem 
neurodegenerative disorder resulting in significant morbidity and mortality, as 
well as a growing social and financial burden in an aging population. The 
hallmark of PD is loss of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars 
compacta, leading to bradykinesia, rigidity and tremor. Current pharmacological 
treatment is therefore centred upon dopamine replacement to alleviate symptoms. 
However, two major problems complicate this approach: (i) motor symptoms 
continue to progress, requiring increasing doses of medication, which result in 
both short-term adverse effects and intermediate- to long-term motor 
complications; (ii) dopamine replacement does little to treat non-dopaminergic 
motor and non-motor symptoms, which are an important source of morbidity, 
including dementia, sleep disturbances, depression, orthostatic hypotension, and 
postural instability leading to falls. It is critical, therefore, to develop a 
broader and more fundamental therapeutic approach to PD, and major research 
efforts have focused upon developing neuroprotective interventions. Despite many 
encouraging preclinical data suggesting the possibility of addressing the 
underlying pathophysiology by slowing cell loss, efforts to translate this into 
the clinical realm have largely proved disappointing in the past. Barriers to 
finding neuroprotective or disease-modifying drugs in PD include a lack of 
validated biomarkers of progression, which hampers clinical trial design and 
interpretation; difficulties separating symptomatic and neuroprotective effects 
of candidate neuroprotective therapies; and possibly fundamental flaws in some 
of the basic preclinical models and testing. However, three recent clinical 
trials have used a novel delayed-start design in an attempt to overcome some of 
these roadblocks. While not examining markers of cell loss and function, which 
would determine neuroprotective effects, this trial design pragmatically tests 
whether earlier versus later intervention is beneficial. If positive (i.e. if an 
earlier intervention proves more effective), this demonstrates disease 
modification, which could result from neuroprotection or from other mechanisms. 
This strategy therefore provides a first step towards supporting neuroprotection 
in PD. Of the three delayed-start design clinical trials, two have investigated 
early versus later start of rasagiline, a specific irreversible monoamine 
oxidase B inhibitor. Each trial has supported, although not proven, 
disease-modifying effects. A third delayed-start-design clinical trial examining 
potential disease-modifying effects of pramipexole has unfortunately reportedly 
been negative according to preliminary presentations. The suggestion that 
rasagiline is disease modifying is made all the more compelling by in vitro and 
PD animal-model studies in which rasagiline was shown to have neuroprotective 
effects. In this review, we examine efforts to demonstrate neuroprotection in PD 
to date, describe ongoing neuroprotection trials, and critically discuss the 
results of the most recent delayed-start clinical trials that test possible 
disease-modifying activities of rasagiline and pramipexole in PD.

DOI: 10.2165/11591320-000000000-00000
PMID: 21812497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2605. Trends Mol Med. 2011 Oct;17(10):548-55. doi: 10.1016/j.molmed.2011.06.009. Epub 
2011 Aug 2.

NeurimmiRs: microRNAs in the neuroimmune interface.

Soreq H(1), Wolf Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Life Sciences and Edmond and Lily Safra Center of Brain 
Sciences, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Edmond J. Safra Campus, Jerusalem 
91904, Israel. soreq@cc.huji.ac.il

Recent reports of microRNA (miR) modulators of both neuronal and immune 
processes (here termed NeurimmiRs) predict therapeutic potential for 
manipulating NeurimmiR levels in diseases affecting both the immune system and 
higher brain functions, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease 
(PD), multiple sclerosis (MS) and anxiety-related disorders. In our opinion, 
NeurimmiRs that function within both the nervous and the immune systems, such as 
miR-132 and miR-124, may act as 'negotiators' between these two interacting 
compartments. We suggest that NeurimmiRs primarily target transcriptional or 
other regulatory genes, which enables modulation of both immune and cognitive 
processes through direct or indirect alterations of neuron-glia and/or 
brain-to-body signaling. Thus, manipulating NeurimmiR control over the immune 
contributions to cognitive pathways may offer new therapeutic targets.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.molmed.2011.06.009
PMID: 21813326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2606. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Jan;45(1):145-55. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.07.016. Epub 2011 
Jul 28.

The methamphetamine-sensitive circadian oscillator is dysfunctional in a 
transgenic mouse model of Huntington's disease.

Cuesta M(1), Aungier J, Morton AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 1PD, UK.

A progressive disintegration of the rest-activity rhythm has been observed in 
the R6/2 mouse model of Huntington's disease (HD). Rest-activity rhythm is 
controlled by a circadian clock located in the suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) of 
the hypothalamus, although SCN-independent oscillators such as the 
methamphetamine (MAP)-sensitive circadian oscillator (MASCO) can also control 
rhythmicity, even in SCN-lesioned animals. We aimed to test whether or not the 
administration of MAP could restore a normal rest-activity rhythm in R6/2 mice, 
via the activation of the MASCO. We administered chronic low doses of MAP to 
wild-type (WT) and presymptomatic (7-8 weeks) R6/2 mice, in constant darkness. 
As expected, ~40% of the WT mice expressed a rest-activity rhythm controlled by 
the MASCO, with a period of around 32 h. By contrast, the MASCO was missing from 
almost 95% of the R6/2 mice, even at early stages of disease. Interestingly, 
although the MASCO was deficient, initially MAP was able to stabilize the 
day/night activity ratio in R6/2 mice and delay the onset of disintegration of 
the rest-activity rhythm driven by the SCN. Furthermore, in presymptomatic R6/2 
mice treated with L-DOPA, a MASCO-like component began to emerge, although this 
never became established. Our data show a major dysfunction of the MASCO in 
presymptomatic R6/2 mice that is likely to be due to an early abnormality of the 
catecholaminergic systems. We suggest that the dysfunction of the MASCO in 
humans could be partially responsible for circadian disturbances observed in HD 
patients, as well as patients with other neurological diseases in which both 
catecholaminergic and circadian abnormalities are present, such as Parkinson's 
disease and schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.07.016
PMID: 21820053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2607. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(1):18-25. doi: 10.1159/000330016. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

A review of transcranial magnetic stimulation in the in vivo functional 
evaluation of central cholinergic circuits in dementia.

Nardone R(1), Golaszewski S, Ladurner G, Tezzon F, Trinka E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Christian Doppler Clinic, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria. raffaele.nardone @ asbmeran-o.it

Central cholinergic circuits of human brain can be tested non-invasively by 
coupling electrical peripheral stimulation with transcranial magnetic 
stimulation (TMS) of the motor cortex. The short-latency afferent inhibition 
(SAI) is reduced in cholinergic forms of dementia, such as Alzheimer disease 
(AD) and dementia with Lewy bodies, while it is normal in non-cholinergic forms 
of dementia, such as frontotemporal dementia. This finding suggests that this 
method can be used as a non-invasive additional tool for discriminating between 
cholinergic and non-cholinergic forms of dementia. Interestingly, SAI was also 
found to be significantly smaller in early AD patients. Identification of SAI 
abnormalities that occur early in the course of AD will allow earlier diagnosis 
and treatment with cholinergic drugs. In patients with vascular dementia, SAI 
responses varied widely; the number of patients with abnormal SAI conceivably 
reflects the percentage of subjects with a significant cholinergic dysfunction. 
It has recently been demonstrated that brain microbleeds have an impact on SAI 
that is independent of the extent of associated white matter changes and 
ischemic stroke. Since SAI can be increased by acetylcholinesterase inhibitors, 
TMS may help in identifying the patients who would be suitable for long-term 
treatment with cholinergic agents.

2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000330016
PMID: 21822020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2608. Gen Hosp Psychiatry. 2012 Jan-Feb;34(1):101.e5-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2011.06.007. Epub 2011 Aug 9.

Recurrent escitalopram-induced hyponatremia in an elderly woman with dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Tsai PH(1), Chen HC, Liao SC, Tseng MC, Lee MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taiwan.

We report the development of hyponatremia following initiation of escitalopram 
therapy in a 73-year-old woman. The patient, with a history of dementia with 
Lewy bodies, had presented with multiple neuropsychiatric symptoms. Within 2 
months of escitalopram, she became delirious with a serum sodium level of 122 
mmol/L. After discontinuation of escitalopram, her consciousness improved with 
resolving hyponatremia. Delirium and hyponatremia (122 mmol/L), however, 
recurred after escitalopram was rechallenged. Apart from eight other cases to 
date, this is the only one with recurrent hyponatremia. Rechallenge of the same 
antidepressant is discouraged especially in patients at risk of developing 
hyponatremia.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.genhosppsych.2011.06.007
PMID: 21831444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2609. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 30;286(39):34088-100. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243907. Epub 
2011 Aug 8.

Interactions of pathological hallmark proteins: tubulin polymerization promoting 
protein/p25, beta-amyloid, and alpha-synuclein.

Oláh J(1), Vincze O, Virók D, Simon D, Bozsó Z, Tõkési N, Horváth I, Hlavanda E, 
Kovács J, Magyar A, Szũcs M, Orosz F, Penke B, Ovádi J.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Enzymology, Biological Research Center, Hungarian Academy of 
Sciences, H-1113 Budapest, Hungary.

The disordered tubulin polymerization promoting protein (TPPP/p25) was found to 
be co-enriched in neuronal and glial inclusions with α-synuclein in Parkinson 
disease and multiple system atrophy, respectively; however, co-occurrence of 
α-synuclein with β-amyloid (Aβ) in human brain inclusions has been recently 
reported, suggesting the existence of mixed type pathologies that could result 
in obstacles in the correct diagnosis and treatment. Here we identified TPPP/p25 
as an interacting partner of the soluble Aβ oligomers as major risk factors for 
Alzheimer disease using ProtoArray human protein microarray. The interactions of 
oligomeric Aβ with proteins involved in the etiology of neurological disorders 
were characterized by ELISA, surface plasmon resonance, pelleting experiments, 
and tubulin polymerization assay. We showed that the Aβ(42) tightly bound to 
TPPP/p25 (K(d) = 85 nm) and caused aberrant protein aggregation by inhibiting 
the physiologically relevant TPPP/p25-derived microtubule assembly. The 
pair-wise interactions of Aβ(42), α-synuclein, and tubulin were found to be 
relatively weak; however, these three components formed soluble ternary complex 
exclusively in the absence of TPPP/p25. The aggregation-facilitating activity of 
TPPP/p25 and its interaction with Aβ was monitored by electron microscopy with 
purified proteins by pelleting experiments with cell-free extracts as well as by 
confocal microscopy with CHO cells expressing TPPP/p25 or amyloid. The finding 
that the interaction of TPPP/p25 with Aβ can produce pathological-like 
aggregates is tightly coupled with unusual pathology of the Alzheimer disease 
revealed previously; that is, partial co-localization of Aβ and TPPP/p25 in the 
case of diffuse Lewy body disease with Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M111.243907
PMCID: PMC3190826
PMID: 21832049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2610. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(1):32-8. doi: 10.1159/000329862. Epub 2011 
Aug 10.

Subtypes of dementia: a study from a memory clinic in India.

Alladi S(1), Mekala S, Chadalawada SK, Jala S, Mridula R, Kaul S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nizam’s Institute of Medical Sciences, Punjagutta, 
Hyderabad 500082, India. alladisuvarna@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The clinical syndrome of dementia consists of several subtypes that 
are distinct in their etiology, clinical profile, management, and outcome. 
Limited specialized services are available for dementia patients in India. We 
report the profile of dementia subtypes from a clinic-based dementia registry in 
India.
METHODS: Consecutive dementia patients were investigated with clinical 
evaluation, neuropsychological tests modified for local use, and brain imaging.
RESULTS: In 347 consecutive dementia patients, Alzheimer's disease was the most 
common subtype of dementia (38.3%), followed by a high proportion of vascular 
dementia (25.4%). Frontotemporal dementia syndromes were not uncommon (18.7%). 
Dementia with Lewy bodies was encountered in 8.9% of the patients, and mixed 
dementia was found in 8.6%. The mean age of the group at presentation was 66.3 
years, nearly a decade younger than in developed countries. The proportion of 
patients with early-onset dementia was high (49.9%).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the clinical profiles of dementia 
subtypes in a clinic population are influenced by the population's demographic 
profile, cardiovascular risk factor burden, sociocultural attitudes about 
cognitive impairment, and possibly genetic factors.

2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000329862
PMID: 21832829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2611. Curr Aging Sci. 2012 Jul;5(2):136-9. doi: 10.2174/1874609811205020136.

Mini-mental Parkinson (MMP) as a dementia screening test: comparison with the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE).

Larner AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Function Clinic, Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
Fazakerley, Liverpool, UK. a.larner@thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk

BACKGROUND: As populations age, screening instruments for cognitive impairment 
and dementia will become of increasing importance in clinical practice. 
Mini-Mental Parkinson (MMP), a derivative of the Mini-Mental State Examination 
(MMSE), was originally described as a cognitive screening instrument for use in 
Parkinson's disease. Its item content addresses some of the acknowledged 
shortcomings of the MMSE. Pragmatic use of MMP in general cognitive clinics has 
not previously been examined.
AIM: To compare the performance of two scales, Mini-Mental Parkinson (MMP) and 
the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), as cognitive screening instruments for 
dementia in a memory clinic population.
METHODS: MMP was administered prospectively to 201 consecutive new patient 
referrals independent of other tests used to establish dementia diagnosis 
according to standard diagnostic criteria (DSM-IV). Diagnostic utility of MMP 
for dementia was measured and compared with MMSE.
RESULTS: MMP proved easy to use and acceptable to patients. Optimal test 
accuracy (0.86) was at MMP cutoff of ≤ 17/32, with sensitivity 0.51, specificity 
0.97, positive predictive value 0.83, negative predictive value 0.87, and area 
under Receiver Operating Characteristic curve 0.89. Using a higher cutoff (≤ 
29/32), MMP sensitivity was 1.00 with specificity 0.70. MMP scores correlated 
with MMSE (r = 0.93) and diagnostic agreement was high (κ = 0.85).
CONCLUSIONS: MMP is a useful screening instrument in the memory clinic setting, 
with patients who fall below the designated cutoff requiring further 
investigation to ascertain a cause for their cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.2174/1874609811205020136
PMID: 21834788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2612. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Mar;1822(3):325-32. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.07.014. Epub 2011 Jul 30.

Structural brain imaging in frontotemporal dementia.

Rohrer JD(1).

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Centre, Department of Neurodegenerative Disease, UCL 
Institute of Neurology, University College London, Queen Square, London, WC1N 
3BG, UK. rohrer@dementia.ion.ucl.ac.uk

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is the second commonest young-onset 
neurodegenerative dementia. The canonical clinical syndromes are a behavioural 
variant (bvFTD) and two language variants (progressive nonfluent aphasia, PNFA, 
and semantic dementia, SD) although there is overlap with motor neurone disease 
and the atypical parkinsonian disorders corticobasal syndrome (CBS) and 
progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSPS). Characteristic patterns of 
atrophy or hypometabolism are described in each of the variants but in reality 
imaging studies are rather heterogeneous. This review attempts to address four 
key questions in the neuroimaging of FTD: 1) what are the early imaging features 
of the different FTD syndromes (and how do these change as the disease 
progresses); 2) what do studies of presymptomatic genetic cases of FTD tell us 
about the very early stages of the disease; 3) can neuroimaging help to 
differentiate the different FTD syndromes; and 4) can neuroimaging help to 
differentiate FTD from other neurodegenerative diseases? This article is part of 
a Special Issue entitled: Imaging Brain Aging and Neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2011.07.014
PMID: 21839829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2613. Brain. 2011 Sep;134(Pt 9):2478-92. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr189. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

The clinical diagnosis of early-onset dementias: diagnostic accuracy and 
clinicopathological relationships.

Snowden JS(1), Thompson JC, Stopford CL, Richardson AM, Gerhard A, Neary D, Mann 
DM.

Author information:
(1)Cerebral Function Unit, Greater Manchester Neuroscience centre, Salford Royal 
NHS Foundation Trust, Salford M6 8HD, UK. julie.snowden@manchester.ac.uk

Comment in
    Brain. 2011 Sep;134(Pt 9):2450-3.

Accuracy of clinical diagnosis of dementia is increasingly important for 
therapeutic and scientific investigations. In this study, we examine diagnostic 
accuracy in a consecutive series of 228 patients referred to a specialist 
early-onset dementia clinic, whose brains were subsequently examined at 
post-mortem. Diagnosis was based on structured history, neurological examination 
and neuropsychological assessment, with emphasis on qualitative as well as 
quantitative aspects of performance. Neuroimaging provided support for but did 
not alter the clinical diagnosis. We set out the principles that guided 
diagnosis: (i) time course of illness; (ii) weighting of physical, behavioural 
and cognitive symptoms and signs; (iii) 'anterior' versus 'posterior' hemisphere 
character of cognitive change; and (iv) specificity of deficit, paying attention 
to the differentiation between syndromes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
and focal forms of Alzheimer's disease. Forty-two per cent of the patients had 
clinical diagnoses of one of the syndromes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration, 
the high proportion reflecting the research interests of the group. Forty-six 
per cent were diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease and the remaining patients, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, vascular or unclassified 
dementia. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration was identified with 100% sensitivity 
and 97% specificity and Alzheimer's disease with 97% sensitivity and 100% 
specificity. Patients with other pathologies were accurately identified on 
clinical grounds. Examination of subsyndromes of frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration showed a relatively predictable relationship between clinical 
diagnosis and pathological subtype. Whereas the behavioural disorder of 
frontotemporal dementia was associated with tau, transactive response DNA 
binding protein 43 and fused-in-sarcoma pathology, cases of frontotemporal 
dementia with motoneuron disease, semantic dementia and, with one exception, 
progressive non-fluent aphasia were associated with transactive response DNA 
binding protein 43 pathology, distinguished by ubiquitin subtyping (types B, C 
and A, respectively). Clinical diagnoses of progressive apraxia, corticobasal 
degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy were, with one exception, 
associated with Pick, corticobasal and progressive supranuclear palsy subtypes 
of tau pathology, respectively. Unanticipated findings included Alzheimer 
pathology in two patients presenting with the behavioural syndrome of 
frontotemporal dementia and corticobasal pathology in four others with clinical 
frontotemporal dementia. Notwithstanding such anomalies, which serve as a 
reminder that there is not an absolute concordance between clinical phenotype 
and underlying pathology, the findings show that dementias can be distinguished 
in life with a high level of accuracy. Moreover, careful clinical phenotyping 
allows prediction of histopathological subtype of frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration. The principles guiding diagnosis provide the foundation for future 
prospective studies.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr189
PMID: 21840888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2614. Neurology. 2011 Aug 30;77(9):858-65. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31822c6224. Epub 
2011 Aug 17.

Network correlates of the cognitive response to levodopa in Parkinson disease.

Mattis PJ(1), Tang CC, Ma Y, Dhawan V, Eidelberg D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurosciences, The Feinstein Institute for Medical Research, 
Manhasset, NY 11030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Cognitive dysfunction is common in Parkinson disease (PD), even early 
in its clinical course. This disease manifestation has been associated with 
impaired verbal learning performance as well as abnormal expression of a 
specific PD-related cognitive spatial covariance pattern (PDCP). It is not 
known, however, how this metabolic network relates to the cognitive response to 
dopaminergic therapy on the individual patient level.
METHODS: We assessed treatment-mediated changes in verbal learning and PDCP 
expression in 17 patients with PD without dementia who underwent cognitive 
testing and metabolic imaging in the unmedicated and levodopa-treated 
conditions. We also determined whether analogous changes were present in 12 
other patients with PD without dementia who were evaluated before and during the 
treatment of cognitive symptoms with placebo.
RESULTS: Levodopa-mediated changes in verbal learning correlated with concurrent 
changes in PDCP expression (r = -0.60, p < 0.01). The subset of patients with 
meaningful cognitive improvement on levodopa (n = 8) exhibited concurrent 
reductions in PDCP expression (p < 0.01) with treatment; network modulation was 
not evident in the remaining subjects. Notably, the levodopa cognitive response 
correlated with baseline PDCP levels (r = 0.70, p = 0.002). By contrast, placebo 
did not affect PDCP expression, even in the subjects (n = 7) with improved 
verbal learning during treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings suggest that cognitive dysfunction in PD may respond 
to treatment depending upon the degree of baseline PDCP expression. 
Quantification of treatment-mediated network changes can provide objective 
information concerning the efficacy of new agents directed at the cognitive 
manifestations of this disease.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31822c6224
PMCID: PMC3162641
PMID: 21849641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2615. Med Glas (Zenica). 2011 Aug;8(2):209-15.

Cognitive dysfunction in idiopathic and vascular parkinsonism.

Stenc Bradvica I(1), Janculjak D, Butkovic-Soldo S, Vladetic M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Clinical Center in Osijek, Osijek, 
Croatia. stenc-bradvica.ivanka@kbo.hr

AIM: To evaluate the characteristics of cognitive disturbances in patients with 
parkinsonism and to point out the need of following up those changes by highly 
specific tests.
METHODS: The first group consisted of patients with Parkinson's disease, and the 
second group of patients with vascular parkinsonism. The neuropsychological 
assessments were performed with mini mental state examination (MMSE) and the 
Raven progressive matrices.
RESULTS: The MMSE has shown a higher percentage of patients with vascular 
parkinsonism who had dementia. For evaluating the nonverbal possibilities, the 
aim of understanding the complex situation and the visual perception, the 
Raven's progressive matrices were used showing that in both groups of the 
patients those specific changes were highly present.
CONCLUSIONS: It was concluded that MMSE and Raven's progressive matrices have to 
be obtained in early phases of the disease, and have to be repeated to follow up 
the therapy effect.

PMID: 21849941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2616. J Alzheimers Dis. 2011;27(3):615-25. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110617.

CRMP2 hyperphosphorylation is characteristic of Alzheimer's disease and not a 
feature common to other neurodegenerative diseases.

Williamson R(1), van Aalten L, Mann DM, Platt B, Plattner F, Bedford L, Mayer J, 
Howlett D, Usardi A, Sutherland C, Cole AR.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Institute, University of Dundee, Ninewells Hospital, 
Dundee, Scotland, UK.

Collapsin response mediator protein 2 (CRMP2) is an abundant brain-enriched 
protein that regulates neurite outgrowth. It is phosphorylated by Cdk5 and GSK3, 
and these modifications are abnormally high in the brains of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) patients. Increased phosphorylation of CRMP2 is also apparent in mouse 
models of AD that express mutated AβPP and PSEN1, but not AβPP or tau alone, 
where it is detectable before the appearance of amyloid plaques and 
neurofibrillary tangles, suggesting it is an early event in AD pathogenesis. 
Here, we have extended these observations by showing that CRMP2 is not 
hyperphosphorylated in mice overexpressing mutated PSEN1 alone, or in cultured 
neurons treated with soluble, oligomeric Aβ42 peptide. Similarly, CRMP2 
phosphorylation was not increased in a mouse model of severe neurodegeneration 
(PMSC-1 knockout) or in cultured neurons subjected to neurotoxic concentrations 
of NMDA or staurosporine. Most interestingly, CRMP2 phosphorylation was not 
increased in frontal cortex from patients with frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
associated with mutations in MAPT or with Pick bodies. Together, these 
observations are consistent with the hypothesis that abnormal phosphorylation of 
CRMP2 is specific to AD and occurs downstream of excessive processing of AβPP, 
but that neither excessive Aβ42 peptide nor neurotoxicity alone are sufficient 
to promote hyperphosphorylation.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110617
PMID: 21860090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2617. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Nov 1;256(3):418-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2011.08.009. Epub 2011 Aug 12.

Role of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) in organophosphate metabolism: implications in 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Androutsopoulos VP(1), Kanavouras K, Tsatsakis AM.

Author information:
(1)Center of Toxicology Science and Research, University of Crete, Heraklion, 
Crete, Greece.

Organophosphate pesticides are a class of compounds that are widely used in 
agricultural and rural areas. Paraoxonase 1 (PON1) is a phase-I enzyme that is 
involved in the hydrolysis of organophosphate esters. Environmental poisoning by 
organophosphate compounds has been the main driving force of previous research 
on PON1 enzymes. Recent discoveries in animal models have revealed the important 
role of the enzyme in lipid metabolism. However although PON1 function is well 
established in experimental models, the contribution of PON1 in 
neurodegenerative diseases remains unclear. In this minireview we summarize the 
involvement of PON1 genotypes in the occurrence of Parkinson's disease, 
Alzheimer's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. A brief overview of 
latest epidemiological studies, regarding the two most important PON1 coding 
region polymorphisms PON1-L55M and PON1-Q192R is presented. Positive and 
negative associations of PON1 with disease occurrence are reported. Notably the 
MM and RR alleles contribute a risk enhancing effect for the development of some 
neurodegenerative diseases, which may be explained by the reduced lipoprotein 
free radical scavenging activity that may give rise to neuronal damage, through 
distinct mechanism. Conflicting findings that fail to support this postulate may 
represent the human population ethnic heterogeneity, different sample size and 
environmental parameters affecting PON1 status. We conclude that further 
epidemiological studies are required in order to address the exact contribution 
of PON1 genome in combination with organophosphate exposure in populations with 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2011.08.009
PMID: 21864557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2618. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Nov 15;310(1-2):70-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.07.054. Epub 
2011 Aug 23.

Brain structural MRI correlates of cognitive dysfunctions in Parkinson's 
disease.

Ibarretxe-Bilbao N(1), Junque C, Marti MJ, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación en Red de Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas (CIBERNED), 
Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Spain. naroa.ibarretxe@deusto.es

Cognitive dysfunction occurs at early stages of Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Initial studies reported that cognitive dysfunction in early PD only affected 
fronto-striatal circuits, provoking a marked executive dysfunction. Memory 
impairment in PD was thought to depend on a problem in retrieving stored 
information, therefore also reflecting a fronto-striatal dysfunction. However, 
there is increasing structural MRI evidence of medial temporal lobe atrophy in 
PD, which may be responsible for memory dysfunction. Other neuropsychological 
functions usually impaired in PD are semantic fluency, visuoperceptual and 
visuospatial functions, decision-making and recognition of facial emotions; and 
impairments in these functions are associated with cortical structural changes 
assessed by MRI. Overall, although the literature on the topic is scarce, there 
is increasing evidence of brain structural changes, detectable by MRI, which can 
explain the neuropsychological deficits early in the clinical disease course 
before dementia develops. In this review, we summarize the papers that have used 
structural MRI to study the neuroanatomical correlates of cognitive dysfunctions 
in PD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.07.054
PMID: 21864849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2619. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 May;1820(5):553-64. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbagen.2011.08.008. Epub 2011 Aug 16.

A mitochondrial etiology of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease.

Coskun P(1), Wyrembak J, Schriner SE, Chen HW, Marciniack C, Laferla F, Wallace 
DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Hewitt Hall, Irvine, CA 92697-3940, USA.

BACKGROUND: The genetics and pathophysiology of Alzheimer Disease (AD) and 
Parkinson Disease (PD) appears complex. However, mitochondrial dysfunction is a 
common observation in these and other neurodegenerative diseases.
SCOPE OF REVIEW: We argue that the available data on AD and PD can be 
incorporated into a single integrated paradigm based on mitochondrial genetics 
and pathophysiology.
MAJOR CONCLUSIONS: Rare chromosomal cases of AD and PD can be interpreted as 
affecting mitochondrial function, quality control, and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) 
integrity. mtDNA lineages, haplogroups, such haplogroup H5a which harbors the 
mtDNA tRNA(Gln) A8336G variant, are important risk factors for AD and PD. 
Somatic mtDNA mutations are elevated in AD, PD, and Down Syndrome and Dementia 
(DSAD) both in brains and also systemically. AD, DS, and DSAD brains also have 
reduced mtDNA ND6 mRNA levels, altered mtDNA copy number, and perturbed Aβ 
metabolism. Classical AD genetic changes incorporated into the 3XTg-AD (APP, 
Tau, PS1) mouse result in reduced forebrain size, life-long reduced 
mitochondrial respiration in 3XTg-AD males, and initially elevated respiration 
and complex I and IV activities in 3XTg-AD females which markedly declines with 
age.
GENERAL SIGNIFICANCE: Therefore, mitochondrial dysfunction provides a unifying 
genetic and pathophysiology explanation for AD, PD, and other neurodegenerative 
diseases. This article is part of a Special Issue entitled Biochemistry of 
Mitochondria.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbagen.2011.08.008
PMCID: PMC3270155
PMID: 21871538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2620. Neuroreport. 2011 Oct 26;22(15):753-7. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32834acb6e.

Choice-option evaluation is preserved in early Huntington and Parkinson's 
disease.

Minati L(1), Piacentini S, Ferrè F, Nanetti L, Romito L, Mariotti C, Grisoli M, 
Medford N, Critchley HD, Albanese A.

Author information:
(1)Scientific Department, Fondazione IRCCS Istituto Neurologico 'Carlo Besta', 
Milano, Italy. lminati@ieee.org

The ability to choose effectively when faced with potential risks and rewards is 
fundamental for adaptive survival. The striatum has a well-established role 
supporting learning from the outcomes of decisions, but it remains unclear 
whether this structure is also necessary for computing expected value (i.e., 
advantageousness of potential decisions) when all information is explicitly 
given. We addressed this question presenting simple monetary gambles, where all 
decisional parameters were given and outcome feedback was absent, to patients 
with early Huntington's and Parkinson's disease, taken as complementary models 
of striatal dysfunction. Behavioural responses and associated times were found 
to be unaltered. This negative finding suggests that striatal activity may not 
be essential for decision-making in situations where all information is provided 
and learning from outcomes is unnecessary.

DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e32834acb6e
PMID: 21876465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2621. Acta Chir Iugosl. 2011;58(2):137-42. doi: 10.2298/aci1102137p.

Preoperative assessment and preparation of patients with neurologic disorders.

Palibrk I(1), Kalezić N, Vucetić C, Dimitrijević I, Arsenijević V, Stefanova E.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, University of Belgrade, Serbia.

Ageing of populataion world wide has significant contribution as one of the 
major risk factor for neurodegenerative disorders. The patients with 
neurodegenerative as well as other neuological diseases presented the population 
with possible great need either of small or big surgical intervention. There are 
several important issues in patients with neurological diseases: the nature, 
disease duration, therapy, the patient's ability to live without assistance. 
Neurological disease may become worst by general and regional anesthesia. 
Stopping therapy may lead to worsening of neurological diseases. One of the main 
common threat is the risk of significant cardiorespiratory complications, which 
is important in assessing operational risk, in preoperative preparation and in 
terms of postoperative recovery and outcomes of surgical treatment. This has 
resulted in greater preoperative care by detailed patient history evaluation and 
examination, patient information and informed consent. Besides the effect of the 
anaesthetic technique upon the course of the disease, there is also the 
interaction of drugs administered during anaesthesia and patient medication. 
Several undiagnosed diseases may be disclosed following a surgical/anaesthetic 
intervention.

DOI: 10.2298/aci1102137p
PMID: 21879663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2622. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2011 Sep;17(5):822-31. doi: 10.1017/S135561771100083X.

The influence of depression on processing speed and executive function in 
nondemented subjects aged 75.

Jungwirth S(1), Zehetmayer S, Hinterberger M, Kudrnovsky-Moser S, Weissgram S, 
Tragl KH, Fischer P.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Aging Research, Vienna, Austria. 
susanne.jungwirth@wienkav.at

Neuropsychological deficits are commonly found to be part of depression in old 
age and might simultaneously represent early symptoms of dementia. We 
investigated the influence of depression on processing speed and executive 
function in subjects who did not develop dementia during the following 5 years 
to examine whether these neuropsychological dysfunctions are due to depression 
or are influenced by other causes (e.g., education, cerebral comorbidity). A 
total of 287 subjects aged 75 (mean: 75.76) were available for analyses. 
Processing speed was measured by the Trail Making Test-A, Executive Function by 
the Trail Making Test-B and Verbal Fluency. DSM-IV-criteria were used for 
diagnosing depression. Cerebral comorbidity (e.g., stroke, Parkinson's disease), 
sex, education, antidepressant, and/or benzodiazepine medication, and a history 
of depression were taken into account as covariates. Univariate analyses and 
multiple regression analyses were calculated. Higher education was strongly 
related to better performance in all three psychometric tests. Cerebral 
comorbidity significantly slowed TMT-A performance and reduced Verbal Fluency 
scores. In multiple regression analysis depression showed only a minor, slowing 
influence on TMT-A and TMT-B performance. Depression only had a minor influence 
on processing speed and executive function in this sample of nondemented 
subjects. By comparison, the influence of education and cerebral comorbidity was 
seen to be stronger.

DOI: 10.1017/S135561771100083X
PMID: 21880169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2623. J Neurol Sci. 2011 Nov 15;310(1-2):86-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.07.047. Epub 
2011 Aug 31.

Initial neuropsychological impairments in patients with the E46K mutation of the 
α-synuclein gene (PARK 1).

Somme JH(1), Gomez-Esteban JC, Molano A, Tijero B, Lezcano E, Zarranz JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital de Cruces, Baracaldo, Vizcaya, Spain. 
johanne_somme@hotmail.com

INTRODUCTION: In 2004 we described the mutation E46K of the α-Synuclein (SNCA). 
These patients show Parkinson's disease with early cognitive impairment, sleep 
disorders and autonomic dysfunction.
OBJECTIVE: The main objective is to identify early neuropsychological 
impairments in patients with the E46K mutation.
METHODS: This is a longitudinal neuropsychological study of 4 of the 5 surviving 
patients with E46K mutation by semi-structured interviews and the following 
scales: Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (MDRS), semantic and phonemic verbal 
fluency tests (VFT), Benton Visual Retention Test (BVRT), Stroop Test (STROOP), 
Clock drawing test (CLOCK), WAIS III Letter and Number sequencing (WAIS III LN), 
Rey Auditory Verbal Learning Test (RAVLT) and Benton Judgement of Line 
Orientation Test (BJLOT). Motor status was assessed by UPDRS III.
RESULTS: Motor status: Patients 1, 2 and 3 present mild to moderate Parkinson 
disease of 7, 8 and 3years of evolution respectively, patient 4 is asymptomatic. 
Cognitive status: Patient 2 and 3 both refer cognitive decline while patient 1 
presents no cognitive complaints, however they all show a progressive cognitive 
decline across various tasks. Tests of frontal function showed the first 
alterations in all patients but fluctuate. The first cognitive complaints 
coincide with deterioration of tasks of posterior cortical basis. Patient 4 
presents a normal performance on all tests. Patient 1, 2 and 3 have all 
presented visual hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: A fluctuating frontal impairment is observed at early stages. 
Prominent visuospatial alterations and visual hallucinations suggest that 
posterior cortical dysfunction might be a distinct early feature of the 
cognitive impairment observed in patients with this mutation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.07.047
PMID: 21880335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2624. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2012 Mar;119(3):353-62. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-011-0708-4. Epub 2011 Sep 4.

Tau protein and beta-amyloid(1-42) CSF levels in different phenotypes of 
Parkinson's disease.

Přikrylová Vranová H(1), Mareš J, Hluštík P, Nevrlý M, Stejskal D, Zapletalová 
J, Obereigneru R, Kaňovský P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine and Dentistry, Palacky 
University in Olomouc, University Hospital Olomouc, I.P. Pavlova 6, 775 20 
Olomouc, Czech Republic. vranovaha@seznam.cz

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder with highly 
heterogeneous clinical manifestations. This fact has prompted many attempts to 
divide PD patients into clinical subgroups. This could lead to a better 
recognition of pathogenesis, improving targeted treatment and the prognosis of 
PD patients. The aim of the present study was to obtain cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) samples in PD patients and to search for a relationship between 
neurodegenerative CSF markers (tau protein, beta-amyloid(1-42) and index tau 
protein/beta-amyloid(1-42)) and the clinical subtypes. PD patients were divided 
into three subgroups: early disease onset (EDO), tremor-dominant PD (TD-PD), and 
non-tremor dominant PD (NT-PD) according to the previously published 
classification. Neurodegenerative markers in the CSF were assessed in these 
three groups of patients suffering from PD (EDO-17, TD-15, NT-16 patients) and 
in a control group (CG) of 19 patients suffering from non-degenerative 
neurological diseases and 18 patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The NT-PD 
patients were found to have significantly higher levels of CSF tau protein and 
index tau/beta than the control subjects and other Parkinsonian subgroups, but 
no significant differences in these markers were found between AD and NT-PD 
patients. In the context of more rapid clinical progression and more pronounced 
neuropathological changes in the NT-PD patient group, our results corroborate 
the opinion that CSF level of tau protein may be regarded as a potential 
laboratory marker of the presence and severity of neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-011-0708-4
PMID: 21892760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2625. Mov Disord. 2011 Dec;26(14):2496-503. doi: 10.1002/mds.23932. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

The interplay of cholinergic function, attention, and falls in Parkinson's 
disease.

Yarnall A(1), Rochester L, Burn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom.

Dopamine loss in the substantia nigra causes several of the motor signs seen in 
Parkinson's disease, but there is now increasing evidence highlighting the 
importance of cholinergic loss in the pathophysiology of nonmotor symptoms. The 
nucleus basalis of Meynert supplies the majority of the cholinergic input to the 
cerebral cortex, with the pedunculopontine nucleus providing many subcortical 
structures with acetylcholine. Both these structures undergo degeneration in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), with more severe loss associated with cognitive 
impairment. The risk of dementia in PD is greater than that in control subjects, 
with impairments in attention, visuospatial function, and executive control 
dominating. Imaging studies have demonstrated degeneration of the cholinergic 
system in PD, Parkinson's disease dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies, with 
improvements in attention seen following the introduction of cholinesterase 
inhibitors. Conversely, anticholinergic drugs are associated with cognitive 
decline, with neuropathology studies indicating the presence of increased 
neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaque formation. In addition, these drugs 
are also known to precipitate visual hallucinations, lending support to a 
cholinergic basis for visual hallucinations in PD. Gait, falls, and cognition 
may also be related, as evidenced by the findings that fallers perform less well 
on test of attention than nonfallers and that greater postural instability is 
associated with worse scores on attention and executive function. It is 
therefore feasible that cognition (namely, attention), visual hallucinations, 
falls, and gait are subserved by acetylcholine, and this is further explored in 
this clinically orientated review.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23932
PMID: 21898597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2626. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17(31):3434-45. doi: 10.2174/138161211798072472.

Gene therapy for Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases: from the bench to 
clinical trials.

Nobre RJ(1), Almeida LP.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Portugal.

Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases represent the most prevalent 
neurodegenerative disorders worldwide. Current pharmacological or surgical 
treatments provide symptomatic benefits, particularly in the early stages, but 
none can delay or stop the progression of these diseases. There is an urgent 
need for new therapies able to modify disease progression. Gene therapy, mainly 
based on viral vectors, is presently being assumed as an important alternative 
to conventional treatments. After decades of preclinical developments, we are 
now facing an important period, in which several viral vector-mediated gene 
therapies are being tested in Phase 1 and Phase 2 clinical trials, with some of 
them showing promising results. This review intends to present an overview of 
the current efforts in the field for the treatment of Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/138161211798072472
PMID: 21902665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2627. Curr Pharm Des. 2011;17(31):3418-33. doi: 10.2174/138161211798072526.

Role of sirtuins and calorie restriction in neuroprotection: implications in 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

Srivastava S(1), Haigis MC.

Author information:
(1)The Paul F. Glenn Labs for the Biological Mechanisms of Aging, Department of 
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Aging is the major known risk factor for the onset of neurodegenerative diseases 
such as Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Mitochondria play 
a central role in aging as mitochondrial dysfunction increases with age and 
produces harmful levels of reactive oxygen species which leads to cellular 
oxidative stress (free-radical theory of aging). Oxidative stress is highly 
damaging to cellular macromolecules and is also a major cause of the loss and 
impairment of neurons in neurodegenerative disorders. A growing body of evidence 
suggests that modulation of sirtuin activity and restricting calorie intake has 
a strong neuroprotective effect. SIRT1 induction by the use of pharmacological 
activators or by calorie restriction (CR) diet regimen has been shown to protect 
against neuronal loss and impairment in the cellular and animal models of AD and 
PD. Here, we review the current knowledge and recent data related to the role of 
sirtuins and CR in neurodegeneration and discuss the potential underlying 
signaling pathways of neuroprotection that might serve as attractive targets for 
the future therapeutic intervention of these age-related neurodegenerative 
diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/138161211798072526
PMID: 21902666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2628. Postgrad Med. 2011 Sep;123(5):116-21. doi: 10.3810/pgm.2011.09.2466.

Exploring the correlates of intermediate CAG repeats in Huntington disease.

Ha AD(1), Jankovic J.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of 
Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the clinical phenotype in individuals with huntingtin gene 
CAG repeat lengths between 27 and 35, a range that is termed "intermediate" and 
below one traditionally considered diagnostic of Huntington disease (HD).
BACKGROUND: The Prospective Huntington Disease At-Risk Observational Study 
(PHAROS) found that patients with intermediate CAG lengths overlapped with those 
diagnosed as HD (≥ 37 CAG repeats) on the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating 
Scale (UHDRS) behavioral measures. Furthermore, several patients with 
intermediate CAG repeats demonstrating clinical (and pathological) evidence of 
HD have been reported.
METHODS: We reviewed all cases with intermediate CAG repeats who have presented 
to our clinic, as well as those reported in the literature.
RESULTS: We describe 4 patients with intermediate repeats evaluated at our 
center whose clinical features were highly suggestive of HD. Investigations for 
HD phenocopies were negative. Anticipation was demonstrated in 1 case with 
supportive neuropathological evidence of HD. Additionally, we describe the 
clinical features of 5 other patients reported in the literature.
CONCLUSION: Individuals with huntingtin gene CAG repeats in the intermediate 
(27-35) range should be considered at risk for the development of HD, 
particularly if they have a family history of HD, whether they exhibit clinical 
features of the disease.

DOI: 10.3810/pgm.2011.09.2466
PMID: 21904093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2629. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2011 Oct;26(10):991-9. doi: 10.1002/gps.2640. Epub 
2010 Dec 28.

PET imaging of brain amyloid in dementia: a review.

Quigley H(1), Colloby SJ, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To review the rapidly expanding literature of amyloid PET imaging 
with particular attention to Pittsburgh compound-B (PIB) in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), fronto-temporal dementia (FTD), mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) and cognitively normal volunteers.
DESIGN: Literature searches were performed using Medline up to February 2010. 
Individual articles were then examined for additional references not revealed by 
automated searches. This yielded 79 articles whose abstracts were read by the 
authors to select key papers.
RESULTS: Amyloid deposition assessed using PIB-PET is significantly elevated in 
AD and DLB compared to controls and those with FTD. In MCI, uptake is often 
intermediate between AD and normal ageing, and excessive amyloid burden in 
non-demented individuals with MCI are likely to represent high-risk cases. 
Amyloid deposition appears to be an early event, and as dementia progresses 
clinical decline seems to be more associated with neurodegeneration than amyloid 
burden.
CONCLUSIONS: PIB-PET imaging is a sensitive and specific marker for underlying 
Aβ amyloid deposition and represents an important investigative tool for 
examining the relationship between amyloid burden, clinical symptoms and 
structural and functional changes in dementia. Amyloid imaging may also be 
useful for selecting patients for anti-amyloid therapies. However, studies have 
identified PIB-positive cases in otherwise healthy older individuals (10-30%), 
limiting diagnostic specificity. Development of biomarkers for investigating 
other aspects of dementia pathology, i.e. soluble Aβ, tau, synuclein and brain 
inflammation would further inform our understanding and assist in studying 
disease-modifying and preventive treatments in dementia.

Copyright © 2010 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.2640
PMID: 21905095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2630. PLoS One. 2011;6(8):e24211. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024211. Epub 2011 Aug 30.

An exploratory study on CLU, CR1 and PICALM and Parkinson disease.

Gao J(1), Huang X, Park Y, Hollenbeck A, Chen H.

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Branch of the National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Recent GWAS and subsequent confirmation studies reported several 
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at the CLU, CR1 and PICALM loci in 
association with late-onset Alzheimer's disease (AD). Parkinson disease (PD) 
shares several clinical and pathologic characteristics with AD; we therefore 
explored whether these SNPs were also associated with PD risk.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: 791 non-Hispanic Whites cases and 1,580 matched 
controls were included in the study. Odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CI) were obtained from logistic regression models. rs11136000 at the 
CLU locus was associated with PD risk under the recessive model (comparing TT 
versus CC+CT: OR = 0.71, 95% CI: 0.55-0.92, p = 0.008) after adjusting for year 
of birth, gender, smoking, and caffeine intake. Further adjustment for family 
history of PD and ApoE ε4 status did not change the result. In addition, we did 
not find evidence for effect modification by ApoE or known PD risk factors. The 
association, however, appeared to be stronger for PD with dementia (OR = 0.49, 
95% CI: 0.27-0.91) than for PD without dementia (OR = 0.81, 95% CI: 0.61-1.06). 
The two other SNPs, rs6656401 from CR1, and rs3851179 from PICALM region were 
not associated with PD (p>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Our exploratory analysis suggests an association of CLU with PD. 
This exploratory finding and the role of dementia in explaining this finding 
needs further investigation.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0024211
PMCID: PMC3166161
PMID: 21912625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


2631. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Jun 21;91(23):1617-20.

[Clinical features and treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies].

[Article in Chinese]

Li L(1), Wang JT, Zhang ZX, Cui RX, Yuan J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing 
100730, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging 
features and treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: The clinical, neuropsychological, neuroimaging and therapeutic features 
of 33 DLB patients were retrospectively analyzed.
RESULTS: There were 25 males and 8 females. The mean course from onset to 
diagnosis was 3.3 years. Sleep disorder, depression, anxiety and constipation 
were present at 1 - 10 years prior to DLB onset in 10 patients. Memory 
impairment (52%) and parkinsonism (21%) were initial symptoms. The mean duration 
from memory impairment to presence of parkinsonism was 17 months. Pattern of 
extrapyramidal signs showed bilateral, symmetry and axial muscles bias as 
postural instability and facial impassivity, tremor was less in DLB. 
Hallucination (70%), sleep disorder (63%), apathy (56%) and delusion (52%) were 
the major behavioral and psychological symptoms. Hallucination occurred within a 
mean of 15 months after presence of initial symptoms. Cognition impairment 
progressed rapidly in half of patients. Neuropsychological tests of mild 
patients revealed visuospatial dysfunction and relatively preservation of 
memory. Severe impairment of all domains of cognition was noticed in 
moderate-severe patients. MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) revealed the 
preservation of hippocampal structures. And PET (positron emission tomography) 
showed hypometabolism of occipital lobe. Cholinesterase inhibitors could improve 
cognitive impairment and behavioral symptoms in a large majority of patients.
CONCLUSION: Neuronal dysfunction may be present at an early stage of DLB. Early 
presence of hallucination, a high prevalence of sleep disorders, axial rigidity 
and hypometabolism of occipital lobe on PET may help to distinguish DLB from 
other types of dementia.

PMID: 21914395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2632. Mov Disord. 2011 Dec;26(14):2522-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.23921. Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Mortality from Parkinson's disease: a population-based prospective study 
(NEDICES).

Posada IJ(1), Benito-León J, Louis ED, Trincado R, Villarejo A, Medrano MJ, 
Bermejo-Pareja F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2012 Jun;27(7):926; author reply 927.

Most studies of mortality in Parkinson's disease have been clinical studies, 
yielding results that are not representative of the general population. We 
assessed the risk of mortality from Parkinson's disease in the Neurological 
Disorders in Central Spain (NEDICES) study, a prospective population-based study 
in which Parkinson's disease patients who were not ascertained through medical 
practitioners were also included. The cohort consisted of 5262 elderly subjects 
(mean baseline age, 73.0 years), including 81 with Parkinson's disease at 
baseline (1994-1995). Thirteen-year mortality was assessed. Two thousand seven 
hundred and one of 5262 subjects (51.3%) died over a median follow-up of 12.0 
years (range, 0.04-14.8 years), including 66 of 81 subjects (81.5%) with 
Parkinson's disease at baseline and 2635 of 5181 subjects (50.8%) without 
Parkinson's disease at baseline. In an unadjusted Cox model, the hazard ratio of 
mortality was increased in subjects with Parkinson's disease (hazard ratio, 
2.29; 95% confidence interval, 1.80-2.93; P < .001) versus subjects without 
Parkinson's disease (reference group). In a Cox model that adjusted for a 
variety of demographic factors and comorbidities, the risk of mortality remained 
elevated in subjects with Parkinson's disease (hazard ratio, 1.75; 95% CI, 
1.32-2.31, P < .001). In additional Cox models, Parkinson's disease patients 
with dementia had particularly high risks of mortality (adjusted hazard ratio, 
2.62; 95% CI, 1.40-4.90; P < .001). In this prospective population-based study, 
Parkinson's disease was an independent predictor of mortality in the elderly. 
Parkinson's disease patients with dementia had particularly high risks of 
mortality.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23921
PMID: 21915906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2633. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012 Jul;27(7):709-15. doi: 10.1002/gps.2770. Epub 
2011 Aug 27.

The prevalence, incidence and risk factors for delirium in Dutch nursing homes 
and residential care homes.

Boorsma M(1), Joling KJ, Frijters DH, Ribbe ME, Nijpels G, van Hout HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of General Practice, EMGO-Institute, VU University Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate and compare the prevalence and incidence of delirium and 
its risk factors in residents of Dutch nursing homes and residential care homes.
METHODS: Data were extracted from the Long-Term Care Facility (inter RAI-LTCF) 
version of the Resident Assessment Instrument, which was filled in a routine 
care cohort for a total of 3627 residents. 828 residents of six nursing homes 
and 1365 residents of 23 residential homes were included in the analyses. 
Delirium was defined as a positive score on the adjusted Nursing Home-CAM.
RESULTS: The prevalence of delirium was 8.9% in the nursing homes and 8.2% in 
the residential homes. The incidence was highest in the nursing homes with 20.7 
versus 14.6 per 100 person-years. Multivariate tests of risk factors for 
developing delirium included chair restraints (OR 2.3; 95% CI 1.27-4.28), 
dementia (odds ratio (OR) 3.3; 95% confidence interval (CI) 2.03-5.24) and 
Parkinson's disease (OR 2.3; 95% CI 0.96-5.63) for residents in nursing homes, 
and dementia (OR 1.8; 95% CI 1.31-2.55) and fall incidents (OR 1.7; 95% CI 
1.20-2.48) for residents in residential care homes.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence and incidence of delirium was high in both nursing 
homes and residential care homes. More focus on modifiable risk factors such as 
the use of restraints in nursing homes and fall incidents in residential care 
homes may help to prevent delirium.

Copyright © 2011 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.2770
PMID: 21919058 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2634. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Jan;33(1):209.e1-2. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.07.011. Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Mutational analysis of the VCP gene in Parkinson's disease.

Majounie E(1), Traynor BJ, Chiò A, Restagno G, Mandrioli J, Benatar M, Taylor 
JP, Singleton AB.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute of Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA. Elisa.Majounie@nih.gov

Mutations in the valosin-containing protein gene (VCP) have been identified in 
neurological disorders (inclusion body myopathy--early Paget's disease of the 
bone--frontotemporal dementia and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis) and are thought 
to play a role in the clearance of abnormally folded proteins. Parkinsonism has 
been noted in kindreds with VCP mutations. Based on this, we hypothesized that 
mutations in VCP may also contribute to idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). We 
screened the coding region of the VCP gene in a large cohort of 768 late-onset 
PD cases (average age at onset, 70 years), both sporadic and with positive 
family history. We identified a number of rare single nucleotide changes, 
including a variant previously described to be pathogenic, but no clear 
disease-causing variants. We conclude that mutations in VCP are not a common 
cause for idiopathic PD.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.07.011
PMCID: PMC3221929
PMID: 21920633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2635. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2010 Nov;50(11):1018-21. doi: 
10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.1018.

[Clinicopathological features of sporadic frontotemporal lobar degeneration with 
TDP-43-positive inclusions].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokota O(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences.

Frontotemporal lobar degeneration with TDP-43-positive inclusions (FTLD-TDP) and 
Pick's disease are common pathological substrates in FTLD patients. Because most 
Japanese FTLD-TDP patients lack a family history, characterizing clinical 
features in sporadic FTLD-TDP is important to infer the underlying pathologies 
in FTLD patients. Our recent study suggested that these two diseases tended to 
show different clinical pictures. Early impairment of semantic memory was 
frequent in sporadic FTLD-TDP, but very rare in Pick's disease. In contrast, 
early impairment of speech output, including non-fluent aphasia and speech 
apraxia, was more frequent in Pick's disease. Asymmetric motor disturbances 
(e.g., pyramidal signs, parkinsonism, and contracture) were frequent in sporadic 
FTLD-TDP, but rare in Pick's disease. The most common first syndrome in FTLD-TDP 
was semantic dementia (39%), but that in Pick's disease was frontotemporal 
dementia (64%). Pathologically, consistent with clinical features, the temporal 
cortex, striatum, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, and pyramidal tract were 
more severely degenerated in sporadic FTLD-TDP. These findings suggest that the 
early impairment of semantic memory and asymmetric motor disturbances in 
sporadic FTLD patients predict FTLD-TDP rather than Pick's disease, while 
initial behavioral symptoms or non-fluent aphasia without subsequent asymmetric 
motor disturbances predict Pick's disease rather than FTLD-TDP.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.50.1018
PMID: 21921551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2636. OTJR (Thorofare N J). 2011;31(1):16-22. doi: 10.3928/15394492-20101108-04.

Everyday Executive Function Is Associated With Activity Participation in 
Parkinson Disease Without Dementia.

Foster ER(1), Hershey T.

Author information:
(1)Program in Occupational Therapy and Departments of Psychiatry and Neurology, 
Washington University in St. Louis School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

Individuals with Parkinson disease (PD) who do not have dementia reliably 
demonstrate mild executive deficits on laboratory-based tests, but the impact of 
these deficits on occupational performance is unclear. The purpose of this study 
was to determine the relevance of executive dysfunction in PD without dementia 
to instrumental, leisure, and social activity participation. Twenty-four 
individuals with PD and 30 matched adult volunteers performed an experimental 
working memory test and rated their everyday executive function and activity 
participation. Participants with PD had worse working memory performance, tended 
to report more everyday executive problems, and reported lower activity 
participation compared to controls. Within PD, lower everyday executive function 
was associated with reduced activity participation after controlling for motor 
dysfunction and depressive symptoms. Executive function is an independent 
predictor of complex activity participation in early PD. These results suggest 
the need for occupational therapists to consider executive dysfunction during 
evaluation and treatment of individuals with PD.

DOI: 10.3928/15394492-20101108-04
PMCID: PMC3171949
PMID: 21921994

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no financial or proprietary 
interest in the materials presented herein.


2637. Neuropsychology. 2011 Nov;25(6):734-40. doi: 10.1037/a0025475.

Metamemory and prospective memory in Parkinson's disease.

Smith SJ(1), Souchay C, Moulin CJ.

Author information:
(1)Bradford Dementia Group, School of Health Studies, University of Bradford, 
UK. s.smith15@bradford.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Metamemory is integral for strategizing about memory intentions. This 
study investigated the prospective memory (PM) deficit in Parkinson's disease 
(PD) from a metamemory viewpoint, with the aim of examining whether metamemory 
deficits might contribute to PM deficits in PD.
METHOD: Sixteen patients with PD and 16 healthy older adult controls completed a 
time-based PM task (initiating a key press at two specified times during an 
ongoing task), and an event-based PM task (initiating a key press in response to 
animal words during an ongoing task). To measure metamemory participants were 
asked to predict and postdict their memory performance before and after 
completing the tasks, as well as complete a self-report questionnaire regarding 
their everyday memory function.
RESULTS: The PD group had no impairment, relative to controls, on the 
event-based task, but had prospective (initiating the key press) and 
retrospective (recalling the instructions) impairments on the time-based task. 
The PD group also had metamemory impairments on the time-based task; they were 
inaccurate at predicting their performance before doing the task but, became 
accurate when making postdictions. This suggests impaired metamemory knowledge 
but preserved metamemory monitoring. There were no group differences regarding 
PD patients' self-reported PM performance on the questionnaire.
CONCLUSIONS: These results reinforce previous findings that PM impairments in PD 
are dependent on task type. Several accounts of PM failures in time-based tasks 
are presented, in particular, ways in which mnemonic and metacognitive deficits 
may contribute to the difficulties observed on the time-based task.

DOI: 10.1037/a0025475
PMID: 21928905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2638. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2011 Oct;70(10):879-89. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3182303745.

Synphilin-1-binding protein NUB1 is colocalized with nonfibrillar, proteinase 
K-resistant α-synuclein in presynapses in Lewy body disease.

Tanji K(1), Mori F, Kito K, Kakita A, Mimura J, Itoh K, Takahashi H, Kamitani T, 
Wakabayashi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Hirosaki University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Hirosaki, Japan. kunikazu@cc.hirosaki-u.ac.jp

α-Synuclein is a major component of Lewy bodies in Parkinson disease (PD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). We recently showed that abnormal α-synuclein 
with resistance to proteinase K (PK) is deposited at presynapses of distinct 
brain anatomic regions from the early stages of PD and DLB. NUB1, a 
synphilin-1-binding protein, also accumulates in Lewy bodies, but it is not 
known whether abnormal α-synuclein is associated with NUB1. Here, we demonstrate 
that, in the brain of patients with PD and DLB, NUB1 accumulates in the 
presynapses in the hippocampus, cerebral neocortex, and substantia nigra in 
which PK-resistant α-synuclein is deposited. Endogenous NUB1 also accumulated 
with PK-resistant α-synuclein in the presynapses of transgenic mice that express 
human α-synuclein with an A53T mutation. Immunoelectron microscopy showed that 
NUB1 is localized to presynaptic nerve terminals where no abnormal filaments are 
seen. Biochemical analyses showed that NUB1 coexists with abnormal α-synuclein 
in the brain of DLB patients. These findings suggest that NUB1 along with 
abnormal α-synuclein is involved in the pathogenesis of Lewy body disease.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3182303745
PMCID: PMC3181070
PMID: 21937912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2639. Neurology. 2011 Oct 4;77(14):1363-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318231530b. Epub 
2011 Sep 21.

Family history of neurodegenerative and vascular diseases in ALS: a 
population-based study.

Huisman MH(1), de Jong SW, Verwijs MC, Schelhaas HJ, van der Kooi AJ, de Visser 
M, Veldink JH, van den Berg LH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, the 
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the frequency of Parkinson disease (PD), 
dementia, and vascular diseases in relatives of patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) differs from the frequency of those diseases in 
relatives of controls, providing further information about the association 
between these diseases.
METHODS: We studied the occurrence of neurodegenerative and vascular diseases in 
families of patients with ALS in a prospective, population-based, case-control 
study in the Netherlands between 2006 and 2009, using the recurrence risk λ. 
Family history data were obtained by asking participants to fill in 
questionnaires.
RESULTS: A total of 635 patients and 1,616 controls were included. The frequency 
of dementia was mildly increased only among parents and siblings of patients 
with sporadic ALS (λ1.32; 95 confidence interval [CI] 1.10-1.59), not among 
grandparents, or aunts and uncles. The risk of PD was not elevated (any 
relative: λ 0.91; 95% CI 0.70-1.17). Among relatives of patients with familial 
ALS, no significantly increased risk of neurodegenerative diseases was found. A 
reduced risk of vascular diseases was found in relatives of patients with 
sporadic ALS (stroke: λ 0.90; 95% CI 0.80-1.01 and myocardial infarction: λ 
0.86; 95% CI 0.79-0.94), and in relatives of patients with familial ALS (stroke: 
λ 0.88; 95% CI 0.61-1.27 and myocardial infarction: λ 0.61; 95% CI 0.43-0.86).
CONCLUSIONS: This large, prospective, population-based study showed that 
familial aggregation of ALS, dementia, and PD is substantially lower than 
previously thought. The lowered risk of vascular diseases in relatives of 
patients with ALS supports the view that a beneficial vascular risk profile 
increases ALS susceptibility.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318231530b
PMID: 21940614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2640. Neurology. 2011 Oct 4;77(14):1357-62. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182315259. Epub 
2011 Sep 21.

Mild cognitive impairment in drug-naive patients with PD is associated with 
cerebral hypometabolism.

Pappatà S(1), Santangelo G, Aarsland D, Vicidomini C, Longo K, Bronnick K, 
Amboni M, Erro R, Vitale C, Caprio MG, Pellecchia MT, Brunetti A, De Michele G, 
Salvatore M, Barone P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biostructure and Bioimaging, CNR, Naples, Italy. 
sabina.pappata@cnr.it

OBJECTIVE: To characterize brain metabolic changes associated with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) in drug-naive patients with Parkinson disease (PD) 
using (18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and PET (FDG-PET).
METHODS: This cross-sectional study included newly diagnosed patients with PD 
with MCI in single or multiple domain (PD-MCI; n =12) and without MCI (PD-nMCI; 
n =12), and healthy controls (n =12). The groups were matched for age. Moreover, 
the patient groups were matched for motor disability. All subjects underwent a 
FDG-PET study. Cerebral regional relative metabolic maps were compared in 
PD-MCI, PD-nMCI, and controls using regions of interest analysis (ROIs) and 
voxel-based analysis with statistical parametric mapping.
RESULTS: ROIs and voxel-based analyses revealed significant relative 
hypometabolism in the prefrontal, superior/inferior parietal, and associative 
occipital cortices as well as in the striatum in patients with PD-MCI relative 
to controls (p < 0.05) and to a lesser extent in patients with PD-nMCI. In 
contrast, patients with PD-nMCI did not show significant metabolic changes as 
compared to controls.
CONCLUSION: MCI in patients with PD is associated with cortical hypometabolism 
since the earliest stage, independent of therapy or motor disability. The early 
involvement of posterior cortical region, a pattern shared by advanced stages of 
PD-MCI and PD with dementia, could represent an early marker of dementia. The 
relevance of this pattern in predicting prodromal dementia has to be evaluated 
in longitudinal studies.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182315259
PMID: 21940621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2641. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 2012 Apr-Jun;26(2):191-3. doi: 
10.1097/WAD.0b013e318231a896.

Prodromal dementia with lewy bodies manifesting as sertraline-induced 
parkinsonism: a case report.

Kim JH(1), Park J, Yu KH, Ma HI, Lee BC, Kim I, Kim YJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Keyo Medical Foundation, Keyo Geriatric Hospital, 
Anyang, Republic of Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To describe a patient with prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
manifesting as sertraline-induced parkinsonism.
DESIGN: Case report.
SETTING: Tertiary referral center.
PATIENT: A 75-year-old man who initially presented with anxiety and depression 
along with mild cognitive impairment, later developed drug-induced parkinsonism 
because of sertraline treatment, and eventually showed symptoms and signs of 
probable DLB.
INTERVENTIONS: Sertraline treatment for depression.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: : Clinical examination, magnetic resonance imaging, 
neuropsychologic test, and cardiac I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy.
RESULTS: His parkinsonian symptoms, which became apparent after sertraline 
therapy, improved markedly after the discontinuation of the drug. When he 
started taking sertraline, he had no dementia but had mild cognitive impairment. 
However, he eventually showed most of the symptoms and signs to indicate 
probable DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge, there has been no report of sertraline-induced or 
aggravated parkinsonian motor symptoms in DLB patients. Our patient had a short 
period with neither dementia nor parkinsonism during the early stage of his 
illness, and this period might have been regarded as the preclinical stage of 
DLB in the natural course of his illness.

DOI: 10.1097/WAD.0b013e318231a896
PMID: 21946016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2642. Psychogeriatrics. 2011 Sep;11(3):150-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00369.x.

Polypharmacy increases the risk of Parkinson's disease in older people in 
Taiwan: a population-based study.

Lai SW(1), Su LT, Lin CH, Tsai CH, Sung FC, Hsieh DP.

Author information:
(1)School of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Psychogeriatrics. 2012 Sep;12(3):214.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the relationship between polypharmacy and 
Parkinson's disease (PD). In the present study, we tested the hypothesis that 
polypharmacy increases the risk of PD in older people in Taiwan.
METHODS: From a randomly sampled cohort of one million health insurance 
enrollees, we identified 2827 new cases of PD over the period 2000-2008 aged ≥ 
65 years and selected 11 308 age-matched controls without PD. Medication history 
and baseline comorbidities were compared between the two groups. We defined 
'polypharmacy' as an average daily use of five or more prescribed drugs.
RESULTS: Compared with patients using between none and one drug, the odds ratios 
(ORs) for PD increased to 1.53, 2.08, 2.64, and 2.95 for patients using two to 
four, five to seven, eight to nine, and ≥ 10 drugs, respectively. The other 
conditions associated with PD were dementia (OR 3.43), stroke (OR 2.30), 
depression (OR 2.15), and alcoholism (OR 2.11). Hyperlipidemia (OR 0.90) was 
inversely associated with PD.
CONCLUSIONS: Polypharmacy was shown to increase the risk of PD in older people 
in Taiwan, with risk increasing with the number of medications taken daily. 
Dementia, stroke, depression, and alcoholism were also associated with an 
increased risk of PD, whereas there was an inverse correlation between PD and 
hyperlipidemia.

© 2011 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2011 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1479-8301.2011.00369.x
PMID: 21951955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2643. Mov Disord. 2011 Nov;26(13):2387-95. doi: 10.1002/mds.23891. Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Visual symptoms in Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's disease dementia.

Archibald NK(1), Clarke MP, Mosimann UP, Burn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Aging and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom. neilarchie@mac.com

Visual symptoms are common in PD and PD dementia and include difficulty reading, 
double vision, illusions, feelings of presence and passage, and complex visual 
hallucinations. Despite the established prognostic implications of complex 
visual hallucinations, the interaction between cognitive decline, visual 
impairment, and other visual symptoms remains poorly understood. Our aim was to 
characterize the spectrum of visual symptomatology in PD and examine clinical 
predictors for their occurrence. Sixty-four subjects with PD, 26 with PD 
dementia, and 32 age-matched controls were assessed for visual symptoms, 
cognitive impairment, and ocular pathology. Complex visual hallucinations were 
common in PD (17%) and PD dementia (89%). Dementia subjects reported illusions 
(65%) and presence (62%) more frequently than PD or control subjects, but the 
frequency of passage hallucinations in PD and PD dementia groups was equivalent 
(48% versus 69%, respectively; P = 0.102). Visual acuity and contrast 
sensitivity was impaired in parkinsonian subjects, with disease severity and age 
emerging as the key predictors. Regression analysis identified a variety of 
factors independently predictive of complex visual hallucinations (e.g., 
dementia, visual acuity, and depression), illusions (e.g., excessive daytime 
somnolence and disease severity), and presence (e.g., rapid eye movement sleep 
behavior disorder and excessive daytime somnolence). Our results demonstrate 
that different "hallucinatory" experiences in PD do not necessarily share common 
disease predictors and may, therefore, be driven by different pathophysiological 
mechanisms. If confirmed, such a finding will have important implications for 
future studies of visual symptoms and cognitive decline in PD and PD dementia.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23891
PMID: 21953737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2644. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Apr;33(4):833.e1-25. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.08.001. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Interaction between NH(2)-tau fragment and Aβ in Alzheimer's disease 
mitochondria contributes to the synaptic deterioration.

Amadoro G(1), Corsetti V, Atlante A, Florenzano F, Capsoni S, Bussani R, 
Mercanti D, Calissano P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Translational Pharmacology-CNR, Rome, Italy. 
g.amadoro@inmm.cnr.it

Although amyloid beta (Aβ) peptide can promote tau pathology and its toxicity is 
concurrently tau-dependent, the underlying mechanisms of the in vivo interplay 
of these proteins remain unsolved. Structural and functional mitochondrial 
alterations play an early, precipitating role in synaptic failure of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) pathogenesis and an aggravated mitochondrial impairment has been 
described in triple APP/PS/tau transgenic mice carrying both plaques and 
tangles, if compared with mice overexpressing tau or amyloid precursor protein 
(APP) alone. Here, we show that a neurotoxic aminoterminal (NH(2))-derived tau 
fragment mapping between 26 and 230 amino acids of the human tau40 isoform (441 
amino acids)-but not the physiological full-length protein-preferentially 
interacts with Aβ peptide(s) in human AD synapses in association with 
mitochondrial adenine nucleotide translocator-1 (ANT-1) and cyclophilin D. The 
two peptides-Aβ 1-42 and the smaller and more potent NH(2)-26-44 peptide of the 
longest 20-22 kDa NH(2)-tau fragment-inhibit the ANT-1-dependent adenosine 
diphosphate-adenosine triphosphate (ADP/ATP) exchange in a noncompetitive and 
competitive manner, respectively, and together further aggravate the 
mitochondrial dysfunction by exacerbating the ANT-1 impairment. Taken together, 
these data establish a common, direct and synergistic toxicity of pathological 
APP and tau products on synaptic mitochondria and suggest potential, new 
pathway(s) and target(s) for a combined, more efficient therapeutic intervention 
of early synaptic dysfunction in AD.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.08.001
PMID: 21958963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2645. Psychiatr Serv. 2011 Oct;62(10):1207-14. doi: 10.1176/ps.62.10.pss6210_1207.

After the black box warning: predictors of psychotropic treatment choices for 
older patients with dementia.

Kim HM(1), Chiang C, Kales HC.

Author information:
(1)Ann Arbor Center of Excellence, U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, Ann 
Arbor, MI, USA. myrakim@umich.edu

OBJECTIVES: This study aimed to evaluate factors associated with the selection 
of pharmacological treatments often given as first-line treatments to elderly 
patients with neuropsychiatric symptoms associated with dementia. It also 
evaluated patterns of medication usage over time in the year preceding and three 
years after the U.S. Food and Drug Administration issued a black box warning for 
antipsychotic usage.
METHODS: A retrospective cohort consisted of 19,517 Veterans Affairs patients 
with diagnosed dementia and a new outpatient start with an antipsychotic agent 
(haloperidol, olanzapine, quetiapine, or risperidone) or valproic acid and its 
derivatives between May 1, 2004, and September 30, 2008. Patient and facility 
characteristics were examined for their association with the new starts of these 
medications.
RESULTS: Trends in the rate of fills for psychotropic medications varied, with 
yearly increases in the use of quetiapine, haloperidol, and valproic acid and 
decreasing use of olanzapine and risperidone. Predictors of haloperidol use 
included a new start in nonpsychiatric settings, prior benzodiazepine use, and 
any prior-year hospitalization. Anxiety disorder and major depression were 
predictive of not receiving haloperidol. Parkinson's disease was predictive of 
quetiapine use, whereas bipolar disorder was predictive of valproic acid use. 
Older age was predictive of use of antipsychotics rather than valproic acid. 
Urban facilities were less likely to use olanzapine, and significant regional 
variations were seen.
CONCLUSIONS: Important patient and facility characteristics were associated with 
initiating different psychotropic agents among elderly dementia patients. In 
addition, the rate of use and the factors predictive of use varied across the 
study years.

DOI: 10.1176/ps.62.10.pss6210_1207
PMID: 21969648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2646. Prescrire Int. 2011 Oct;20(120):242-5.

Treatment of Parkinson's disease. Psychological disorders: striking a balance in 
order to optimise antiparkinsonian treatment.

[No authors listed]

Parkinson's disease is frequently associated with psychological disorders, 
especially depression, psychotic disorders, and dementia. We examined the 
management of psychological disorders in Parkinson's disease, including the use 
of psychotropic drugs, by reviewing the literature using the standard Prescrire 
methodology. About one-third of patients with Parkinson's disease experience 
visual hallucinations. Other hallucinations and delusions can also occur. Dose 
reduction or withdrawal of certain antiparkinsonian drugs sometimes improves 
psychotic disorders, providing an acceptable level of symptom control. Clozapine 
is effective and does not worsen parkinsonian symptoms, but it carries a risk of 
severe adverse effects, including agranulocytosis. Other neuroleptics are 
ineffective or worsen motor status. Mood disorders and depression are frequent 
during the course of Parkinson's disease. Pramipexole, an antiparkinsonian 
dopamine agonist, improved depressive symptoms in patients with Parkinson's 
disease in one trial. Its main adverse effects are ocular disorders. Several 
trials have shown that some tricyclic antidepressants improve depression in 
Parkinson's patients, but these drugs can worsen cognitive status and cause 
postural hypotension. Data on selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor 
antidepressants (SSRIs) are unconvincing. A meta-analysis of three trials showed 
that treatment withdrawals due to adverse events were similarly frequent with 
tricyclics and SSRIs. Dementia is frequent in end-stage Parkinson's disease. 
When severe cognitive disorders occur, it is advisable to withdraw any drugs 
capable of worsening the situation, especially drugs with antimuscarinic effects 
and benzodiazepines. Cholinesterase inhibitors have a negative harm-benefit 
balance in this setting. When a Parkinson's patient presents with a 
psychological disorder, the first step is to optimise antiparkinsonian treatment 
by striking a balance between motor control and psychological adverse effects. 
In the few situations in which drug treatment is likely to be beneficial, it 
should be remembered that psychotropic drugs are at best only moderately 
effective and should be used with care, monitoring patients for adverse effects.

PMID: 21970092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2647. Drugs Aging. 2011 Oct 1;28(10):769-77. doi: 10.2165/11594110-000000000-00000.

Treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease dementia.

Ballard C(1), Kahn Z, Corbett A.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Age-Related Diseases, Wolfson Building, King's College London, 
Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. clive.ballard@kcl.ac.uk

Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) account 
for 10-15% of late onset dementias. Key treatment targets include cognitive and 
functional impairments, neuropsychiatric symptoms including intense and 
persistent visual hallucinations, and parkinsonism. Six-month, 
placebo-controlled randomized controlled trials (RCTs) of the cholinesterase 
inhibitor rivastigmine have indicated modest but significant benefits in 
cognition, function, global outcome and neuropsychiatric symptoms in both PDD 
and DLB. The evidence base for other cholinesterase inhibitors from RCTs is 
inconclusive. More recent RCTs with memantine in PDD/DLB patients indicate a 
benefit with regard to global outcome, with some suggestion of a specific 
benefit with respect to sleep disturbance. Given the risk of severe 
antipsychotic sensitivity reactions, antipsychotics should be avoided. A 
significant proportion of PDD/DLB patients are responsive to levodopa, but care 
needs to be taken with anti-parkinsonian treatments because of their potential 
propensity to exacerbate neuropsychiatric symptoms, particularly hallucinations.

DOI: 10.2165/11594110-000000000-00000
PMID: 21970305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2648. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Feb;18(2):161-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.09.009. Epub 2011 Oct 4.

Cognitive impairment is common in Parkinson's disease without dementia in the 
early and middle stages in a Han Chinese cohort.

Wu Q(1), Chen L, Zheng Y, Zhang C, Huang L, Guo W, Fang Y, Zhou H, Liu Y, Chen 
J, Qian H, Xian W, Zeng J, Li J, Liu Z, Pei Z.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-sen 
University, Guangzhou, 510080, PR China. wuqi8733@163.com

BACKGROUND: Cognitive impairments have been reported to be common in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) without dementia, which occur not only in the late stages of PD, 
but also in the early and middle stages. Until now, no reports on the profile of 
cognitive impairment in Chinese non-demented PD population have been published 
yet. Different ethnic groups should be assessed to improve evaluation of 
cognitive impairment in clinical practice. The aims of this study are to 
estimate the frequencies and profile of cognitive impairments and to explore the 
risk factors of cognitive impairments in Han Chinese non-demented PD patients at 
early and middle stages.
METHODS: Eighty non-demented PD patients in early and middle stages and 86 
healthy controls were invited to participate in this study. Neuropsychological 
batteries testing executive function, visuospatial function, memory and 
attention were evaluated. Cognitive impairments were defined as impaired 
performance in at least one cognitive domain.
RESULTS: Neuropsychological batteries detected 30 cases with executive 
dysfunction, 27 cases with memory impairment, eight cases with visuospatial 
dysfunction and seven cases with attention impairment. As many as 48 cases (60%) 
of PD patients presented cognitive impairment. Logistic regression analysis 
indicated that education level and Hoehn & Yahr stage were associated with 
cognitive impairment in PD.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive impairment is common in the early and middle stages of PD 
without dementia; executive function is the most common domain impaired in a 
Chinese PD population. Cognitive impairment might be predicted by lower 
education level and higher Hoehn and Yahr stage.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.09.009
PMID: 21975261 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2649. MMW Fortschr Med. 2011 Sep 22;153(38):86-9; quiz 90.

[Early diagnosis and treatment of dementia].

[Article in German]

Froböse T(1), Kurz A.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie, Zentrum für kognitive Störungen, 
Klinikum rechts der Isar,TU München t.froboese@lrz.tu-muenchen.de

PMID: 21977802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2650. Mol Neurodegener. 2011 Oct 7;6:70. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-70.

Alzheimer-specific variants in the 3'UTR of Amyloid precursor protein affect 
microRNA function.

Delay C(1), Calon F, Mathews P, Hébert SS.

Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche du CHUQ (CHUL), Axe Neurosciences, Québec (Qc), Canada. 
sebastien.hebert@crchul.ulaval.ca.

BACKGROUND: APP expression misregulation can cause genetic Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Recent evidences support the hypothesis that polymorphisms located in 
microRNA (miRNA) target sites could influence the risk of developing 
neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD) and frontotemporal 
dementia. Recently, a number of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located 
in the 3'UTR of APP have been found in AD patients with family history of 
dementia. Because miRNAs have previously been implicated in APP expression 
regulation, we set out to determine whether these polymorphisms could affect 
miRNA function and therefore APP levels.
RESULTS: Bioinformatics analysis identified twelve putative miRNA bindings sites 
located in or near the APP 3'UTR variants T117C, A454G and A833C. Among those 
candidates, seven miRNAs, including miR-20a, miR-17, miR-147, miR-655, 
miR-323-3p, miR-644, and miR-153 could regulate APP expression in vitro and 
under physiological conditions in cells. Using luciferase-based assays, we could 
show that the T117C variant inhibited miR-147 binding, whereas the A454G variant 
increased miR-20a binding, consequently having opposite effects on APP 
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our results provide proof-of-principle that APP 
3'UTR polymorphisms could affect AD risk through modulation of APP expression 
regulation, and set the stage for further association studies in genetic and 
sporadic AD.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-6-70
PMCID: PMC3195754
PMID: 21982160


2651. Prog Neurobiol. 2011 Dec;95(4):601-13. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2011.09.002. 
Epub 2011 Sep 19.

Biomarkers of Parkinson's disease and Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Henchcliffe C(1), Dodel R, Beal MF.

Author information:
(1)Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New York, NY, USA. 
clh2007@med.cornell.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) and Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are progressive and 
disabling neurodegenerative disorders, in which signs and symptoms overlap with 
each other and with other neurodegenerative conditions. Currently, diagnosis, 
measurement of progression, and response to therapeutic intervention rely upon 
clinical observation. However, there remains a critical need for validated 
biomarkers in each of these areas. A definitive diagnostic test would improve 
clinical management and enrollment into clinical trials. An objective measure of 
progression is vitally important in identifying neuroprotective interventions. 
Biomarkers may also provide insight into pathogenesis, and might therefore 
suggest possible novel targets for therapeutic intervention. In addition, 
certain biomarkers might be of use in monitoring the biochemical and 
physiological effects of therapeutic interventions. Development of diagnostic 
biomarkers has focused until recently upon imaging techniques based upon 
measuring loss of dopamine neurons. Additionally, advances in understanding the 
genetic contribution to neurodegenerative disorders, in particular in PD, have 
identified multiple causative genes and risk factors that in some cases may help 
estimate PD risk. However, recent availability of increasingly sophisticated 
bioinformatics technology has rendered development of fluid biomarkers feasible, 
opening the possibility of generally accessible blood or cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) tests that could impact upon diagnosis, management, and research in PD, 
PDD, and DLB.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2011.09.002
PMID: 21983334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2652. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012 Sep;20(9):773-81. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e31823033bc.

Early visuospatial deficits predict the occurrence of visual hallucinations in 
autopsy-confirmed dementia with Lewy bodies.

Hamilton JM(1), Landy KM, Salmon DP, Hansen LA, Masliah E, Galasko D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA 92093, USA. jmhamilton@ucsd.edu

OBJECTIVES: The current study explored the value of visuospatial findings for 
predicting the occurrence of visual hallucinations (VH) in a sample of patients 
with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) compared with patients with Alzheimer 
disease (AD). PARTICIPANTS/MEASUREMENTS: Retrospective analysis of 55 
autopsy-confirmed DLB and 55 demographically similar, autopsy-confirmed AD cases 
determined whether severe initial visuospatial deficits on the WISC-R Block 
Design subtest predicted the development of VH. Visuospatial deficits were 
considered severe if Block Design z scores were 2.5 or more standard deviations 
below the mean of a well-characterized normal control group (severe visuospatial 
deficits [severe-VIS]; DLB: n = 35, AD: n = 26) and otherwise were considered 
mild (mild visuospatial deficits [mild-VIS]; DLB: n = 20, AD: n = 29).
RESULTS: Forty percent of the severe-VIS DLB group had baseline VH compared with 
0% of mild-VIS DLB patients. Only 8% of the severe-VIS and 3% mild-VIS AD 
patients had baseline VH. During the follow-up period (mean = 5.0 years), an 
additional 61% of the severe-VIS but only 11% of the mild-VIS DLB patients 
developed VH. In that period, 38% of the severe-VIS and 20% of the mild-VIS AD 
patients developed VH. After considering initial MMSE score and rate of decline, 
logistic regression analyses found that performance on Block Design 
significantly predicted the presence of VH in the DLB group but not the AD 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of early, severe deficits on neuropsychological tests 
of visuospatial skill increases the likelihood that patients with suspected DLB 
will develop the prototypical DLB syndrome. The presence of such deficits may 
identify those DLB patients whose syndrome is driven by α-synuclein pathology 
rather than AD pathology and may inform treatment plans as well as future 
research.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e31823033bc
PMCID: PMC3260388
PMID: 21997600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2653. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2012 Jan;39(1):113-9. doi: 
10.1007/s00259-011-1963-1. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Standardization of metaiodobenzylguanidine heart to mediastinum ratio using a 
calibration phantom: effects of correction on normal databases and a multicentre 
study.

Nakajima K(1), Okuda K, Matsuo S, Yoshita M, Taki J, Yamada M, Kinuya S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Kanazawa University Hospital, Kanazawa, 
Japan. nakajima@med.kanazawa-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: This study was performed to demonstrate that the results obtained with 
a calibration phantom could be used as a tool for standardizing measurement of 
heart to mediastinum (H/M) ratio in cardiac metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) 
imaging.
METHODS: Images of the phantom containing (123)I-MIBG were acquired on the 
cameras in 10 hospitals (11 camera types) to determine the relationship between 
H/M ratios using different collimators: low-energy (LE) and medium-energy 
(ME)/low-medium-energy (LME) collimators. The effect of standardization on the 
ME-comparable H/M ratio was examined in two settings: a Japanese standard MIBG 
database (n = 62) and multicentre studies (n = 49). In a multicentre study, 
probable Alzheimer's disease (AD, n = 18) and probable dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB, n = 31) were studied and standardized by the calibration phantom method.
RESULTS: Linear regression equations between LE and ME collimators were obtained 
for the phantom study in all institutions. When the H/M ratio with an LE 
collimator was corrected based upon the calibration phantom, the corrected 
values were comparable to those obtained using ME collimators. The standard 
database also exhibited a normal distribution after standardization as 
determined by skewness and goodness-of-fit test. A mixture of the populations by 
LE and ME collimators showed significant separation of AD and DLB groups (F 
ratio = 24.9 for the late H/M), but the corrected values resulted in higher F 
ratios for both early and late H/M (F ratio = 34.9 for the late H/M).
CONCLUSION: Standardization of H/M ratios by the heart-chest calibration phantom 
method is feasible among different collimator types. This method could be 
practically used for multicentre comparison of H/M ratios.

DOI: 10.1007/s00259-011-1963-1
PMID: 22009380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2654. Physiol Rev. 2011 Oct;91(4):1161-218. doi: 10.1152/physrev.00022.2010.

What genetics tells us about the causes and mechanisms of Parkinson's disease.

Corti O(1), Lesage S, Brice A.

Author information:
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, Centre de Recherche de l'Institut 
du Cerveau et de la Moelle épinière; Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale U.975, Paris, France.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common motor disorder of mysterious etiology. It 
is due to the progressive degeneration of the dopaminergic neurons of the 
substantia nigra and is accompanied by the appearance of intraneuronal 
inclusions enriched in α-synuclein, the Lewy bodies. It is becoming increasingly 
clear that genetic factors contribute to its complex pathogenesis. Over the past 
decade, the genetic basis of rare PD forms with Mendelian inheritance, 
representing no more than 10% of the cases, has been investigated. More than 16 
loci and 11 associated genes have been identified so far; genome-wide 
association studies have provided convincing evidence that polymorphic variants 
in these genes contribute to sporadic PD. The knowledge acquired of the 
functions of their protein products has revealed pathways of neurodegeneration 
that may be shared between inherited and sporadic PD. An impressive set of data 
in different model systems strongly suggest that mitochondrial dysfunction plays 
a central role in clinically similar, early-onset autosomal recessive PD forms 
caused by parkin and PINK1, and possibly DJ-1 gene mutations. In contrast, 
α-synuclein accumulation in Lewy bodies defines a spectrum of disorders ranging 
from typical late-onset PD to PD dementia and including sporadic and autosomal 
dominant PD forms due to mutations in SCNA and LRRK2. However, the pathological 
role of Lewy bodies remains uncertain, as they may or may not be present in PD 
forms with one and the same LRRK2 mutation. Impairment of autophagy-based 
protein/organelle degradation pathways is emerging as a possible unifying but 
still fragile pathogenic scenario in PD. Strengthening these discoveries and 
finding other convergence points by identifying new genes responsible for 
Mendelian forms of PD and exploring their functions and relationships are the 
main challenges of the next decade. It is also the way to follow to open new 
promising avenues of neuroprotective treatment for this devastating disorder.

DOI: 10.1152/physrev.00022.2010
PMID: 22013209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2655. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Apr;83(4):405-10. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2011-300875. Epub 2011 Oct 21.

Diagnostic criteria for corticobasal syndrome: a comparative study.

Mathew R(1), Bak TH, Hodges JR.

Author information:
(1)Neurosciences Research Australia, and University of New South Wales, Sydney, 
Australia.

INTRODUCTION: There are no well-established criteria for patients with 
corticobasal syndrome. The authors have attempted to clarify this area by 
comparing and applying three sets of well-known criteria (from Toronto, the Mayo 
Clinic and Cambridge).
PATIENT AND METHODS: The authors first compared the three criteria for overlap 
and differences, and then applied them to a group of 40 consecutive patients (22 
men, mean age 67 years) with focal cortical syndrome characterised by apraxia 
and Parkinsonism, at both the early stages and later in their illness.
RESULTS: Despite an overall similarity, there were major differences in the 
criteria which affect their applicability. Cognitive impairment was ubiquitous 
even at presentation, with speech and language impairment the commonest feature. 
Some classic features, alien limb and myoclonus, were present in a minority only 
even late in their course. The three criteria were equally applicable to 
patients with advanced disease (Toronto 92.5%, Cambridge 90% and Mayo 87.5%). 
Thirty patients (75%) satisfied all three criteria. Using this group as a 'gold 
standard', 73.3% fulfilled the Cambridge criteria at presentation compared with 
46.7% and 36.7% for the Toronto and Mayo Clinic criteria, respectively. 
Concordance between criteria was poor.
CONCLUSION: Cognitive impairment, especially language impairment, was prominent 
from onset of disease. The Cambridge criteria apply to a higher proportion of 
cases at an early stage of corticobasal syndrome. The authors suggest a minor 
modification to capture the high prevalence of aphasia.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-300875
PMID: 22019546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2656. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Jun;46(3):553-8. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.003. Epub 2011 
Oct 14.

REM sleep behavior disorder: from dreams to neurodegeneration.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada. ronald.postuma@mcgill.ca

REM sleep behavior disorder is a unique parasomnia characterized by dream 
enactment behavior during REM sleep. Unless triggered by pharmacologic agents 
such as antidepressants, it is generally related to damage of pontomedullary 
brainstem structures. Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a 
well-established risk factor for neurodegenerative disease. Prospective studies 
have estimated that at least 40-65% of patients with idiopathic RBD will 
eventually develop a defined neurodegenerative phenotype, almost always a 
'synucleinopathy' (Parkinson's disease, Lewy Body dementia or multiple system 
atrophy). In most cases, patients appear to develop a syndrome with overlapping 
features of both Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia. The interval 
between RBD onset and disease onset averages 10-15 years, suggesting a 
promisingly large window for intervention into preclinical disease stages. The 
ability of RBD to predict disease has major implications for design and 
development of neuroprotective therapy, and testing of other predictive markers 
of synuclein-mediated neurodegeneration. Recent studies in idiopathic RBD 
patients have demonstrated that olfaction, color vision, severity of REM atonia 
loss, transcranial ultrasound of the substantia nigra, and dopaminergic 
neuroimaging can predict development of neurodegenerative disease.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.003
PMID: 22019718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2657. Mov Disord. 2011 Oct;26(12):2286-90. doi: 10.1002/mds.23878.

Projected numbers of people with movement disorders in the years 2030 and 2050.

Bach JP(1), Ziegler U, Deuschl G, Dodel R, Doblhammer-Reiter G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Philipps-University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2012 Aug;27(9):1204-5; author reply 1207.

BACKGROUND: Movement disorders are chronic diseases with an increasing 
prevalence in old age. Because these disorders pose a major challenge to 
patients, families, and health care systems, there is a need for reliable data 
about the future number of affected people.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We searched the literature to identify epidemiological 
studies to obtain age-specific prevalence data of movement disorders. We 
combined the age-specific prevalence data with population projections for 
Europe, the United States, and Canada.
RESULTS: Movement disorders will increase considerably between 2010 and 2050. 
The highest increase will be for dementia with Lewy bodies. In several 
countries, we project a near doubling of patients with PD.
CONCLUSIONS: There will be a strong increase in the number of people affected by 
most movement disorders between 2010 and 2050. This increase will mostly depend 
on the future aging of populations in terms of their age structure and future 
life expectancy.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23878
PMID: 22021158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2658. Alzheimers Dement. 2012 Jan;8(1):74-83. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.08.003. Epub 
2011 Oct 22.

[123I]N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane single-photon 
emission computed tomography brain imaging in the diagnosis of dementia with 
Lewy bodies.

Walker Z(1), Cummings JL.

Author information:
(1)UCL Mental Health Sciences Unit, University College London, United Kingdom. 
z.walker@ucl.ac.uk

Early, accurate diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), in particular its 
differentiation from Alzheimer's disease, is important for optimal management, 
providing patients/carers with information about the likely symptomatology and 
illness course, allowing initiation of effective pharmacotherapy, and avoiding 
the consequences of neuroleptic sensitivity. Clinical diagnosis of DLB has high 
specificity but low sensitivity. Clinical trials of 
[(123)I]N-ω-fluoropropyl-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)nortropane 
single-photon emission computed tomography ([(123)I]FP-CIT SPECT) indicate high 
positive and negative percent agreement with reference to clinical diagnosis, 
and high sensitivity and specificity in patients with neuropathologically 
confirmed diagnoses of DLB. An abnormal [(123)I]FP-CIT SPECT image in patients 
fulfilling criteria for possible DLB advances the certainty of a diagnosis to 
probable DLB. [(123)I]FP-CIT SPECT, by identifying the striatal dopaminergic 
deficit, can be a valuable diagnostic aid and can provide support to a clinical 
diagnosis of DLB in patients with dementia. The technique is likely to be of 
particular utility in patients with dementia with an uncertain diagnosis.

Copyright © 2012 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2011.08.003
PMID: 22024052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2659. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;28(2):377-87. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110824.

The role of variation at AβPP, PSEN1, PSEN2, and MAPT in late onset Alzheimer's 
disease.

Gerrish A(1), Russo G, Richards A, Moskvina V, Ivanov D, Harold D, Sims R, 
Abraham R, Hollingworth P, Chapman J, Hamshere M, Pahwa JS, Dowzell K, Williams 
A, Jones N, Thomas C, Stretton A, Morgan AR, Lovestone S, Powell J, Proitsi P, 
Lupton MK, Brayne C, Rubinsztein DC, Gill M, Lawlor B, Lynch A, Morgan K, Brown 
KS, Passmore PA, Craig D, McGuinness B, Todd S, Johnston JA, Holmes C, Mann D, 
Smith AD, Love S, Kehoe PG, Hardy J, Mead S, Fox N, Rossor M, Collinge J, Maier 
W, Jessen F, Kölsch H, Heun R, Schürmann B, van den Bussche H, Heuser I, 
Kornhuber J, Wiltfang J, Dichgans M, Frölich L, Hampel H, Hüll M, Rujescu D, 
Goate AM, Kauwe JS, Cruchaga C, Nowotny P, Morris JC, Mayo K, Livingston G, Bass 
NJ, Gurling H, McQuillin A, Gwilliam R, Deloukas P, Davies G, Harris SE, Starr 
JM, Deary IJ, Al-Chalabi A, Shaw CE, Tsolaki M, Singleton AB, Guerreiro R, 
Mühleisen TW, Nöthen MM, Moebus S, Jöckel KH, Klopp N, Wichmann HE, Carrasquillo 
MM, Pankratz VS, Younkin SG, Jones L, Holmans PA, O'Donovan MC, Owen MJ, 
Williams J.

Author information:
(1)MRC Centre for Neuropsychiatric Genetics and Genomics, Department of 
Psychological Medicine and Neurology, School of Medicine, Neuroscience and 
Mental Health Research Institute, Cardiff University, Cardiff, UK.

Rare mutations in AβPP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 cause uncommon early onset forms of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and common variants in MAPT are associated with risk 
of other neurodegenerative disorders. We sought to establish whether common 
genetic variation in these genes confer risk to the common form of AD which 
occurs later in life (>65 years). We therefore tested single-nucleotide 
polymorphisms at these loci for association with late-onset AD (LOAD) in a large 
case-control sample consisting of 3,940 cases and 13,373 controls. Single-marker 
analysis did not identify any variants that reached genome-wide significance, a 
result which is supported by other recent genome-wide association studies. 
However, we did observe a significant association at the MAPT locus using a 
gene-wide approach (p = 0.009). We also observed suggestive association between 
AD and the marker rs9468, which defines the H1 haplotype, an extended haplotype 
that spans the MAPT gene and has previously been implicated in other 
neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson's disease, progressive 
supranuclear palsy, and corticobasal degeneration. In summary common variants at 
AβPP, PSEN1, and PSEN2 and MAPT are unlikely to make strong contributions to 
susceptibility for LOAD. However, the gene-wide effect observed at MAPT 
indicates a possible contribution to disease risk which requires further study.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2011-110824
PMCID: PMC4118466
PMID: 22027014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2660. Ann Neurol. 2011 Oct;70(4):532-40. doi: 10.1002/ana.22615.

Pathogenic protein seeding in Alzheimer disease and other neurodegenerative 
disorders.

Jucker M(1), Walker LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular Neurology, Hertie Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. 
mathias.jucker@uni-tuebingen.de

The misfolding and aggregation of specific proteins is a seminal occurrence in a 
remarkable variety of neurodegenerative disorders. In Alzheimer disease (the 
most prevalent cerebral proteopathy), the two principal aggregating proteins are 
β-amyloid (Aβ) and tau. The abnormal assemblies formed by conformational 
variants of these proteins range in size from small oligomers to the 
characteristic lesions that are visible by optical microscopy, such as senile 
plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. Pathologic similarities with prion disease 
suggest that the formation and spread of these proteinaceous lesions might 
involve a common molecular mechanism-corruptive protein templating. 
Experimentally, cerebral β-amyloidosis can be exogenously induced by exposure to 
dilute brain extracts containing aggregated Aβ seeds. The amyloid-inducing agent 
probably is Aβ itself, in a conformation generated most effectively in the 
living brain. Once initiated, Aβ lesions proliferate within and among brain 
regions. The induction process is governed by the structural and biochemical 
nature of the Aβ seed, as well as the attributes of the host, reminiscent of 
pathogenically variant prion strains. The concept of prionlike induction and 
spreading of pathogenic proteins recently has been expanded to include 
aggregates of tau, α-synuclein, huntingtin, superoxide dismutase-1, and TDP-43, 
which characterize such human neurodegenerative disorders as frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration, Parkinson/Lewy body disease, Huntington disease, and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Our recent finding that the most effective Aβ 
seeds are small and soluble intensifies the search in bodily fluids for 
misfolded protein seeds that are upstream in the proteopathic cascade, and thus 
could serve as predictive diagnostics and the targets of early, mechanism-based 
interventions. Establishing the clinical implications of corruptive protein 
templating will require further mechanistic and epidemiologic investigations. 
However, the theory that many chronic neurodegenerative diseases can originate 
and progress via the seeded corruption of misfolded proteins has the potential 
to unify experimental and translational approaches to these increasingly 
prevalent disorders.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22615
PMCID: PMC3203752
PMID: 22028219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2661. Curr Top Behav Neurosci. 2012;11:117-48. doi: 10.1007/7854_2011_165.

Molecular imaging and the neuropathologies of Parkinson's disease.

Cumming P(1), Borghammer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Ludwig-Maximilian's University of Munich, 
Munich, Germany, paul.k.cumming@gmail.com.

The main motor symptoms of Parkinson's disease (PD) are linked to degeneration 
of the nigrostriatal dopamine (DA) fibers, especially those innervating the 
putamen. This degeneration can be assessed in molecular imaging studies with 
presynaptic tracers such as [(18)F]-fluoro-L-DOPA (FDOPA) and ligands for DA 
transporter ligands. However, the pathologies of PD are by no means limited to 
nigrostriatal loss. Results of post mortem and molecular imaging studies reveal 
parallel degenerations of cortical noradrenaline (NA) and serotonin (5-HT) 
innervations, which may contribute to affective and cognitive changes of PD. 
Especially in advanced PD, cognitive impairment can come to resemble that seen 
in Alzheimer's dementia, as can the degeneration of acetylcholine innervations 
arising in the basal forebrain. The density of striatal DA D(2) receptors 
increases in early untreated PD, consistent with denervation upregulation, but 
there is an accelerated rate of DA receptor loss as the disease advances. Animal 
studies and post mortem investigations reveal changes in brain opioid peptide 
systems, but these are poorly documented in imaging studies of PD. Relatively 
minor changes in the binding sites for GABA are reported in cortex and striatum 
of PD patients. There remains some controversy about the expression of the 
18 kDa translocator protein (TSPO) in activated microglia as an indicator of an 
active inflammatory component of neurodegeneration in PD. A wide variety of 
autonomic disturbances contribute to the clinical syndrome of PD; the 
degeneration of myocardial sympathetic innervation can be revealed in SPECT 
studies of PD patients with autonomic failure. Considerable emphasis has been 
placed on investigations of cerebral blood flow and energy metabolism in PD. Due 
to the high variance of these physiological estimates, researchers have often 
employed normalization procedures for the sensitive detection of perturbations 
in relatively small patient groups. However, a widely used normalization to the 
global mean must be used with caution, as it can result in spurious findings of 
relative hypermetabolic changes in subcortical structures. A meta-analysis of 
the quantitative studies to date shows that there is in fact widespread 
hypometabolism and cerebral blood flow in the cerebral cortex, especially in 
frontal cortex and parietal association areas. These changes can bias the use of 
global mean normalization, and probably represent the pathophysiological basis 
of the cognitive impairment of PD.

DOI: 10.1007/7854_2011_165
PMID: 22034053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2662. Acta Clin Croat. 2011 Mar;50(1):67-77.

Mediterranean diet in healthy lifestyle and prevention of stroke.

Demarin V(1), Lisak M, Morović S.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Neurology, Reference Center for Neurovascular 
Disorders and Headache of the Ministry of Health and Social Welfare, Republic of 
Croatia, Sestre milosrdnice University Hospital Center, Zagreb, Croatia.

Several studies demonstrated the beneficial and preventive role of Mediterranean 
diet in the occurrence of cardiovascular diseases, chronic neurodegenerative 
diseases and neoplasms, obesity and diabetes. In randomized intervention trials, 
Mediterranean diet improved endothelial function and significantly reduced waist 
circumference, plasma glucose, serum insulin and homeostasis model assessment 
score in metabolic syndrome. Several studies support favorable effects of 
Mediterranean diet on plasma lipid profile: reduction of total and plasma LDL 
cholesterol levels, plasma triglyceride levels, and apo-B and VLDL 
concentrations, and an increase in plasma HDL cholesterol levels. This effect is 
associated with increased plasma antioxidant capacity, improved endothelial 
function, reduced insulin resistance, and reduced incidence of the metabolic 
syndrome. The beneficial impact of fish consumption on the risk of 
cardiovascular diseases is the result of synergistic effects of nutrients in 
fish. Fish is considered an excellent source of protein with low saturated fat, 
nutritious trace elements, long-chain omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids 
(LCn3PUFAs), and vitamins D and B. Fish consumption may be inversely associated 
with ischemic stroke but not with hemorrhagic stroke because of the potential 
antiplatelet aggregation property of LCn3PUFAs. Total stroke risk reduction was 
statistically significant for fish intake once per week, while the risk of 
stroke was lowered by 31% in individuals who ate fish 5 times or more per week. 
In the elderly, moderate consumption of tuna/other fish, but not fried fish, was 
associated with lower prevalence of subclinical infarcts and white matter 
abnormalities on MRI examination. Dietary intake of omega-3 fatty acids in a 
moderate-to-high range does not appear to be associated with reduced plaque, but 
is negatively associated with carotid artery intima-media thickness. Greater 
adherence to Mediterranean diet is associated with significant reduction in 
overall mortality, mortality from cardiovascular diseases and stroke, incidence 
of or mortality from cancer, and incidence of Parkinson's disease and 
Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive impairment.

PMID: 22034786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2663. Mov Disord. 2012 Jan;27(1):72-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.24003. Epub 2011 Oct 28.

Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder and subtypes in autopsy-confirmed 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Dugger BN(1), Boeve BF, Murray ME, Parisi JE, Fujishiro H, Dickson DW, Ferman 
TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2012 Jan;27(1):6-7.

The purpose of this study was to determine whether dementia with Lewy bodies 
with and without probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder differ 
clinically or pathologically. Patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) with 
probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior sleep disorder (n = 71) were compared 
with those without it (n = 19) on demographics, clinical variables (core 
features of dementia with Lewy bodies, dementia duration, rate of 
cognitive/motor changes), and pathologic indices (Lewy body distribution, 
neuritic plaque score, Braak neurofibrillary tangle stage). Individuals with 
probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder were predominantly male (82% 
vs 47%) and had a shorter duration of dementia (mean, 8 vs 10 years), earlier 
onset of parkinsonism (mean, 2 vs 5 years), and earlier onset of visual 
hallucinations (mean, 3 vs 6 years). These patients also had a lower Braak 
neurofibrillary tangle stage (stage IV vs stage VI) and lower neuritic plaque 
scores (18% vs 85% frequency), but no difference in Lewy body distribution. When 
probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder developed early (at or 
before dementia onset), the onset of parkinsonism and hallucinations was earlier 
and Braak neurofibrillary tangle stage was lower compared with those who 
developed the sleep disorder after dementia onset. Women with autopsy-confirmed 
DLB without a history of dream enactment behavior during sleep had a later onset 
of hallucinations and parkinsonism and a higher Braak NFT stage. Probable rapid 
eye movement sleep behavior disorder is associated with distinct clinical and 
pathologic characteristics of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24003
PMCID: PMC3513369
PMID: 22038951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2664. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2011 Oct;69(5):733-8. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2011000600002.

Dementia in Parkinson's disease: a Brazilian sample.

Baldivia B(1), Brucki SM, Batistela S, Esper JC, Augusto CD, Rocha MS.

Author information:
(1)Service of Neurology, Santa Marcelina Hospital, São Paulo SP, Brazil. 
bbaldivia@gmail.com

Comment in
    Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2011 Oct;69(5):731-2.

To determine the prevalence of dementia associated with Parkinson's disease 
(PD-D) in a Brazilian sample adopting clinical and diagnostic procedures 
recommended by the Movement Disorders Society (MDS). Sixty-seven patients were 
consecutively submitted to neurological, neuropsychological and functional 
examinations. PD-D was established according to MDS clinical criteria (Level II) 
and clinical procedures for PD-D (Level I) and prevalence rate was compared 
between the levels adopted. Ten patients (14.9%) were diagnosed as demented by 
Level I criteria whereas sixteen (23.8%) were diagnosed based on Level II 
criteria. Level I criteria had low sensitivity in detecting PD-D (31.25%), but 
greater specificity (90.19). The PD-D group had significantly worse performance 
on all neuropsychological tests, were older (p<0.001), had an older age of onset 
of disease (p<0.01), had lower educational level (p<0.02) and had higher scores 
on functional scales. Current age (p=0.046) and Hoehn & Yahr score (p=0.048) 
were predictors for developing PD-D.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2011000600002
PMID: 22042172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2665. Curr Opin Neurol. 2011 Dec;24(6):525-31. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834cd477.

Clinical appraisal of chronic traumatic encephalopathy: current perspectives and 
future directions.

Gavett BE(1), Cantu RC, Shenton M, Lin AP, Nowinski CJ, McKee AC, Stern RA.

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy, Boston University, and 
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: There are currently no consensus-based clinical diagnostic 
criteria for chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). This review provides an 
update on recent literature pertaining to clinically relevant procedures 
that--presently or in the future--may be useful for the in-vivo detection, 
characterization, and/or prediction of CTE.
RECENT FINDINGS: Preliminary evidence about the clinical manifestations of CTE 
has been accumulating via post-mortem medical record review and interviews of 
friends or family members of individuals with neuropathologically documented 
CTE. This evidence suggests that CTE is manifested clinically by changes in 
cognition (especially memory and executive functioning, with dementia later in 
the disease course), mood (especially, depression, apathy, and suicidality), 
personality and behavior (especially poor impulse control and behavioral 
disinhibition), and movement (including parkinsonism and signs of motor neuron 
disease). At the present time, evidence regarding CTE has not been confirmed in 
a prospective study of a cohort at risk for CTE.
SUMMARY: On the basis of recent research in the fields of dementia and traumatic 
brain injury, several in-vivo procedures (including neurological examination, 
neuropsychological assessment, neuroimaging techniques, and blood and 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers) each have the potential to contribute unique 
information about the manifestations of CTE, including clinical and preclinical 
stages. More research is needed to develop a set of consensus diagnostic 
criteria that provide a reliable and valid indicator of neuropathologically 
verified CTE. Until such criteria are developed, the clinical assessment of CTE 
should be informed by modern research that is of relevance to traumatic brain 
injury and neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e32834cd477
PMID: 22045219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2666. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Feb 1;21(3):495-510. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr507. Epub 2011 Nov 
1.

α-Synuclein accumulates in huntingtin inclusions but forms independent filaments 
and its deficiency attenuates early phenotype in a mouse model of Huntington's 
disease.

Tomás-Zapico C(1), Díez-Zaera M, Ferrer I, Gómez-Ramos P, Morán MA, 
Miras-Portugal MT, Díaz-Hernández M, Lucas JJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Biology Severo Ochoa, CSIC/UAM, Madrid, Spain.

Huntington's disease (HD) is the most common of nine inherited neurological 
disorders caused by expanded polyglutamine (polyQ) sequences which confer 
propensity to self-aggregate and toxicity to their corresponding mutant 
proteins. It has been postulated that polyQ expression compromises the folding 
capacity of the cell which might affect other misfolding-prone proteins. 
α-Synuclein (α-syn) is a small neural-specific protein with propensity to 
self-aggregate that forms Parkinson's disease (PD) Lewy bodies. Point mutations 
in α-syn that favor self-aggregation or α-syn gene duplications lead to familial 
PD, thus indicating that increased α-syn aggregation or levels are sufficient to 
induce neurodegeneration. Since polyQ inclusions in HD and other polyQ disorders 
are immunopositive for α-syn, we speculated that α-syn might be recruited as an 
additional mediator of polyQ toxicity. Here, we confirm in HD postmortem brains 
and in the R6/1 mouse model of HD the accumulation of α-syn in polyQ inclusions. 
By isolating the characteristic filaments formed by aggregation-prone proteins, 
we found that N-terminal mutant huntingtin (N-mutHtt) and α-syn form independent 
filamentous microaggregates in R6/1 mouse brain as well as in the inducible HD94 
mouse model and that N-mutHtt expression increases the load of α-syn filaments. 
Accordingly, α-syn knockout results in a diminished number of N-mutHtt 
inclusions in transfected neurons and also in vivo in the brain of HD mice. 
Finally, α-syn knockout attenuates body weight loss and early motor phenotype of 
HD mice. This study therefore demonstrates that α-syn is a modifier of polyQ 
toxicity in vivo and raises the possibility that potential PD-related therapies 
aimed to counteract α-syn toxicity might help to slow HD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddr507
PMID: 22045698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2667. Neurobiol Dis. 2012 Jun;46(3):559-64. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.014. Epub 2011 
Oct 25.

Pathological correlates of gastrointestinal dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.

Cersosimo MG(1), Benarroch EE.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorder Unit, Hospital de Clinicas, 
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina. mgcersosimo@gmail.com

Gastrointestinal dysfunction is a prominent manifestation of Parkinson's disease 
(PD). Gastrointestinal symptoms in PD include reduced salivation, dysphagia, 
impaired gastric emptying, constipation, and defecatory dysfunction. 
Constipation may precede the development of somatic motor symptoms of PD for 
several years. Neuropathological studies show early accumulation of abnormal 
alpha-synuclein (α-SYN) containing inclusions (Lewy neurites) in the enteric 
nervous system (ENS) and dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus (DMV) both in PD and 
in incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD). These findings provided the basis for 
the hypothesis that α-SYN pathology progresses in a centripetal, prion-like 
fashion, from the ENS to the DMV and then to more rostral areas of the central 
nervous system. Colonic biopsies may show accumulation α-SYN immunoreactive Lewy 
neurites in the submucosal plexus of PD patients. Salivary gland involvement is 
prominent in PD and α-SYN pathology can be detected both at autopsy and in minor 
salivary gland biopsies.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2011.10.014
PMID: 22048068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2668. Curr Med Chem. 2011;18(33):5114-44. doi: 10.2174/092986711797636090.

The state of the art of pyrazole derivatives as monoamine oxidase inhibitors and 
antidepressant/anticonvulsant agents.

Secci D(1), Bolasco A, Chimenti P, Carradori S.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Chimica e Tecnologie del Farmaco, Università degli Studi di 
Roma "Sapienza", P.le A. Moro 5, 00185 Rome, Italy. daniela.secci@uniroma1.it

Monoamine oxidase plays a significant role in the control of intracellular 
concentration of monoaminergic neurotransmitters or neuromodulators and dietary 
amines. The rapid degradation of these molecules ensures the proper functioning 
of synaptic neurotransmission and is critically important for the regulation of 
emotional and other brain functions. The development of human MAO inhibitors led 
to important breakthroughs in the therapy of several neuropsychiatric disorders. 
Different families of heterocycles containing 2 or 4 nitrogen atoms have been 
used as scaffolds for synthesizing selective monoamine oxidase inhibitors, but 
the early period of the MAO-inhibitors started with hydrazine derivatives. 
Pyrazole, pyrazoline, and pyrazolidine derivatives can be considered as a cyclic 
hydrazine moiety. This scaffold also displayed promising antidepressant and 
anticonvulsant properties as demonstrated by different and established animal 
models. Diversely substituted pyrazoles, embedded with a variety of functional 
groups, are important biological agents and a significant amount of research 
activity has been directed towards this chemical class.

DOI: 10.2174/092986711797636090
PMID: 22050759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2669. Neuroscience. 2011 Dec 29;199:303-17. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.10.018. 
Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Dynamic modeling of α-synuclein aggregation in dopaminergic neuronal system 
indicates points of neuroprotective intervention: experimental validation with 
implications for Parkinson's therapy.

Sultana Z(1), Paleologou KE, Al-Mansoori KM, Ardah MT, Singh N, Usmani S, Jiao 
H, Martin FL, Bharath MM, Vali S, El-Agnaf OM.

Author information:
(1)Cellworks Group Incorporated, 13962 Pierce Road, Saratoga, CA 95070, USA.

Protein aggregation is the major pathological hallmark seen in neurodegenerative 
disorders such as Parkinson's disease (PD). Alpha-synuclein (αS) is the main 
component of protein aggregates that form Lewy bodies (LBs) in PD and dementia 
with LBs. There have been several attempts to intervene in the process of 
expression, modification, clearance, and aggregation of αS as a therapeutic 
strategy toward neuroprotection. In this study, we have employed a novel, 
predictive, system level approach in silico to study four different strategies 
of anti-aggregation therapies: (a) reduction in αS modifications such as 
phosphorylation, nitration, or truncation in an approach called "seed 
clearance;" (b) "anti-oligomerization" approach through blocking the early 
oligomers formation; (c) "oligomers clearance" process by increasing its 
lysosomal degradation; and (d) "anti-aggregation" that involves prevention of 
aggregate formation at a later stage. These strategies were tested in a virtual 
dopaminergic neuronal system triggered by overexpression (OE) of mutant αS-A53T 
with or without rotenone (Rot)-induced oxidative stress. The results were 
compared by analyzing markers related to various end points such as oxidative 
stress, dopamine (DA) metabolism, proteasome function, survival and apoptosis. 
The experimental system and anti-oligomerization strategies were recapitulated 
in vitro in M17 dopaminergic cells overexpressing mutant αS-A53T triggered with 
Cu(II)-mediated oxidative stress, and the experimental data prospectively 
corroborated with the predictive results. Through this analysis, we found that 
intervention in the early part of the aggregation pathway by prevention of 
oligomer formation and increased clearance is indeed a good neuroprotective 
strategy, whereas anti-aggregation efforts to break up the aggregate at later 
stages has negative effects on the system.

Copyright © 2011 IBRO. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2011.10.018
PMID: 22056602 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2670. PM R. 2011 Oct;3(10 Suppl 2):S460-7. doi: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.08.008.

Long-term consequences of repetitive brain trauma: chronic traumatic 
encephalopathy.

Stern RA(1), Riley DO, Daneshvar DH, Nowinski CJ, Cantu RC, McKee AC.

Author information:
(1)Center for Study of Traumatic Encephalopathy, Boston University School of 
Medicine, Boston University, 72 East Concord St, 7380, Boston, MA 02118, USA. 
bobstern@bu.edu

Chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE) has been linked to participation in 
contact sports such as boxing and American football. CTE results in a 
progressive decline of memory and cognition, as well as depression, suicidal 
behavior, poor impulse control, aggressiveness, parkinsonism, and, eventually, 
dementia. In some individuals, it is associated with motor neuron disease, 
referred to as chronic traumatic encephalomyelopathy, which appears clinically 
similar to amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Results of neuropathologic research 
has shown that CTE may be more common in former contact sports athletes than 
previously believed. It is believed that repetitive brain trauma, with or 
possibly without symptomatic concussion, is responsible for neurodegenerative 
changes highlighted by accumulations of hyperphosphorylated tau and TDP-43 
proteins. Given the millions of youth, high school, collegiate, and professional 
athletes participating in contact sports that involve repetitive brain trauma, 
as well as military personnel exposed to repeated brain trauma from blast and 
other injuries in the military, CTE represents an important public health issue. 
Focused and intensive study of the risk factors and in vivo diagnosis of CTE 
will potentially allow for methods to prevent and treat these diseases. Research 
also will provide policy makers with the scientific knowledge to make 
appropriate guidelines regarding the prevention and treatment of brain trauma in 
all levels of athletic involvement as well as the military theater.

Copyright © 2011 American Academy of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation. 
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pmrj.2011.08.008
PMID: 22035690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2671. Mol Psychiatry. 2013 Jan;18(1):79-85. doi: 10.1038/mp.2011.136. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

African ancestry protects against Alzheimer's disease-related neuropathology.

Schlesinger D(1), Grinberg LT, Alba JG, Naslavsky MS, Licinio L, Farfel JM, 
Suemoto CK, de Lucena Ferretti RE, Leite RE, de Andrade MP, dos Santos AC, 
Brentani H, Pasqualucci CA, Nitrini R, Jacob-Filho W, Zatz M; Brazilian Aging 
Brain Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Human Genome Research Center, University of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil. 
dschles@einstein.br

Previous studies in dementia epidemiology have reported higher Alzheimer's 
disease rates in African-Americans when compared with White Americans. To 
determine whether genetically determined African ancestry is associated with 
neuropathological changes commonly associated with dementia, we analyzed a 
population-based brain bank in the highly admixed city of São Paulo, Brazil. 
African ancestry was estimated through the use of previously described 
ancestry-informative markers. Risk of presence of neuritic plaques, 
neurofibrillary tangles, small vessel disease, brain infarcts and Lewy bodies in 
subjects with significant African ancestry versus those without was determined. 
Results were adjusted for multiple environmental risk factors, demographic 
variables and apolipoprotein E genotype. African ancestry was inversely 
correlated with neuritic plaques (P=0.03). Subjects with significant African 
ancestry (n=112, 55.4%) showed lower prevalence of neuritic plaques in the 
univariate analysis (odds ratio (OR) 0.72, 95% confidence interval (CI) 
0.55-0.95, P=0.01) and when adjusted for age, sex, APOE genotype and 
environmental risk factors (OR 0.43, 95% CI 0.21-0.89, P=0.02). There were no 
significant differences for the presence of other neuropathological alterations. 
We show for the first time, using genetically determined ancestry, that African 
ancestry may be highly protective of Alzheimer's disease neuropathology, 
functioning through either genetic variants or unknown environmental factors. 
Epidemiological studies correlating African-American race/ethnicity with 
increased Alzheimer's disease rates should not be interpreted as surrogates of 
genetic ancestry or considered to represent African-derived populations from the 
developing nations such as Brazil.

DOI: 10.1038/mp.2011.136
PMCID: PMC3526728
PMID: 22064377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2672. Neuroepidemiology. 2011;37(3-4):168-76. doi: 10.1159/000331490. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Parkinson's disease and dementia: a longitudinal study (DEMPARK).

Balzer-Geldsetzer M(1), Costa AS, Kronenbürger M, Schulz JB, Röske S, Spottke A, 
Wüllner U, Klockgether T, Storch A, Schneider C, Riedel O, Wittchen HU, Seifried 
C, Hilker R, Schmidt N, Witt K, Deuschl G, Mollenhauer B, Trenkwalder C, 
Liepelt-Scarfone I, Gräber-Sultan S, Berg D, Gasser T, Kalbe E, Bodden M, Oertel 
WH, Dodel R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Philipps University Marburg, Marburg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurodegenerative motor 
disorder. However, non-motor complications frequently alter the course of the 
disease. A particularly disabling non-motor symptom is dementia.
METHODS/DESIGN: The study is designed as a multicentre prospective, 
observational cohort study of about 700 PD patients aged 45-80 years with or 
without dementia and PD-mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The patients will be 
recruited in eight specialized movement disorder clinics and will be followed 
for 36 months. Information about the patients' functional status will be 
assessed at baseline and 6-/12- month intervals. In addition, 120 patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) will be included. Well-established standardized 
questionnaires/tests will be applied for detailed neuropsychological assessment. 
In addition, patients will be asked to participate in modules including 
volumetric MRI, genetic parameters, and neuropsychology to detect risk factors, 
early diagnostic biomarkers and predictors for dementia in PD.
RESULTS: The study included 604 PD patients by March 2011; 56.3% were classified 
as having PD alone, with 30.6% of patients suffering from PD-MCI and 13.1% from 
PD with dementia. The mean age of the cohort was 68.6 ± 7.9 years, with a mean 
disease duration of 6.8 ± 5.4 years. There was a preponderance of patients in 
the earlier Hoehn and Yahr stages.
CONCLUSION: The main aim of the study is to characterize the natural progression 
of cognitive impairment in PD and to identify factors which contribute to the 
evolution and/or progression of the cognitive impairment. To accomplish this aim 
we established a large cohort of PD patients without cognitive dysfunction, PD 
patients with MCI, and PD patients with dementia, to characterize these patients 
in a standardized manner, using imaging (serial structural MRI), genetic and 
proteomic methods in order to improve our understanding of the course of the PD 
process and the development of cognitive dysfunction and dementia in this 
disease. The inclusion of the DLB patients will start in the second quarter of 
2011 in the BMBF-funded follow-up project LANDSCAPE.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000331490
PMID: 22067139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2673. Int J Environ Res Public Health. 2011 Oct;8(10):3889-921. doi: 
10.3390/ijerph8103889. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

Is neurodegenerative disease a long-latency response to early-life genotoxin 
exposure?

Kisby GE(1), Spencer PS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Western University of Health Sciences, 
College of Osteopathic Medicine of the Pacific Northwest, Lebanon, OR 97355, 
USA. gkisby@westernu.edu

Western Pacific amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia complex, 
a disappearing neurodegenerative disease linked to use of the neurotoxic cycad 
plant for food and/or medicine, is intensively studied because the 
neuropathology (tauopathy) is similar to that of Alzheimer's disease. Cycads 
contain neurotoxic and genotoxic principles, notably cycasin and 
methylazoxymethanol, the latter sharing chemical relations with nitrosamines, 
which are derived from nitrates and nitrites in preserved meats and fertilizers, 
and also used in the rubber and leather industries. This review includes new 
data that influence understanding of the neurobiological actions of cycad and 
related genotoxins and the putative mechanisms by which they might trigger 
neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.3390/ijerph8103889
PMCID: PMC3210588
PMID: 22073019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2674. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Sep;33(9):1995-2005. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.09.026. Epub 2011 Nov 12.

Increased regional cerebral glucose uptake in an APP/PS1 model of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Poisnel G(1), Hérard AS, El Tannir El Tayara N, Bourrin E, Volk A, Kober F, 
Delatour B, Delzescaux T, Debeir T, Rooney T, Benavides J, Hantraye P, Dhenain 
M.

Author information:
(1)Therapeutic Strategic Unit Aging, Alzheimer/Parkinson/Stroke, Chilly-Mazarin, 
France.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common age-related neurodegenerative 
disorder, is characterized by the invariant cerebral accumulation of β-amyloid 
peptide. This event occurs early in the disease process. In humans, 
[18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose ([18F]-FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) is 
largely used to follow-up in vivo cerebral glucose utilization (CGU) and brain 
metabolism modifications associated with the Alzheimer's disease pathology. 
Here, [18F]-FDG positron emission tomography was used to study age-related 
changes of cerebral glucose utilization under resting conditions in 3-, 6-, and 
12-month-old APP(SweLon)/PS1(M146L), a mouse model of amyloidosis. We showed an 
age-dependent increase of glucose uptake in several brain regions of APP/PS1 
mice but not in control animals and a higher [18F]-FDG uptake in the cortex and 
the hippocampus of 12-month-old APP/PS1 mice as compared with age-matched 
control mice. We then developed a method of 3-D microscopic autoradiography to 
evaluate glucose uptake at the level of amyloid plaques and showed an increased 
glucose uptake close to the plaques rather than in amyloid-free cerebral 
tissues. These data suggest a macroscopic and microscopic reorganization of 
glucose uptake in relation to cerebral amyloidosis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.09.026
PMCID: PMC3666917
PMID: 22079157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2675. Curr Clin Pharmacol. 2011 Nov;6(4):236-59. doi: 10.2174/157488411798375903.

Olfactory dysfunction and cognitive impairment in age-related neurodegeneration: 
prevalence related to patient selection, diagnostic criteria and therapeutic 
treatment of aged clients receiving clinical neurology and community-based care.

Babizhayev MA(1), Deyev AI, Yegorov YE.

Author information:
(1)Innovative Vision Products, Inc., County of New Castle, Delaware 19810, USA. 
markbabizhayev@yahoo.com

A decrease in olfactory function with age has been attributed to a variety of 
factors including normal anatomical and physiological changes in aging, surgery, 
trauma, environmental factors, medications and disease. Olfactory impairment has 
also been associated with neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and Parkinson's disease. Deficits in these chemical senses cannot only 
reduce the pleasure and comfort from food, but represent risk factors for 
nutritional and immune deficiencies as well as adherence to specific dietary 
regimens. Therapy is limited, but one should be aware of the existing medical 
and surgical treatment modalities. Reactive oxygen and nitrogen species, copper 
and zinc ions, glycating agents and reactive aldehydes, protein cross-linking 
and proteolytic dysfunction may all contribute to neurodegeneration, olfactory 
dysfunction, AD. Carnosine (beta-alanyl- L-histidine) is a naturally-occurring, 
pluripotent, homeostatic transglycating agent. The olfactory lobe is normally 
enriched in carnosine and zinc. Loss of olfactory function and oxidative damage 
to olfactory tissue are early symptoms of AD. Protein and lipid oxidation and 
glycation are integral components of the AD pathophysiology. Carnosine can 
suppress amyloidbeta peptide toxicity, inhibit production of oxygen 
free-radicals, scavenge hydroxyl radicals and reactive aldehydes, and suppresses 
protein glycation. The observations suggest that patented non-hydrolyzed 
carnosine lubricant drug delivery or perfume toilet water formulations combined 
with related moiety amino acid structures, such as beta-alanine, should be 
explored for therapeutic potential towards olfactory dysfunction, AD and other 
neurodegenerative disorders. "The olfactory system, anatomically, is right in 
the middle of the part of the brain that's very important for memory. There are 
strong neural connections between the two." ~ Donald Wilson.

DOI: 10.2174/157488411798375903
PMID: 22082323 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2676. Expert Rev Neurother. 2011 Dec;11(12):1661-3. doi: 10.1586/ern.11.159.

Developing predictive biomarkers for dementia of Parkinson's disease.

Caviness JN, Aarsland D.

DOI: 10.1586/ern.11.159
PMID: 22091589 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2677. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(3):202-8. doi: 10.1159/000333072. Epub 2011 
Nov 16.

Early and presenting symptoms of dementia with lewy bodies.

Auning E(1), Rongve A, Fladby T, Booij J, Hortobágyi T, Siepel FJ, Ballard C, 
Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Psychiatry, Akershus University Hospital, Lorenskog, 
Norway.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To explore the presenting and early symptoms of dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHOD: Patients with mild dementia fulfilling diagnostic criteria for DLB (n = 
61) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) (n = 109) were recruited from outpatient 
dementia clinics in western Norway. At diagnosis, caregivers were asked which 
symptom had been the presenting symptom of dementia.
RESULTS: Caregivers reported that memory impairment was the most common 
presenting symptom in DLB (57%), followed by visual hallucinations (44%), 
depression (34%), problem solving difficulties (33%), gait problems (28%), and 
tremor/stiffness (25%). In contrast, 99% of AD carers reported impaired memory 
as a presenting symptom, whereas visual hallucinations were a presenting symptom 
in 3% of the AD cases.
CONCLUSION: DLB should be suspected in predementia cases with visual 
hallucinations.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000333072
PMID: 22095040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2678. J Pathol. 2012 Apr;226(5):693-702. doi: 10.1002/path.3969. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

The unfolded protein response is associated with early tau pathology in the 
hippocampus of tauopathies.

Nijholt DA(1), van Haastert ES, Rozemuller AJ, Scheper W, Hoozemans JJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Genome Analysis, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

Comment in
    J Pathol. 2012 Apr;226(5):687-92.

The unfolded protein response (UPR) is a stress response activated upon 
disturbed homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). Previously, we reported 
that the activation of the UPR closely correlates with the presence of 
phosphorylated tau (p-tau) in Alzheimer's disease (AD). As well as increased 
presence of intracellular p-tau, AD brains are characterized by extracellular 
deposits of β amyloid (Aβ). Recent in vitro studies have shown that Aβ can 
induce ER stress and activation of the UPR. The aim of the present study is to 
investigate UPR activation in sporadic tauopathies like progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP) and Pick's disease (PiD), and familial cases with frontotemporal 
dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) which carry 
mutations in the gene encoding for tau (MAPT). The presence of phosphorylated 
pancreatic ER kinase (pPERK) and phosphorylated inositol requiring enzyme 1α 
(pIRE1), which are indicative of an activated UPR, was assessed by 
immunohistochemistry in cases neuropathologically defined as frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration with tau pathology (FTLD-tau). Increased presence of UPR 
activation markers pPERK and pIRE1 was observed in neurons and glia in FTLD-tau 
cases, in contrast to FTLD subtypes negative for tau pathology or in 
non-neurological controls. pPERK and pIRE1 were also prominently present in 
relatively young carriers of MAPT mutation. A strong association between the 
presence of UPR activation markers and p-tau was observed in the hippocampus of 
FTLD-tau cases. Double immunohistochemical staining on FTLD-tau cases revealed 
that UPR activation is predominantly observed in neurons that show diffuse 
staining of p-tau. These data demonstrate that UPR activation is intimately 
connected with the accumulation and aggregation of p-tau, and occurs 
independently from Aβ deposits. Our findings provide new pathological insight 
into the close association between p-tau and UPR activation in tauopathies.

Copyright © 2012 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/path.3969
PMID: 22102449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2679. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Mar;18(3):268-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.11.001. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Deep brain stimulation in early Parkinson's disease: enrollment experience from 
a pilot trial.

Charles PD(1), Dolhun RM, Gill CE, Davis TL, Bliton MJ, Tramontana MG, Salomon 
RM, Wang L, Hedera P, Phibbs FT, Neimat JS, Konrad PE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, 
Tennessee 37232, USA. david.charles@vanderbilt.edu

BACKGROUND: Deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the subthalamic nucleus is an 
accepted therapy for advanced Parkinson's disease (PD). In animal models, 
pharmacologic ablation and stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus have resulted 
in clinical improvement and, in some cases, improved survival of dopaminergic 
neurons. DBS has not been studied in the early stages of PD, but early 
application should be explored to evaluate safety, efficacy, and the potential 
to alter disease progression.
METHODS: We are conducting a prospective, randomized, single-blind clinical 
trial of optimal drug therapy (ODT) compared to medication plus DBS (ODT + DBS) 
in subjects with Hoehn & Yahr Stage II idiopathic PD who are without motor 
fluctuations or dementia. We report here subject screening, enrollment, baseline 
characteristics, and adverse events.
RESULTS: 30 subjects (average age 60 ± 6.9 years, average duration of medicine 
2.1 ± 1.3 years, average UPDRS-III scores 14.9 on medication and 27.0 off 
medication) are enrolled in the ongoing study. Twelve of 15 subjects randomized 
to DBS experienced perioperative adverse events, the majority of which were 
related to the procedure or device and resolved without sequelae. Frequently 
reported adverse events included wound healing problems, headache, edema, and 
confusion.
CONCLUSION: This report demonstrates that subjects with early stage PD can be 
successfully recruited, consented and retained in a long-term clinical trial of 
DBS. Our ongoing pilot investigation will provide important preliminary safety 
and tolerability data concerning the application of DBS in early stage PD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.11.001
PMCID: PMC3288479
PMID: 22104012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2680. Brain. 2012 Jan;135(Pt 1):170-80. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr277. Epub 2011 Nov 21.

Alzheimer's disease pattern of brain atrophy predicts cognitive decline in 
Parkinson's disease.

Weintraub D(1), Dietz N, Duda JE, Wolk DA, Doshi J, Xie SX, Davatzikos C, Clark 
CM, Siderowf A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104-3339, USA. daniel.weintraub@uphs.upenn.edu

Research suggests overlap in brain regions undergoing neurodegeneration in 
Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease. To assess the clinical significance of 
this, we applied a validated Alzheimer's disease-spatial pattern of brain 
atrophy to patients with Parkinson's disease with a range of cognitive abilities 
to determine its association with cognitive performance and decline. At 
baseline, 84 subjects received structural magnetic resonance imaging brain scans 
and completed the Dementia Rating Scale-2, and new robust and expanded Dementia 
Rating Scale-2 norms were applied to cognitively classify participants. 
Fifty-nine non-demented subjects were assessed annually with the Dementia Rating 
Scale-2 for two additional years. Magnetic resonance imaging scans were 
quantified using both a region of interest approach and voxel-based morphometry 
analysis, and a method for quantifying the presence of an Alzheimer's disease 
spatial pattern of brain atrophy was applied to each scan. In multivariate 
models, higher Alzheimer's disease pattern of atrophy score was associated with 
worse global cognitive performance (β = -0.31, P = 0.007), including in 
non-demented patients (β = -0.28, P = 0.05). In linear mixed model analyses, 
higher baseline Alzheimer's disease pattern of atrophy score predicted long-term 
global cognitive decline in non-demented patients [F(1, 110) = 9.72, P = 0.002], 
remarkably even in those with normal cognition at baseline [F(1, 80) = 4.71, 
P = 0.03]. In contrast, in cross-sectional and longitudinal analyses there was 
no association between region of interest brain volumes and cognitive 
performance in patients with Parkinson's disease with normal cognition. These 
findings support involvement of the hippocampus and parietal-temporal cortex 
with cognitive impairment and long-term decline in Parkinson's disease. In 
addition, an Alzheimer's disease pattern of brain atrophy may be a preclinical 
biomarker of cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr277
PMCID: PMC3316476
PMID: 22108576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2681. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Mar 15;314(1-2):48-56. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.11.001. Epub 
2011 Nov 21.

Peripheral markers in neurodegenerative patients and their first-degree 
relatives.

Cristalli DO(1), Arnal N, Marra FA, de Alaniz MJ, Marra CA.

Author information:
(1)INIBIOLP (Instituto de Investigaciones Bioquímicas de La Plata), CCT La 
Plata, CONICET-UNLP, Cátedra de Bioquímica y Biología Molecular, Facultad de 
Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Calles 60 y 120 (1900) La 
Plata, Argentina.

We have determined various biomarkers in the peripheral blood of Alzheimer, 
Parkinson and vascular dementia patients by comparing the samples with those of 
first-degree relatives and control subjects. Our results, together with 
correlation studies using data from the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
suggest that the clinical evaluation of the nitrite (NOx) concentration in 
Alzheimer patients should be complemented by assays of protein carbonyls (PCs) 
levels, the ratio of reduced to oxidized glutathione (GSH/GSSG) in plasma, PCs 
in erythrocytes and PCs and calcium content in leukocytes. For Parkinson 
patients it would be useful to determine NOx, thiobarbituric-acid reactive 
substances (TBARS) and PCs in erythrocytes, and NOx and TBARS en leukocytes. For 
vascular-demented (VD) patients, determination of NOx, Cu, and GSH/GSSG in 
plasma and TBARS, and PCs in erythrocytes together with PCs in leukocytes should 
be assayed. Relatives of Alzheimer patients showed alterations in plasma Se and 
Zn concentrations, catalase (CAT) activity in erythrocytes and calcium content 
in leukocytes as possible predictive markers of the disease. Relatives of 
Parkinson patients showed elevated levels of NOx in leukocytes. In the case of 
vascular-demented patients we suggest NOx, GSH/GSSG and α-tocopherol in plasma, 
the CAT/superoxide dismutase ratio in erythrocytes and TBARS, GSSG and 
glutathione reductase in leukocytes as predictive markers. Large-scale 
longitudinal population-based studies using these suggested biomarkers are 
necessary in order to assess their level of reliability and specificity in 
clinical practice.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.11.001
PMID: 22113180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2682. Postgrad Med J. 2011 Dec;87(1034):829-36. doi: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2011-130051.

Vascular parkinsonism: what makes it different?

Gupta D(1), Kuruvilla A.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Walter C Mackenzie Health 
Sciences Center, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada. 
docdeepakgupta@gmail.com

Vascular parkinsonism (VP) accounts for 2.5-5% of all cases of parkinsonism in 
various population based and clinical cohort studies. VP develops as a result of 
ischaemic cerebrovascular disease, so aetiologically it is classified as 
secondary parkinsonism. It has been variably referred to in the literature as 
arteriosclerotic parkinsonism, vascular pseudo-parkinsonism, and lower body 
parkinsonism. The most important consideration while making a diagnosis of VP 
should be to differentiate VP from Parkinson's disease (PD) because of 
prognostic and therapeutic implications. The salient clinical features in VP 
which differentiate it from PD are presentation with postural instability and 
falls rather than with upper limb rest tremor or bradykinesia; short shuffling 
parkinsonian gait in VP is accompanied by a wider base of stance and variable 
stride length (parkinsonian-ataxic gait), absence of festination, frequent 
occurrence of pyramidal signs, and early subcortical dementia. In a patient 
where the clinical features are suggestive of VP the clinical diagnosis can be 
supported by demonstration of diffuse white matter lesions and/or strategic 
subcortical infarcts in the MRI of the brain. The therapeutic options in VP are 
limited to levodopa, and a poor or non-sustained response to levodopa is another 
differentiating feature between VP and PD.

DOI: 10.1136/postgradmedj-2011-130051
PMID: 22121251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2683. Epigenomics. 2010 Oct;2(5):671-82. doi: 10.2217/epi.10.43.

Role of epigenetics in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Kwok JB(1).

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, NSW, Australia. 
j.kwok@neura.edu.au

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are two common 
neurodegenerative diseases that result in the progressive damage or death of 
neurons. Environmental agents have the potential to damage the developing and 
mature nervous system, resulting in neurodegenerative diseases. Heritable 
changes in gene expression that do not involve coding sequence modifications are 
referred to as 'epigenetic'. These modifications include DNA methylation and 
downstream modification of histones. Environmental factors, including heavy 
metals and dietary folate intake, perturb neurodegenerative genes by epigenetic 
means, leading to altered gene expression and late-onset neurodegenerative 
diseases. Research into the genetic control of DNA methylation indicates an 
allelic skewing in a significant proportion of genes. This phenomenon may 
determine how an individual's genetic makeup can alter the effect an 
environmental factor has on their risk of developing neurodegeneration. Finally, 
preliminary evidence using cell culture and transgenic animal models suggests 
that whole classes of pan-epigenetic modifiers will have significant protective 
effects against common neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.2217/epi.10.43
PMID: 22122050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2684. Neurochem Res. 2012 Jun;37(6):1261-6. doi: 10.1007/s11064-011-0662-4. Epub 2011 
Nov 29.

Pathobiochemical effect of acylated steryl-β-glucoside on aggregation and 
cytotoxicity of α-synuclein.

Usuki S(1), Kamitani T, Matsuo Y, Yu RK.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Georgia Health Sciences 
University, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. susuki@georgiahealth.edu

Cycad seed consumption by the native islanders of Guam is frequently associated 
with high rates of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-parkinsonism dementia complex 
(ALS/PDC); furthermore, accompanying pathological examination often exhibits 
α-synuclein inclusions in the neurons of the affected brain. Acylated 
steryl-β-glucoside (ASG) contained in cycad seeds is considered as causative 
environmental risk factor. We aimed to investigate whether ASG influences 
aggregation and cell toxicity of α-synuclein. To understand whether ASG is a 
causative factor in the development of ALS/PDC, soybean-derived ASG was tested 
for its effect on in vitro aggregation of α-synuclein using Thioflavin-T. ASG 
was also tested to determine whether it modulates α-synuclein cytotoxicity in 
yeast cells. In addition, we determined whether an interaction between ASG and 
α-synuclein occurs in the plasma membrane or cytoplasm using three factors: GM1 
ganglioside, small unilamellar vesicles, and ATP. In the present study, we found 
that ASG-mediated acceleration of α-synuclein aggregation is influenced by the 
presence of ATP, but not by the presence of GM1. ASG accelerated the α-synuclein 
aggregation in the cytoplasm. ASG also enhanced α-synuclein-induced cytotoxicity 
in yeast cells. This study demonstrated that ASG directly enhances aggregation 
and cytotoxicity of α-synuclein, which are often observed in patients with 
ALS/PDC. These results, using assays that replicate cytoplasmic conditions, are 
consistent with the molecular mechanism that cytotoxicity is caused by 
intracellular α-synuclein fibril formation in neuronal cells.

DOI: 10.1007/s11064-011-0662-4
PMCID: PMC3895943
PMID: 22124781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2685. Aging Ment Health. 2012;16(4):529-36. doi: 10.1080/13607863.2011.628979. Epub 
2011 Nov 29.

Cognitive impairments in Parkinson's disease.

Liu JH(1), Li XS, Ye J, Gao LH, Zhang ZP, Wu W, Yao L, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department of Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, 
China.

OBJECTIVE: Dementia and cognitive impairment (CI) are common in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and have important clinical consequences. We explored the 
prognostic factors for CI in patients with PD.
METHODS: A total of 102 patients with PD in Xuan wu hospital and Qian dongnan 
People's Hospital from 2005 to 2010 were included in this study. All patients 
underwent clinical and neurological assessments. Relevant demographic and 
performance parameters were analysed to determine variables that may be 
independently associated with the progression of CI.
RESULTS: In the 6-month follow-up group, CI progressed in three out of 58 cases 
(5%): two cases progressed from mild CI (MiCI) to moderate CI (MoCI), and one 
case from MoCI to dementia. In the six-month-to-two-year follow-up group, seven 
out of 46 cases (15%) worsened: one case developed MiCI, three cases progressed 
from MiCI to MoCI and three other cases from MoCI to dementia. In the 
two-to-five-year group, 20 out of 44 cases (45%) worsened with one case 
developing MiCI, 14 cases progressing from MiCi to MoCI and five cases from MoCI 
to dementia. Compared with other patients, those with worsening of CI symptoms 
were significantly older in the two-to-five-year group. Progression of CI was 
also associated with age at onset and initial staging of PD.
CONCLUSIONS: Advanced age, late onset of disease and severity of PD are the 
predictive factors for the progression of CI in PD. The highest probability of 
progression of CI is in patients with initial severe impairments of visuospatial 
function.

DOI: 10.1080/13607863.2011.628979
PMID: 22126334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2686. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Apr 15;315(1-2):115-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.11.012. Epub 
2011 Nov 29.

Early detection of dementia with Lewy bodies in patients with amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment using 123I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy.

Fujishiro H(1), Nakamura S, Kitazawa M, Sato K, Iseki E.

Author information:
(1)PET/CT Dementia Research Center, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical 
Center, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 3-3-20 Shinsuna, Tokyo 136-0075, 
Japan. fujishiro17@hotmail.co.jp

Increasing clinical attention has been focused on cardiac sympathetic 
denervation for the differential diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
from Alzheimer's disease (AD) with the development of [123I] 
metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy. Decreased MIBG uptake, which 
reflects cardiac sympathetic denervation, has been detected in DLB, but not in 
AD. However, the time course of detected cardiac sympathetic degeneration is 
poorly understood in DLB. Herein, the authors report two patients with a 
clinical diagnosis of amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) who had cardiac 
sympathetic denervation, detected by cardiac (123)I-MIBG scintigraphy, without 
the core clinical features of DLB. One amnestic MCI patient had nocturnal dream 
enactment behavior, consistent with clinically probable REM sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD), and converted to probable DLB with the development of recurrent 
visual hallucination and spontaneous parkinsonism two years after MCI is 
diagnosed. The other amnestic MCI patient exhibited occipital metabolic 
reduction on [18F]-fluoro-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission tomography (PET) 
scan, which is the preferentially affected region in DLB patients, although she 
had no core or suggestive clinical features of DLB. Both patients had abnormal 
findings on electrocardiogram at annual health checkups despite having no 
cardiac-related symptoms. Detailed clinical examinations, including angiography 
and echocardiogram, revealed no overt etiology, supporting the idea that cardiac 
sympathetic denervation is due to underlying Lewy body disease. The clinical 
courses of these patients suggest that (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy is 
useful for the detection of DLB in the predementia phase, even before core 
clinical features appear.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.11.012
PMID: 22129938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2687. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 May;33(5):1012.e1-10. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.10.019. Epub 2011 Nov 29.

Abnormal temporal dynamics of visual attention in Alzheimer's disease and in 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Peters F(1), Ergis AM, Gauthier S, Dieudonné B, Verny M, Jolicoeur P, Belleville 
S.

Author information:
(1)Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada. 
Frederic.Peters@criugm.qc.ca

Although attentional control processes are disproportionately impaired in 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) compared with dementia of the Alzheimer type 
(DAT), previous studies have not compared directly the temporal dynamics of 
visual attention in DLB and DAT. We examined the magnitude of the attentional 
blink (AB) effect in these patients, to determine the degree to which each 
patient group exhibited a deficit in selecting and processing visual stimuli 
presented in rapid succession. Eighteen DAT, 15 DLB patients, and 33 elderly 
controls were tested in a rapid serial visual presentation task. Participants 
were asked to report 1 (single-target condition) or 2 target letters 
(dual-target condition) embedded in a sequence of digit distracters. The 
temporal dynamics of visual attention was examined by varying the number of 
intervening distracters between the 2 targets in the dual-target condition and 
by estimating the attentional blink effect as the decline in the ability to 
report the second target correctly after successfully identifying the first. 
Patients with DLB performed significantly worse than patients with DAT and 
controls in both the single and dual-targets conditions. In contrast, DAT 
patients showed a selective impairment in the dual-target condition as compared 
with controls. As predicted, we found that both patients with DAT and DLB showed 
a more pronounced and protracted attentional blink than controls, indicating a 
reduced ability to re-engage attention on the second target. Furthermore, when 
DAT and DLB patients were able to report the second target, they frequently 
failed to identify the first, an effect that was absent in elderly controls and 
particularly large and long-lasting in DLB patients. This study suggests that 
both DLB and DAT patients show abnormal temporal dynamics of visual selective 
attention, presumably due to a greater intertarget competition for limited 
processing capacity. More generally, these findings reinforce the notion that 
deficits of attentional control processes are more severe in DLB patients as 
compared with DAT patients.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2011.10.019
PMID: 22130206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2688. Neurology. 2011 Dec 13;77(24):2119-22. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823e9f2a. Epub 
2011 Nov 30.

Computerized visual field defects in posterior cortical atrophy.

Pelak VS(1), Smyth SF, Boyer PJ, Filley CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, 
Denver, CO, USA. victoria.pelak@ucdenver.edu

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Posterior cortical atrophy (PCA) is a progressive 
neurodegenerative syndrome that presents with cortical visual dysfunction and 
relatively preserved memory. Although higher cortical visual syndromes are well 
known in PCA, visual field defects detected by computerized visual field (CVF) 
perimetry have not been systematically described. The objective of this study 
was to describe CVF defects measured by threshold perimetry in PCA.
METHODS: This was a retrospective case series of patients meeting proposed PCA 
diagnostic criteria seen in the Neuro-ophthalmology and Neurobehavior Clinics at 
the University of Colorado during 2002 to 2006. History, examination, 
neuroimaging, autopsy, and CVF studies were analyzed.
RESULTS: Nine of 11 patients who met the criteria for PCA and had CVF testing 
were included. Seven of the 9 patients had homonymous hemianopia or 
quadrantanopia, and 2 had bilateral constriction. All patients progressed to 
dementia. Criteria were met for probable Alzheimer disease (AD) in 7, definite 
AD in 1, and definite dementia with Lewy bodies associated with AD pathology in 
1. Seven of 9 patients had early and prominent complaints of difficulty driving.
CONCLUSIONS: CVF defects were characterized by homonymous visual field defects 
or bilateral constriction. Eight of 9 patients progressed to probable or 
definite AD, but the CVF defects were distinctly different from those in typical 
AD. This observation probably reflects a posterior shift of cortical pathology 
to the primary and early secondary visual cortices in PCA. CVF testing should be 
considered in older patients with unexplained visual complaints, particularly 
when associated with difficulty driving, which may indicate the possibility of 
PCA and prompt early neurobehavioral evaluation.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823e9f2a
PMID: 22131540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2689. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Mar 15;314(1-2):41-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.11.002. Epub 
2011 Nov 30.

Impact of complications and comorbidities on treatment costs and health-related 
quality of life of patients with Parkinson's disease.

Bach JP(1), Riedel O, Klotsche J, Spottke A, Dodel R, Wittchen HU.

Author information:
(1)Philipps-University Marburg, Department of Neurology, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Data regarding both drug-related and non-drug-related costs in 
patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) are scarce, mainly due to the 
difficulties in data acquisition in experimental designs. Likewise, the reported 
impact of drug costs on total direct costs varies across different studies. In 
addition, the influence of comorbidities on both treatment costs and 
health-related quality of life has not been adequately evaluated.
METHODS: A sample of office-based neurologists (n=315) in Germany was asked to 
examine up to five consecutive patients with PD (n=1449) on a specified day 
during the study period. Patients of all ages were eligible and their evaluation 
was performed using standardized questionnaires.
RESULTS: PD-specific therapy costs increased with the stage of the disease, 
early onset of the disease and disease duration. The major costs were due to 
PD-related therapy, whereas other medications only resulted in minor costs. 
Disease stage mainly influenced direct therapy costs, with an observed increase 
of total daily costs from €7.3 to €11.3/day. In addition, disease onset at age 
<65 years resulted in total daily costs of €11.2 compared to late onset of 
disease (>75 years) with daily therapy costs of €5.3. In this patient group 
neuropsychiatric comorbidities such as dementia and depression were only 
insufficiently treated. In addition, these comorbidities severely affected 
health-related quality of life.
CONCLUSION: Therapy costs were influenced by disease stage, disease onset as 
well as present comorbidities. Furthermore, comorbidities such as depression and 
dementia were diagnosed but were not adequately treated.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.11.002
PMID: 22133477 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2690. Exp Neurol. 2012 Jan;233(1):513-22. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.11.031. Epub 
2011 Dec 3.

The MPTP neurotoxic lesion model of Parkinson's disease activates the 
apolipoprotein E cascade in the mouse brain.

Domenger D(1), Dea D, Theroux L, Moquin L, Gratton A, Poirier J.

Author information:
(1)Douglas Mental Health University Institute, 6875 Lasalle Blvd, Verdun, 
Quebec, Canada.

Apolipoprotein E (apoE) is recognized as a key actor in brain remodeling. It has 
been shown to increase after peripheral and central injury, to modulate 
reparative capacity in neurodegenerative conditions like Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and to be associated with a number of other neurodegenerative diseases. 
This particular function of apoE has been postulated to underlie the robust 
association with risk and age at onset of AD. ApoE associations studies with 
Parkinson's disease (PD), the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disease, 
have generated contradictory results but associations with age at onset and 
dementia in PD stand out. We investigate here whether apoE is involved in 
response to 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)-induced 
degeneration that models PD-like deafferentation of the striatum in the mouse 
and participates in compensatory reinnervation mechanisms. We examined the 
modifications in gene expression and protein levels of apoE and its key 
receptors, the low density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) and the LDLR-related 
protein (LRP), as well as the reactive astrocyte marker glial fibrillary acidic 
protein (GFAP) in different brain structures throughout the degenerative and 
reactive regenerative period. In the striatum, upregulations of GFAP, apoE and 
LRP mRNAs at 1 day post-treatment were associated with marked decreases in 
dopamine (DA) levels, loss in tyrosine hydroxylase protein content, as well as 
to a compensatory increase in dopaminergic metabolism. Subsequent return to near 
control levels coincided with indications of reinnervation in the striatum: all 
consistent with a role of apoE during the degenerative process and regenerative 
period. We also found that this cascade was activated in the hippocampus and 
more so than in the striatum, with a particular contribution of LDLR expression. 
The hippocampal activation did not correlate with substantial neurochemical 
reductions but appears to reflect local subtle alteration of DA metabolism and 
the regulation of plasticity-related event in this structure. This study 
provides first evidence of an activation of the apoE/apoE receptors cascade in a 
mouse model of PD, specifically in the MPTP-induced deafferentation of the 
striatum. Results are also quite consistent with the postulated role of apoE in 
brain repair but, raise the issue of possible lesion- and region-specific 
alterations in gene expression.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2011.11.031
PMID: 22155743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2691. Arch Neurol. 2011 Dec;68(12):1562-8. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.725.

Neurodegeneration across stages of cognitive decline in Parkinson disease.

Weintraub D(1), Doshi J, Koka D, Davatzikos C, Siderowf AD, Duda JE, Wolk DA, 
Moberg PJ, Xie SX, Clark CM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, 3615 Chestnut St, Ste 
330, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. daniel.weintraub@uphs.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVE: To assess regions and patterns of brain atrophy in patients with 
Parkinson disease (PD) with normal cognition (PD-NC), mild cognitive impairment 
(PD-MCI), and dementia-level cognitive deficits (PDD).
DESIGN: Images were quantified using a region-of-interest approach and 
voxel-based morphometry analysis. We used a high-dimensional pattern 
classification approach to delineate brain regions that collectively formed the 
Spatial Pattern of Abnormalities for Recognition of PDD.
SETTING: The Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center at the University 
of Pennsylvania.
SUBJECTS: Eighty-four PD patients (61 PD-NC, 12 PD-MCI, and 11 PDD) and 23 
healthy control subjects (HCs) underwent magnetic resonance imaging of the 
brain.
RESULTS: The PD-NC patients did not demonstrate significant brain atrophy 
compared with HCs. Compared with PD-NC patients, PD-MCI patients had hippocampal 
atrophy (β = -0.37; P = .001), and PDD patients demonstrated hippocampal (β = 
-0.32; P = .004) and additional medial temporal lobe atrophy (β = -0.36; P = 
.003). The PD-MCI patients had a different pattern of atrophy compared with 
PD-NC patients (P = .04) and a similar pattern to that of PDD patients (P = 
.81), characterized by hippocampal, prefrontal cortex gray and white matter, 
occipital lobe gray and white matter, and parietal lobe white matter atrophy. In 
nondemented PD patients, there was a correlation between memory-encoding 
performance and hippocampal volume.
CONCLUSIONS: Hippocampal atrophy is a biomarker of initial cognitive decline in 
PD, including impaired memory encoding and storage, suggesting heterogeneity in 
the neural substrate of memory impairment. Use of a pattern classification 
approach may allow identification of diffuse regions of cortical gray and white 
matter atrophy early in the course of cognitive decline.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.725
PMCID: PMC3290902
PMID: 22159053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2692. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2012 May;119(5):597-604. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-011-0733-3. Epub 2011 Dec 13.

Neuropsychology, neuroimaging or motor phenotype in diagnosis of Parkinson's 
disease-dementia: which matters most?

Di Biasio F(1), Vanacore N, Fasano A, Modugno N, Gandolfi B, Lena F, Grillea G, 
Pietracupa S, Caranci G, Ruggieri S.

Author information:
(1)Sapienza, University of Rome, Rome, Italy. fradibias@hotmail.it

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a neurodegenerative disorder affecting not only the 
motor system but also the cognitive and behavioral domains. Although there are 
many studies addressing the issue of cognition, a universally recognized method 
to diagnose patients with dementia is still lacking. The aim of this study was 
to determine which neuropsychological test is the most reliable in the diagnosis 
of dementia in PD and to establish if mini mental state examination (MMSE) is 
enough to detect this condition. We studied 200 consecutive PD patients through 
an extensive neuropsychological battery, clinical evaluation and brain magnetic 
resonance imaging over a period of 4 years. A logistic regression model was used 
to evaluate the interplay between possible risk factors and the accuracy of 
different neuropsychological tests. PD patients with dementia performed 
significantly worse in all the tests as compared to patients with PD alone: 
phonological verbal fluency, attentional matrices, Rey auditory verbal learning 
test and digit span were the most useful tools. Age and disease duration were 
correlated with cognitive impairment. No relevant differences were detected in 
phenotype, affected body side at onset, levodopa equivalent daily dose or 
neuroimaging findings (except for the occurrence of atrophy). Despite reasonable 
accuracy of MMSE (90%), its positive predictive value is only 74%. Using at 
least 3 neuropsychological tests, among those more significant detected with 
logistic regression analysis, the positive predictive value rises to 91%. In 
conclusion, the use of an extensive neuropsychological battery is still 
recommended in the diagnosis of dementia in PD.

© Springer-Verlag 2011

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-011-0733-3
PMID: 22160550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2693. Glas Srp Akad Nauka Med. 2011;(51):85-97.

[Selective stimulations and lesions of the rat brain nuclei as the models for 
research of the human sleep pathology mechanisms].

[Article in Serbian]

Šaponjić J.

Many complex behavioral phenomena such as sleep can not be explained without 
multidisciplinary experimental approach, and complementay approaches in the 
animal models "in vivo" and human studies. Electrophysiological, 
pharmacological, anatomical and immunohistochemical techniques, and particularly 
stereotaxically guided local nanovolume microinjection technique, enable us to 
selectively stimulate and lesion the brain nuclei or their specific neuronal 
subpopulation, and to reslove the mechanisms of certain brain structure 
regulatory role, and its afferent-efferent connectivity within the brain. Local 
stereotaxically guided nanovolume microinjection technique enable us to 
investigate in animals the brain nulcei functional topography with a resolution 
of < or = 10 microM, and at a level of 300 microM of effective radius within the 
brain tissue "in vivo". The advantage of local glutamate or DL- homocysteic acid 
microinjection stimulation or local excitotoxic (glutamate, ibotenic acid, IgG 
saporin) microinjection lesion over electrical stimulation/lesion of the same 
neuronal population are that they reduces the likelihood of activation/lesion of 
fibers of passage. Much of our knowledge of the sleep neuronal substrates is 
based on animal studies primarly in cat and rat. Selective pharmacological 
stimulation of the pedunculopontine tegmentum (PPT) in freely moving rat, using 
glutamate microinjection, proved that excitation of its cholinergic part is 
necessary for induction of wakefulness or REM (Datta S, 2001). Local nanovolume 
glutamate microinjection into PPT of anesthetized rats (Saponjić et al, 2003a) 
additionally evidenced P-wave and respiratory regulating neuronal subpopulation 
within the cholinergic compartment of PPT (apneogenic neuronal zone). Local 
microinjection of serotonin and noradrenaline into cholinergic PPT apneogenic 
zone evidenced their opposed impact through PPT on breathing, in contrast to 
their convergent regulatory role in behavioral state control (Saponjić et al., 
2005a). Also, selective pharmacological stimulation by microinjection of 
DL-homocysteic acid defined four neuronal micro-circuitry approximately 500 
microm in lenght of breathing-related neurons within the ventral respiratory 
group of medulla oblongata, which when stimulated produce different effects on 
respiratory rate, rhythm and amplitude, and on blood pressure. This study was 
the first high resolution study in order to understand anatomical and functional 
neuronal system organization (Monnier et al., 2003). Recently, local glutamate 
microinjection stimulation technique enabled detailed functional topography of 
respiratory, cardiovascular and pontine-wave responses within the PPT (Topchiy 
et al., 2010). Discovery of "flip-flop" switch for REM sleep control is based on 
the experiments in rats using local stereotaxically guided microinjection of 
excitotoxins (ibotenic acid, IgG saporin), and the anterograde and retrograde 
tracers for selective lesion, and identifying "REM-off" and "REM- on" regions 
and their afferent-efferent connections, and for identifying pathways for REM 
atonia and REM EEG activation (Lu et al., 2006). Recently, selective lesion of 
SLD part of "REM-on" region in rat established an animal model of RBD, as well 
as a selective ibotenic acid lesion of PC part of "REM-on" region abolished 
theta during REM (Lu et al., 200; Anaclet et al., 2010). Selective ablation 
targeted to pre-Bötzinger complex neurons of ventrolateral respiratory group of 
medulla in rat induced REM related respiratory disorder up to 10 days, when this 
respiratory disorder became spreaded to all sleep phases, and even during 
wakefulness, due to long-lasting intermitent hypoxia, and an increase of the 
threshold for hypoxia/hypercapnea induced arousal response (McKay et al., 2005). 
Human development, maturation, healthy aging and many neurological diseases are 
associated with profound changes in sleep/wake states distribution and with 
variety of the sleep-related behavioral disorders. Sleep and sleep-related 
respiratory disorders (insomnia, hypersomnia, parasomnias, excessive nocturnal 
motor activity, circadian sleep-wake rhythm disturbances, respiratory 
dysrhythmias, RBD) are very frequently unnoticed in patients with 
neurodegenerative diseases (Boeve et al., 2007; Whitwell et al., 2007). 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease (AD, PD) are the most common 
neurodegenerative diseases, with prevalence of 0.5-1%; increasing to 1-3% for 
Parkinson, and up to 50% for Alzheimer's disease in ages over 69 (Nussbaum and 
Christopher, 2003). In spite of a long knowledge of their clinical description 
and brain pathology (lesions of the NB cholinergic neurons in basal forebrain, 
dopaminergic neurons in substantia nigra, etc.), they remain incurable with only 
limited success in temporal amelioration of their symptoms. Clinical symptoms 
first appear at 65-69 years on average, but there are indications that 
subclinical features may start many years earlier. Patients with REM-sleep 
behavior disorder (RBD) face close to a 20% 5-year risk of developing PD or 
dementia, and that risk rises to more than 40% after 10 years, and exceeds 50% 
after 12 years. Human studies evidenced that sleep/wake cycle disturbance, as no 
cognitive symptom of dementia, precedes on average 3 years before the clinical 
diagnosis of the AD (Simic et al., 2009), and that RBD, precedes as symptom the 
onset of motor and cognitive disturbances by years or decades. AD and PD involve 
the selective loss of specific neuronal populations within the brain. RBD in 
those patients reflects an underlying synucleinopathy, with presence of the 
alpha-synuclein protein pathology within the REM sleep-related regulatory 
structures of the dorsal midbrain and pons at the onset of disease, with 
ascending pattern of neurodegeneration progression from brainstem to basal areas 
of the brain (Whitwell et al., 2007; Simic et al., 2009: Raggi and Ferri, 2010). 
On the base of hypothesis that basal forebrain cholinergic system plays an 
important role in the etiology of the most common neurodegenerative diseases of 
elderly (AD, PD), the lesion of the nucleus basalis in rat presents the most 
utilized "in vivo" animal model to study the disorders of cortical cholinergic 
innervation, and its impact on higher central nervous system functions. Our 
knowledge of the neural substrates for sleep/wake states and sleep-related 
behavior disorders regulation in health and the diseases, over more than 50 
years of sleep research, is based on animal models, pharmacotherapy, central 
nervous system lesions, and the neuropathological studies in humans. Today we 
have many complementary animal models of human sleep pathology, and further work 
in fundamental multidisciplinary and clinical research between sleep and 
neurodegenerative disease investigators is promising to enable us understand 
normal and abnormal sleep, and may provide new insights into preventive or 
disease-altering approaches for therapy. Obviously counseling and prevention of 
AD or PD would be highly enriched by the development of a practical, sensitive 
and reliable methodology of detecting those patients with RBD, or other sleep 
disorders, who are at risk for developing AD or PD.

PMID: 22165729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2694. Mov Disord. 2011 Dec;26(14):2483-95. doi: 10.1002/mds.23919. Epub 2011 Aug 24.

Cognitive impairment in nondemented Parkinson's disease.

Barone P(1), Aarsland D, Burn D, Emre M, Kulisevsky J, Weintraub D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University Federico II-ICD Hermitage, 
Capodimonte, Naples, Italy. barone@unina.it

A substantial percentage of patients with newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease 
without dementia are reported to be affected by cognitive impairment (CI). In 
practice, however, CI is underrecognized, as the signs may not be apparent in 
early-stage disease and many routine assessment tools lack the sensitivity to 
detect subtle cognitive dysfunction. Patients with PD and mild CI (MCI) may have 
a higher risk of developing dementia than cognitively intact PD patients; 
however, it is not currently known which patients with CI are at increased risk 
of developing dementia. This review summarizes current knowledge about CI in 
nondemented PD; it discusses the structural and functional changes associated 
with CI and addresses areas of unmet needs. We focus on questions that should be 
addressed in future studies to achieve consensus on its characteristics and 
definition, pathophysiology, epidemiology, diagnosis and assessment, and 
treatment and management.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.23919
PMID: 22170275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2695. Neurology. 2012 Jan 3;78(1):47-54. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823ed0f0. Epub 2011 
Dec 14.

Cerebrospinal fluid markers for differential dementia diagnosis in a large 
memory clinic cohort.

Schoonenboom NS(1), Reesink FE, Verwey NA, Kester MI, Teunissen CE, van de Ven 
PM, Pijnenburg YA, Blankenstein MA, Rozemuller AJ, Scheltens P, van der Flier 
WM.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology, VU University Medical Center, Alzheimer Center, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. niki.schoonenboom@vumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: To determine how amyloid β 42 (Aβ42), total tau (t-tau), and 
phosphorylated tau (p-tau) levels in CSF behave in a large cohort of patients 
with different types of dementia.
METHODS: Baseline CSF was collected from 512 patients with Alzheimer disease 
(AD) and 272 patients with other types of dementia (OD), 135 patients with a 
psychiatric disorder (PSY), and 275 patients with subjective memory complaints 
(SMC). Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau (at amino acid 181) were measured in CSF by ELISA. 
Autopsy was obtained in a subgroup of 17 patients.
RESULTS: A correct classification of patients with AD (92%) and patients with OD 
(66%) was accomplished when CSF Aβ42 and p-tau were combined. Patients with 
progressive supranuclear palsy had normal CSF biomarker values in 90%. Patients 
with Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease demonstrated an extremely high CSF t-tau at a 
relatively normal CSF p-tau. CSF AD biomarker profile was seen in 47% of 
patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 38% in corticobasal degeneration 
(CBD), and almost 30% in frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and vascular 
dementia (VaD). PSY and SMC patients had normal CSF biomarkers in 91% and 88%. 
Older patients are more likely to have a CSF AD profile. Concordance between 
clinical and neuropathologic diagnosis was 85%. CSF markers reflected 
neuropathology in 94%.
CONCLUSION: CSF Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau are useful in differential dementia 
diagnosis. However, in DLB, FTLD, VaD, and CBD, a substantial group exhibit a 
CSF AD biomarker profile, which requires more autopsy confirmation in the 
future.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e31823ed0f0
PMID: 22170879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2696. Brain. 2011 Dec;134(Pt 12):3716-27. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr273.

Long term incidence of dementia, predictors of mortality and pathological 
diagnosis in older stroke survivors.

Allan LM(1), Rowan EN, Firbank MJ, Thomas AJ, Parry SW, Polvikoski TM, O'Brien 
JT, Kalaria RN.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Wolfson Research 
Centre, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, UK. 
louise.allan@ncl.ac.uk

Greater understanding of the risk factors and mechanisms of incident dementia in 
stroke survivors is needed for prevention and management. There is limited 
information on the long-term consequences and forms of incident dementia in 
older stroke survivors. We recruited 355 patients aged >75 years from 
hospital-based stroke registers into a longitudinal study 3 months after stroke. 
At baseline none of the patients had dementia. Patients were genotyped for 
apolipoprotein E and assessed annually for cognition and development of incident 
dementia over up to 8 years of follow-up. The effect of baseline vascular risk 
factors upon incidence of dementia and mortality were estimated by Cox 
proportional regression analyses adjusted for age and gender. Standard 
neuropathological examination was performed to diagnose the first 50 cases that 
came to autopsy. We found that the median survival from the date of the index 
stroke was 6.72 years (95% confidence intervals: 6.38-7.05). During the 
follow-up of a mean time of 3.79 years, 23.9% of subjects were known to have 
developed dementia and 76.1% remained alive without dementia or died without 
dementia. The incidence of delayed dementia was calculated to be 6.32 cases per 
100 person years whereas that for death or dementia was 8.62. Univariate and 
multivariate regression analyses showed that the most robust predictors of 
dementia included low (1.5 standard deviations below age-matched control group) 
baseline Cambridge Cognitive Examination executive function and memory scores, 
Geriatric Depression Scale score and three or more cardiovascular risk factors. 
Autopsy findings suggested that remarkably ≥ 75% of the demented stroke 
survivors met the current criteria for vascular dementia. Demented subjects 
tended to exhibit marginally greater neurofibrillary pathology including 
tauopathy and Lewy bodies and microinfarcts than non-demented survivors. Despite 
initial improvements in cognition following stroke in older stroke survivors, 
risk of progression to delayed dementia after stroke is substantial, but is 
related to the presence of vascular risk factors. Careful monitoring and 
treatment of modifiable vascular risk factors may be of benefit in preventing 
post-stroke dementia in the general population.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr273
PMCID: PMC3235558
PMID: 22171356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2697. Mov Disord. 2012 Mar;27(3):393-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.24045. Epub 2011 Dec 15.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations confer a greater risk of dementia during 
Parkinson's disease course.

Setó-Salvia N(1), Pagonabarraga J, Houlden H, Pascual-Sedano B, Dols-Icardo O, 
Tucci A, Paisán-Ruiz C, Campolongo A, Antón-Aguirre S, Martín I, Muñoz L, Bufill 
E, Vilageliu L, Grinberg D, Cozar M, Blesa R, Lleó A, Hardy J, Kulisevsky J, 
Clarimón J.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat 
Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene are associated with Parkinson's disease 
and Lewy body dementia. However, whether these alterations have any effect on 
the clinical course of Parkinson's disease is not clear. The glucocerebrosidase 
coding region was fully sequenced in 225 Parkinson's disease patients, 17 
pathologically confirmed Lewy body dementia patients, and 186 controls from 
Spain. Twenty-two Parkinson's disease patients (9.8%) and 2 Lewy body dementia 
patients (11.8%) carried mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene, compared with 
only 1 control (0.5%); P = .016 and P = .021 for Parkinson's disease and Lewy 
body dementia, respectively. The N370S and the L444P mutations represented 50% 
of the alterations. Two novel variants, L144V and S488T, and 7 previously 
described alterations were also found. Alterations in glucocerebrosidase were 
associated with a significant risk of dementia during the clinical course of 
Parkinson's disease (age at onset, years of evolution, and sex-adjusted odds 
ratio, 5.8; P = .001). Mutation carriers did not show worse motor symptoms, had 
good response to L-dopa, and tended to present the intermediate parkinsonian 
phenotype. Our findings suggest that mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene 
not only increase the risk of both Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia 
but also strongly influence the course of Parkinson's disease with respect to 
the appearance of dementia.

Copyright © 2011 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24045
PMID: 22173904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2698. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 May;18(4):321-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.11.015. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Direct costs and survival of medicare beneficiaries with early and advanced 
Parkinson's disease.

Kaltenboeck A(1), Johnson SJ, Davis MR, Birnbaum HG, Carroll CA, Tarrants ML, 
Siderowf AD.

Author information:
(1)Analysis Group, Inc, NY 10020, USA. akaltenboeck@analysisgroup.com

BACKGROUND: No recent analysis details Parkinson's Disease (PD) costs or 
survival for Medicare beneficiaries. This study assesses excess direct costs and 
survival in Medicare beneficiaries with early and advanced PD.
METHODS: Patients with ≥ 2 PD diagnoses (ICD-9-CM: 332.0), ≥ age 65, 
continuously enrolled in Parts A&B during one-year baseline and study periods 
were selected from the Medicare 5% sample (N = 3.2 million, 1999-2008). Newly 
diagnosed patients were defined as having no baseline claims for movement 
disorder, dementia, Alzheimer's, bipolar disorder, psychosis, falls or related 
injuries, ambulatory assistance device (walker or wheelchair), or skilled 
nursing facility. Controls without PD were demographically matched 1:1. Costs to 
Medicare were compared via Wilcoxon rank-sum tests and inverse probability 
weighted multivariate regression. Survival was assessed via Cox proportional 
hazards analysis.
RESULTS: Costs in the year post-diagnosis were higher for newly diagnosed 
patients (N = 9,201, $7423) than controls ($5024), resulting in excess 
PD-associated costs of $2399 (p < 0.001). Cumulative excess costs were $28,422 
from the year prior to index quarter to five years following (p < 0.01). PD 
patients receiving their first claim for an ambulatory assistance device (N = 
11,294) had excess cumulative costs of $50,923 (p < 0.001) over the same period; 
those receiving their first claim for a skilled nursing facility (N = 10,152) 
had excess costs of $102,750 (p < 0.001). Hazard rates of mortality were higher 
among newly diagnosed PD (1.43, p < 0.001), ambulatory assistance device (2.37, 
p < 0.001) and skilled nursing facility (3.34, p < 0.001) cohorts than in 
corresponding non-PD groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Medicare beneficiaries with PD have substantially and progressively 
higher costs and mortality compared with controls.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2011.11.015
PMID: 22177623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2699. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Mar;83(3):251-7. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2011-300470. Epub 2011 Dec 16.

Subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation outcome in young onset Parkinson's 
disease: a role for age at disease onset?

Merola A(1), Zibetti M, Artusi CA, Marchisio A, Ricchi V, Rizzi L, Angrisano S, 
Arduino N, Lanotte M, Rizzone M, Lopiano L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Turin, Turin, Italy. 
aristidemerola@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Patients with young onset Parkinson's disease (YOPD) are often 
candidates for subthalamic nucleus-deep brain stimulation (STN-DBS). 
Nevertheless, few data have been reported on the long term STN-DBS clinical 
outcome of YOPD versus non-young onset Parkinson's disease (n-YOPD) patients.
AIM: In this study, the issue of whether YOPD might represent a long term 
positive predictive factor for STN-DBS was addressed, comparing follow-up data 
for 20 YOPD and 40 n-YOPD patients (20 treated after <15 years of disease 
duration and 20 treated after ≥15 years of disease duration).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mean scores for the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale (UPDRS) sections were compared 1 year, 5 years and, for 34 patients (12 
YOPD and 22 n-YOPD), ≥7 years after surgery. Furthermore, a Cox proportional 
hazard regression model was used to determine the influence of age at PD onset, 
clinical phenotype, disease duration and duration of motor complications on the 
development of stimulation and medication resistant symptoms.
RESULTS: YOPD patients showed a lower incidence of stimulation and medication 
resistant symptoms and a lower mortality rate; also, the tremor dominant 
clinical phenotype was associated with a lower risk of developing dementia, 
hallucinations and constipation. No significant differences in UPDRS scores were 
observed between n-YOPD patients treated after <15 years of PD and those treated 
after ≥15 years of PD.
CONCLUSION: In this series of STN-DBS treated patients, YOPD was associated with 
a medium to long term lower incidence of stimulation and medication resistant 
symptoms.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-300470
PMID: 22180646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2700. Afr J Psychiatry (Johannesbg). 2011 Nov;14(5):377-82. doi: 
10.4314/ajpsy.v14i5.5.

Profile of clinically-diagnosed dementias in a neuropsychiatric practice in 
Abeokuta, south-western Nigeria.

Amoo G(1), Akinyemi RO, Onofa LU, Akinyemi JO, Baiyewu O, Ogunlesi AO, Ogunniyi 
A.

Author information:
(1)Psychogeriatrics Unit, Aro Neuropsychiatric Hospital, Abeokuta, Nigeria.

OBJECTIVE: Many subjects with dementia present primarily to neuropsychiatric 
practices because of behavioural and psychological symptoms (BPSD). This study 
reviewed the profile of clinically-diagnosed dementias and BPSD seen in a 
pioneer neuropsychiatric practice in Abeokuta, southwestern Nigeria over a ten 
year period (January1998 - December 2007).
METHODS: A review of hospital records of all patients with diagnoses of dementia 
or dementing illness using the ICD-10 criteria as well as specific diagnostic 
criteria for different dementia phenotypes. Associated BPSD, co-morbidities and 
treatments were also reviewed.
RESULTS: Out of a total of 240,294 patients seen over the study period, 108 
subjects met clinical diagnostic criteria for probable dementia giving a 
hospital frequency of 45 per 100,000. Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Vascular 
dementia (VaD) were the predominant phenotypes seen in 62 (57.4%) and 18 (16.7%) 
subjects respectively. Others include mixed dementia (4 cases), frontotemporal 
dementia (4 cases), Lewy body dementia (3 cases), alcohol-related dementia (3 
cases), PD dementia (1 case) and unclassifiable (13 cases). Apathy, night time 
behaviour, aberrant motor behaviour, agitation and irritability were the most 
common BPSD features, while hypertension was the most common co-morbidity. 
Neuroleptics, anticholinergics and anti-hypertensives were most commonly 
prescribed. Anticholinesterase inhibitors were sparingly used.
CONCLUSION: Probable AD was the most prevalent dementia phenotype seen in this 
practice. Increased awareness of dementia and better utilization of specific 
treatments are needed among psychiatrists and primary care practitioners in 
Nigeria.

DOI: 10.4314/ajpsy.v14i5.5
PMID: 22183468 [Indexed for MEDLINE]