3201. Aging Male. 2013 Dec;16(4):173-6. doi: 10.3109/13685538.2013.832193. Epub 2013 
Sep 2.

Elderly patients with inappropriate medication correlations with adverse drug 
events or unexpected illnesses in long-term care institutions.

Lin JJ(1), Yeh TY, Lau HL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Fong-Yuan Hospital, Taichung , Taiwan , R.O.C.

INTRODUCTION: The elderly are subject to natural aging and the health problems 
caused by the recession of physical and mental functions. Elderly patients are 
also more susceptible to adverse reactions of medication, drug interactions and 
other drug problems than the young. We then investigated patients with adverse 
drug events (ADEs) or unexpected illnesses transferred to our hospital during 
the whole year of 2010.
METHODS: We analyzed the medicine of elderly patients in long-term care 
institutions. Four long-term care institutions with different types and sizes 
located near Fong-Yuan Hospital in downtown Fong-Yuan were investigated. In this 
study, the researchers divided potentially inappropriate medications (PIMs) into 
two categories: (a) those with or without the drug-drug interaction (DDI) and 
(b) those with narrow therapeutic index drugs. Variables were reclassified as 
inferential statistics for analysis by using the independent t-test or 
Mantel-Haenszel test.
RESULTS: The data for age, gender, presence or absence of dementia, brain damage 
and Parkinson's disease were divided into two groups for those patients with or 
without PIMs. There were no statistically significant differences among the 
groups. However, the numbers of chronic diseases for the group with PIMs were 
higher, and the numbers of drug items with PIMs were also higher. In addition, 
we investigated the presence or absence of PIMs for patients transferred to our 
hospital with ADEs and unexpected illnesses. The results showed no statistically 
significant differences among the groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed that elderly patients who had consultations with 
doctors and the hidden problems about medication were detected by pharmacists in 
the privileged hospital had no direct risk with DDI or narrow therapeutic index 
drugs. However, other potential drug risks remain to be further analyzed and 
more samples should be surveyed.

DOI: 10.3109/13685538.2013.832193
PMID: 23991675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3202. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2013 Nov;67(7):509-16. doi: 10.1111/pcn.12083. Epub 
2013 Sep 2.

Predicting treatment-seeking for visual hallucinations among Parkinson's disease 
patients.

Rana AQ(1), Siddiqui I, Zangeneh M, Fattah A, Awan N, Yousuf MS.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Clinic of Eastern Toronto and Movement Disorders Centre, Toronto, 
Canada.

AIM: While much research has been conducted towards understanding the basis of 
visual hallucinations in Parkinson's disease, little has focused on 
characterizing the content and patients' emotional experience. These factors are 
likely very influential on a patient's decision to seek treatment, a critical 
aspect of any symptom from the clinical perspective.
METHODS: A retrospective chart analysis was performed on Parkinson's disease 
patients seen in a community-based Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorder 
Clinic between 2005 and 2010.
RESULTS: The study consisted of 334 patients with Parkinson's disease, among 
whom 10.5% had visual hallucinations. Hoehn and Yahr disease stage (P = 0.001), 
concurrent presence of dementia (P = 0.001),and sex (P = 0.031) were significant 
onset predictors. The most significant determinant of treatment-seeking was 
emotional reaction, namely whether hallucinations were bothersome (P = 0.008). 
However, the specific type of content during hallucinations was sometimes more 
influential and contradicted emotional response.
CONCLUSION: Although treatment-seeking can be predicted by how individuals feel 
about hallucinations, a patient's decision may not be logically consistent. We 
suggest that clinicians offer treatment based on patients' recollections and 
opinions.

© 2013 The Authors. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences © 2013 Japanese 
Society of Psychiatry and Neurology.

DOI: 10.1111/pcn.12083
PMID: 23992392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3203. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Nov;70(11):1382-8. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3487.

Relationship of Mediterranean diet and caloric intake to phenoconversion in 
Huntington disease.

Marder K(1), Gu Y, Eberly S, Tanner CM, Scarmeas N, Oakes D, Shoulson I; 
Huntington Study Group PHAROS Investigators.

Collaborators: Shoulson I, Kieburtz K, Oakes D, Kayson E, Zhao H, Shinaman M, 
Romer M, Young A, Hersch S, Penney J, Biglan K, Marder K, Paulsen J, Quaid K, 
Siemers E, Tanner C, Mallonee W, Palmer D, Suter G, Dubinsky R, Gronseth G, 
Schimke R, Gray C, Nance M, Bundlie S, Radtke D, Kostyk S, Paulson GW, Thomas K, 
Stepanov N, Baic C, Caress J, Walker F, Hunt V, Chouinard S, Rouleau G, Poiffaut 
H, Rioux B, Testa C, Greenamyre T, Harrison J, Corey-Bloom J, Song D, Peavy G, 
Goldstein J, Paulsen J, Paulson H, Rodnitzky RL, Mikos A, Reese B, Stierman L, 
Williams K, Vining L, Marder K, Moskowitz C, Quaid K, Wojcieszek J, Wesson M, 
Samii A, Bird T, Lipe H, Reynolds N, Blindauer K, Petit J, Como P, Marshall F, 
Counihan T, Biglan K, Zimmerman C, Hogarth P, Nutt J, Andrews P, Hersch S, 
Shinobu L, Rosas D, Kaneko Y, Gevorkian S, Sexton P, Caviness J, Adler C, 
Wheelock V, Richman D, Tempkin T, Wu CK, Fernandez H, Friedman JH, Lannon M, 
Seeberger L, O'Brien C, Montellano S, Kartha N, Sakurai S, Hickenbottom S, Albin 
R, Wernette K, Racette B, Perlmutter JS, Good L, Jackson G, Perlman S, Segal S, 
Carroll R, Carr L, Martin W, Roberts T, Wieler M, Leavitt B, Clarke L, Raymond 
L, Decolongon J, Popovska V, Almqvist E, Ondo W, Thomas M, Ashizawa T, Jankovic 
J, Hauser R, Sanchez-Ramos J, Price K, Delgado H, Furtado S, LaFontaine AL, 
Suchowersky O, Klimek ML, Sethna R, Guttman M, Russell S, Elliott S, Mentis M, 
Feigin A, Cox M, Shannon B, Percy A, Dure L, Pendley D, Lane J, Harrison M, 
Rost-Ruffner E, Johnson W, Colcher A, Siderowf A, Matthews M, Jennings D, Marek 
K, Caplan K, Higgins D, Molho E, Nickerson C, Evans S, Brown D, Hobson D, 
Shelton P, Hobson S, Singer C, Galvez-Jimenez N, Koller W, Martin D, Lyons K, 
Rodriguez D, Shannon K, Comella C, Jaglin J, Anderson K, Weiner W, Dustin K, 
Rosenblatt A, Ross C, Pollard D, Saint-Hilaire MH, Novak P, Fink J, Hersh B, 
Diggin M, Vickers L, Deckel W, Duffy J, Fitzpatrick MJ, Thomson E, Hersch S, 
Stout J, Calhoun J, Coryell W, Erwin C, Hunt V, Ross C, Vawter D, Andrews L, 
Bury D, Calhoun J, Hersch S, Hunt V, Leventhal C, Quaid K, Shinaman A, Vawter D, 
Wexler N, Brocht A, Daigneault S, Gerwitz K, Orme C, Nobel R, Ross V, Slough M, 
Watts A, Weber J, Weaver C, Julian-Baros E, Young A, Marder K, Foroud T, Gusella 
J, Housman D, MacDonald M, Myers R, Tanner C, Tanzi R, Fahn S, Conneally M, Tsai 
WY, Housman D, Ross C, Tanzi R, Young A, Kawas C, Francoise-Chesselet M, 
Conneally M, Nance M, Shults C, Tanner C, Hogarth P, Rosas D, Zhao H.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Neurology and Psychiatry, Columbia University College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, New York3Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, New York.

IMPORTANCE: Adherence to Mediterranean-type diet (MeDi) may delay onset of 
Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases. Whether adherence to MeDi affects time to 
phenoconversion in Huntington disease (HD), a highly penetrant, single-gene 
disorder, is unknown.
OBJECTIVES: To determine if MeDi modifies the time to clinical onset of HD 
(phenoconversion) in premanifest carriers participating in Prospective 
Huntington at Risk Observational Study (PHAROS), and to examine the effects of 
body mass index and caloric intake on time to phenoconversion.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: A prospective cohort study of 41 Huntington 
study group sites in the United States and Canada involving 1001 participants 
enrolled in PHAROS between July 1999 and January 2004 who were followed up every 
9 months until 2010. A total of 211 participants aged 26 to 57 years had an 
expanded CAG repeat length (≥ 37).
EXPOSURE: A semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire was administered 33 
months after baseline. We calculated daily gram intake for dairy, meat, fruit, 
vegetables, legumes, cereals, fish, monounsaturated and saturated fatty acids, 
and alcohol and constructed MeDi scores (0-9); higher scores indicate higher 
adherence. Demographics, medical history, body mass index, and Unified 
Huntington's Disease Rating Scale (UHDRS) score were collected.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURE: Cox proportional hazards regression models to 
determine the association of MeDi and phenoconversion. RESULTS Age, sex, caloric 
intake, education status, and UHDRS motor scores did not differ among MeDi 
tertiles (0-3, 4-5, and 6-9). The highest body mass index was associated with 
the lowest adherence to MeDi. Thirty-one participants phenoconverted. In a model 
adjusted for age, CAG repeat length, and caloric intake, MeDi was not associated 
with phenoconversion (P for trend = 0.14 for tertile of MeDi, and P = .22 for 
continuous MeDi). When individual components of MeDi were analyzed, higher dairy 
consumption (hazard ratio, 2.36; 95% CI, 1.0-5.57; P = .05) and higher caloric 
intake (P = .04) were associated with risk of phenoconversion.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: MeDi was not associated with phenoconversion; 
however, higher consumption of dairy products had a 2-fold increased risk and 
may be a surrogate for lower urate levels (associated with faster progression in 
manifest HD). Studies of diet and energy expenditure in premanifest HD may 
provide data for interventions to modify specific components of diet that may 
delay the onset of HD.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3487
PMCID: PMC4040231
PMID: 24000094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosures: The authors report no conflict of 
interest


3204. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;37(3):475-81. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130899.

Clinical symptoms and symptom signatures of Alzheimer's disease subgroups.

Iqbal K(1), Flory M, Soininen H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, Inge Grundke-Iqbal Research Floor, New York 
State Institute for Basic Research In Developmental Disabilities, Staten Island, 
NY, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a multifactorial disorder that involves several 
different mechanisms. Over 99% of AD patients suffer from the sporadic form of 
the disease. Based on cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of amyloid-β (Aβ)(1-42), 
total tau, and ubiquitin--the markers associated with the histopathological 
hallmarks of the disease (Aβ plaques and abnormally hyperphosphorylated 
neurofibrillary tangles)--previous studies identified five subgroups of AD. Here 
we report the potential diagnostic predictive value of hallucination, 
hypokinesia, paranoia, rigidity, and tremors in aged individuals for AD and 
differences in the prevalence of these symptoms in the CSF marker-based 
subgroups of the disease. Analysis of 196 clinically diagnosed AD or Alzheimer 
with Lewy body, and 75 non-AD neurological and non-neurological control cases, 
all from a single center, showed that the presence of hallucination, 
hypokinesia, paranoia, rigidity, or tremors individually, or the presence of any 
of these, could diagnose AD with sensitivities and specificities of 14% and 99%; 
30% and 99%; 15% and 99%; 16% and 100%; 16% and 96%; and 47% and 92%, 
respectively. The pattern of the prevalence of the above symptoms varied from AD 
subgroup to subgroup. Presence of any of these symptoms, as well as presence of 
each individual symptom except tremors, significantly differentiated AD 
subgroups from the predominantly control cluster. These findings encourage the 
exploration of hallucination, hypokinesia, paranoia, rigidity, and tremors in 
identifying various subgroups of AD for stratification of patients for clinical 
trials to develop therapeutic drugs. This study is for the special issue of the 
Journal of Alzheimer's Disease honoring Inge Grundke-Iqbal who made several 
seminal contributions in AD research.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-130899
PMID: 24002184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3205. Inj Prev. 2014 Jun;20(3):200-3. doi: 10.1136/injuryprev-2013-040795. Epub 2013 
Sep 3.

Food-related choking deaths among the elderly.

Kramarow E(1), Warner M(2), Chen LH(1).

Author information:
(1)Office of Analysis and Epidemiology, National Center for Health Statistics, 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Hyattsville, Maryland, USA.
(2)Division of Vital Statistics, National Center for Health Statistics, Centers 
for Disease Control and Prevention Hyattsville, Hyattsville, Maryland, USA.

During 2007-2010 in the USA, 2214 deaths among people aged ≥65 were attributed 
to choking on food. The death rate for this cause is higher among the elderly 
than among any other age group. Using data from the US National Vital Statistics 
System, we examined the relationship between food suffocation and other causes 
of death listed on the death certificate. Among decedents aged ≥65, the three 
most common additional conditions listed on the death certificate were heart 
disease, dementia and diabetes. However, after estimating the expected joint 
frequency of other causes based on the overall distribution of all causes of 
death, we find that three causes-dementia (including Alzheimer's disease), 
Parkinson's disease and pneumonitis-are most strongly associated with deaths 
from choking on food among older people.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/injuryprev-2013-040795
PMID: 24003082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3206. Rev Neurol (Paris). 2013 Oct;169(10):811-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.014. 
Epub 2013 Sep 4.

Genetics of frontotemporal lobar degeneration: an up-date and diagnosis 
algorithm.

Le Ber I(1).

Author information:
(1)CRicm-UMRS 975, hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 47, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 
Paris cedex 13, France; Centre de référence des démences rares et CNR-MAJ, 
hôpital de la Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, 47, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris 
cedex 13, France; Fédération des maladies du système nerveux, hôpital de la 
Pitié-Salpêtrière, AP-HP, 47, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris cedex 13, 
France. Electronic address: isabelle.leber@upmc.fr.

The last decade marked a turning point in the knowledge of frontotemporal lobar 
degenerations (FTLD). Major discoveries were made with the identification of 
TDP-43 and FUS, two novel key players in FTLD. The growing number of FTLD genes 
has considerably changed our clinical practice. The high intrafamilial 
variability of phenotypes underlines the necessity of a careful interview 
concerning the family history, regarding FTLD diseases, but also other 
neurodegenerative and extra-neurological disorders. Knowledge of the different 
genetic forms of FTLD and their associated phenotypes become essential to 
propose appropriate genetic diagnosis to the patients, and deliver accurate 
genetic counseling to their families. We propose an algorithm based on four 
criteria to help to pinpoint the genetic cause of FTLD: Presence of ALS in the 
patient or family; age at onset of FTLD; progranulin plasma level; and other 
disorders present in the patient or family. Presence of ALS is strongly 
indicative of a C9ORF72 expansion; a very early age at onset (<50 years), 
parkinsonism and oculomotor dysfunction are indicative of MAPT mutations; 
whereas hallucinations, CBDS and PNFA are indicative of PGRN mutations. A 
C9ORF72 repeat expansion should be searched for therefore in patients with 
FTLD-ALS, followed by sequencing of exon 6 of TARDBP gene in negative cases. 
Since C9ORF72 expansions are as frequent as PGRN mutations in patients with pure 
FTLD, both should be investigated, except in early familial FTLD (<50) where 
MAPT mutations should be searched for first. VCP, SQSTM1 and hnRNPA2B1 
gene-sequencing could be proposed in patients or families presenting 
'multisystem proteinopathy'. The genes currently identified explain 50-60% of 
familial forms of FTLD. The identification of new FTLD genes involved remains a 
major challenge to gain further insight into the pathology and even better 
clarify the classification of FTLD in the future.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurol.2013.07.014
PMID: 24011980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3207. Mech Ageing Dev. 2013 Oct;134(10):506-15. doi: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.08.007. Epub 
2013 Sep 3.

Impaired mitochondrial energy production and ABC transporter function-A crucial 
interconnection in dementing proteopathies of the brain.

Pahnke J(1), Fröhlich C, Krohn M, Schumacher T, Paarmann K.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegeneration Research Lab (NRL), Department of Neurology, University of 
Magdeburg, Leipziger Str. 44, H64, 39120 Magdeburg, Germany; German Center for 
Neurodegenerative Diseases (DZNE) Magdeburg, Leipziger Str. 44, H64, 39120 
Magdeburg, Germany. Electronic address: jens.pahnke@gmail.com.

Ageing is the main risk factor for the development of dementing 
neurodegenerative diseases (NDs) and it is accompanied by the accumulation of 
variations in mitochondrial DNA. The resulting tissue-specific alterations in 
ATP production and availability cause deteriorations of cerebral clearance 
mechanisms that are important for the removal of toxic peptides and its 
aggregates. ABC transporters were shown to be the most important exporter 
superfamily for toxic peptides, e.g. β-amyloid and α-synuclein. Their activity 
is highly dependent on the availability of ATP and forms a directed 
energy-exporter network, linking decreased mitochondrial function with highly 
impaired ABC transporter activity and disease progression. In this paper, we 
describe a network based on interactions between ageing, energy metabolism, 
regeneration, accumulation of toxic peptides and the development of 
proteopathies of the brain with a focus on Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Additionally, we provide new experimental evidence for interactions within this 
network in regenerative processes in AD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mad.2013.08.007
PMCID: PMC3844141
PMID: 24012632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3208. Auton Neurosci. 2013 Dec;179(1-2):138-41. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2013.08.067. 
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Reduced sympathetic activity in idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior 
disorder and Parkinson's disease.

Sorensen GL(1), Mehlsen J, Jennum P.

Author information:
(1)Danish Center for Sleep Medicine, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, 
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Glostrup Hospital, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: More than 50% of patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior 
disorder (iRBD) will develop Parkinson's disease or Lewy body dementia. In a 
previous study, we found attenuated heart rate responses in iRBD and Parkinson's 
disease patients during sleep. The current study aimed to evaluate heart rate 
variability further in order to identify possible changes in these components 
during wakefulness and sleep in patients with iRBD and Parkinson's disease.
METHODS: We evaluated heart rate variability in 5-minute electrocardiography 
segments from wakefulness, and non-REM and REM sleep in 11 iRBD patients and 23 
Parkinson's disease patients, and compared these with 10 control subjects.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: Patients with iRBD had attenuated sympathetic nervous 
system activity compared with controls and this was more pronounced in patients 
with Parkinson's disease. The cardiac parasympathetic nervous system seems to be 
relatively well preserved in patients with iRBD and Parkinson's disease. The 
progressive reduction of sympathetic nervous activity is in line with the 
postganglionic sympathetic nervous dysfunction seen in early Parkinson's 
disease.

© 2013.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2013.08.067
PMID: 24021939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3209. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Oct 8;110(41):16562-7. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1310249110. Epub 2013 Sep 10.

U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein complex and RNA splicing alterations in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Bai B(1), Hales CM, Chen PC, Gozal Y, Dammer EB, Fritz JJ, Wang X, Xia Q, Duong 
DM, Street C, Cantero G, Cheng D, Jones DR, Wu Z, Li Y, Diner I, Heilman CJ, 
Rees HD, Wu H, Lin L, Szulwach KE, Gearing M, Mufson EJ, Bennett DA, Montine TJ, 
Seyfried NT, Wingo TS, Sun YE, Jin P, Hanfelt J, Willcock DM, Levey A, Lah JJ, 
Peng J.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Structural Biology and Developmental Neurobiology and St. Jude 
Proteomics Facility, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN 38105.

Deposition of insoluble protein aggregates is a hallmark of neurodegenerative 
diseases. The universal presence of β-amyloid and tau in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) has facilitated advancement of the amyloid cascade and tau hypotheses that 
have dominated AD pathogenesis research and therapeutic development. However, 
the underlying etiology of the disease remains to be fully elucidated. Here we 
report a comprehensive study of the human brain-insoluble proteome in AD by mass 
spectrometry. We identify 4,216 proteins, among which 36 proteins accumulate in 
the disease, including U1-70K and other U1 small nuclear ribonucleoprotein (U1 
snRNP) spliceosome components. Similar accumulations in mild cognitive 
impairment cases indicate that spliceosome changes occur in early stages of AD. 
Multiple U1 snRNP subunits form cytoplasmic tangle-like structures in AD but not 
in other examined neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson disease and 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. Comparison of RNA from AD and control brains 
reveals dysregulated RNA processing with accumulation of unspliced RNA species 
in AD, including myc box-dependent-interacting protein 1, clusterin, and 
presenilin-1. U1-70K knockdown or antisense oligonucleotide inhibition of U1 
snRNP increases the protein level of amyloid precursor protein. Thus, our 
results demonstrate unique U1 snRNP pathology and implicate abnormal RNA 
splicing in AD pathogenesis.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1310249110
PMCID: PMC3799305
PMID: 24023061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3210. J Neurochem. 2014 Jan;128(2):294-304. doi: 10.1111/jnc.12444. Epub 2013 Oct 21.

Nucleic acid oxidation: an early feature of Alzheimer's disease.

Bradley-Whitman MA(1), Timmons MD, Beckett TL, Murphy MP, Lynn BC, Lovell MA.

Author information:
(1)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging and Alzheimer's Disease Center, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.

Studies of oxidative damage during the progression of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
suggest its central role in disease pathogenesis. To investigate levels of 
nucleic acid oxidation in both early and late stages of AD, levels of multiple 
base adducts were quantified in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA from the superior 
and middle temporal gyri (SMTG), inferior parietal lobule (IPL), and cerebellum 
(CER) of age-matched normal control subjects, subjects with mild cognitive 
impairment, preclinical AD, late-stage AD, and non-AD neurological disorders 
(diseased control; DC) using gas chromatography/mass spectrometry. Median levels 
of multiple DNA adducts in nuclear and mitochondrial DNA were significantly (p ≤ 
0.05) elevated in the SMTG, IPL, and CER in multiple stages of AD and in DC 
subjects. Elevated levels of fapyguanine and fapyadenine in mitochondrial DNA 
suggest a hypoxic environment early in the progression of AD and in DC subjects. 
Overall, these data suggest that oxidative damage is an early event not only in 
the pathogenesis of AD but is also present in neurodegenerative diseases in 
general. Levels of oxidized nucleic acids in nDNA and mtDNA were found to be 
significantly elevated in mild cognitive impairment (MCI), preclinical 
Alzheimer's disease (PCAD), late-stage AD (LAD), and a pooled diseased control 
group (DC) of frontotemporal dementia (FTD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
subjects compared to normal control (NC) subjects. Nucleic acid oxidation peaked 
early in disease progression and remained elevated. The study suggests nucleic 
acid oxidation is a general event in neurodegeneration.

© 2013 International Society for Neurochemistry.

DOI: 10.1111/jnc.12444
PMCID: PMC3947319
PMID: 24032632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest The authors have no 
conflicts of interest.


3211. Brain Pathol. 2014 Mar;24(2):152-65. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12088. Epub 2013 Oct 28.

Increased amoeboid microglial density in the olfactory bulb of Parkinson's and 
Alzheimer's patients.

Doorn KJ(1), Goudriaan A, Blits-Huizinga C, Bol JG, Rozemuller AJ, Hoogland PV, 
Lucassen PJ, Drukarch B, van de Berg WD, van Dam AM.

Author information:
(1)Swammerdam Institute for Life Sciences, Center for Neuroscience, University 
of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands; Department of Anatomy and 
Neurosciences, VU University Medical Center, Neuroscience Campus Amsterdam, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The olfactory bulb (OB) is affected early in both Parkinson's (PD) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), evidenced by the presence of disease-specific protein 
aggregates and an early loss of olfaction. Whereas previous studies showed 
amoeboid microglia in the classically affected brain regions of PD and AD 
patients, little was known about such changes in the OB. Using a morphometric 
approach, a significant increase in amoeboid microglia density within the 
anterior olfactory nucleus (AON) of AD and PD patients was observed. These 
amoeboid microglia cells were in close apposition to β-amyloid, 
hyperphosphorylated tau or α-synuclein deposits, but no uptake of pathological 
proteins by microglia could be visualized. Subsequent analysis showed (i) no 
correlation between microglia and α-synuclein (PD), (ii) a positive correlation 
with β-amyloid (AD), and (iii) a negative correlation with hyperphosphorylated 
tau (AD). Furthermore, despite the observed pathological alterations in neurite 
morphology, neuronal loss was not apparent in the AON of both patient groups. 
Thus, we hypothesize that, in contrast to the classically affected brain regions 
of AD and PD patients, within the AON rather than neuronal loss, the increased 
density in amoeboid microglial cells, possibly in combination with neurite 
pathology, may contribute to functional deficits.

© 2013 International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12088
PMCID: PMC8029318
PMID: 24033473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3212. Prog Neurobiol. 2013 Nov;110:2-28. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.08.003. Epub 
2013 Sep 11.

A review of quality of life after predictive testing for and earlier 
identification of neurodegenerative diseases.

Paulsen JS(1), Nance M, Kim JI, Carlozzi NE, Panegyres PK, Erwin C, Goh A, 
McCusker E, Williams JK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA, USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of Iowa, Carver College of 
Medicine, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Psychology, University of Iowa, Iowa 
City, IA, USA. Electronic address: predict-publications@uiowa.edu.

The past decade has witnessed an explosion of evidence suggesting that many 
neurodegenerative diseases can be detected years, if not decades, earlier than 
previously thought. To date, these scientific advances have not provoked any 
parallel translational or clinical improvements. There is an urgency to 
capitalize on this momentum so earlier detection of disease can be more readily 
translated into improved health-related quality of life for families at risk 
for, or suffering with, neurodegenerative diseases. In this review, we discuss 
health-related quality of life (HRQOL) measurement in neurodegenerative diseases 
and the importance of these "patient reported outcomes" for all clinical 
research. Next, we address HRQOL following early identification or predictive 
genetic testing in some neurodegenerative diseases: Huntington disease, 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, Dementia with Lewy bodies, 
frontotemporal dementia, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, prion diseases, 
hereditary ataxias, Dentatorubral-pallidoluysian atrophy and Wilson's disease. 
After a brief report of available direct-to-consumer genetic tests, we address 
the juxtaposition of earlier disease identification with assumed reluctance 
toward predictive genetic testing. Forty-one studies examining health-related 
outcomes following predictive genetic testing for neurodegenerative disease 
suggested that (a) extreme or catastrophic outcomes are rare; (b) consequences 
commonly include transiently increased anxiety and/or depression; (c) most 
participants report no regret; (d) many persons report extensive benefits to 
receiving genetic information; and (e) stigmatization and discrimination for 
genetic diseases are poorly understood and policy and laws are needed. Caution 
is appropriate for earlier identification of neurodegenerative diseases but 
findings suggest further progress is safe, feasible and likely to advance 
clinical care.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2013.08.003
PMCID: PMC3833259
PMID: 24036231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3213. Mov Disord. 2013 Dec;28(14):2035-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.25622. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Early onset dystonia and parkinsonism with abnormal globus pallidal signal in 
MRI: a diagnostic challenge.

Post B(1), van Belzen M, Marcelis C, Meijer FJ, Willemsen MA, van de Warrenburg 
BP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, the Netherlands.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25622
PMID: 24038378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3214. Mov Disord. 2014 Mar;29(3):360-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.25633. Epub 2013 Sep 3.

Volumetric correlates of cognitive functioning in nondemented patients with 
Parkinson's disease.

Filoteo JV(1), Reed JD, Litvan I, Harrington DL.

Author information:
(1)Psychology Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, California, 
USA; Research Service, VA San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego, California, 
USA; Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, San Diego, 
California, USA.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2014 Mar;29(3):283-4.

A challenge in Parkinson's disease (PD) is to identify biomarkers of early 
cognitive change because functioning in some domains may be more prognostic of 
dementia. Few studies have investigated whether structural magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) correlates in a regionally specific manner with functioning in 
different cognitive domains. The aim of this study was to identify 
neuroanatomical correlates of executive functioning, memory, and visual 
cognition in PD without dementia. 3T MRI was conducted in 51 PD patients and 39 
control participants. Brain volumes were measured in structures comprising the 
frontostriatal cognitive-control system, the medial temporal memory system, the 
ventral object-based system, and the dorsal spatial-based system. Measures of 
executive functioning (Stroop Test; Letter Fluency), memory (California Verbal 
Learning Test), visuospatial cognition (Judgment of Line Orientation), and 
visuoconstruction (Pentagon Copy) were correlated with volumes comprising each 
system. Poorer executive functioning largely correlated with decreased 
frontostriatal volumes. Poorer memory correlated with decreased volumes in all 
medial temporal regions, but also with frontostriatal volumes. Poorer 
visuospatial cognition correlated with decreased volumes in the object-based 
system, whereas poorer visuoconstruction correlated with decreased frontal and 
object-based system volumes. These relationships were nonsignificant in the 
control group. This is the first study to demonstrate that subtle changes in 
multiple cognitive domains in PD without dementia correlate with regional 
volumes in specific systems implicated in the development of cognitive 
impairment. The findings suggest that structural MRI holds promise as a marker 
of early changes in different brain systems, some of which may predict future 
cognitive deterioration.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25633
PMCID: PMC4758346
PMID: 24038502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3215. J Neurosci Methods. 2014 Jan 15;221:22-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.09.001. 
Epub 2013 Sep 14.

Detecting brain structural changes as biomarker from magnetic resonance images 
using a local feature based SVM approach.

Chen Y(1), Storrs J, Tan L, Mazlack LJ, Lee JH, Lu LJ.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biomedical Informatics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Research 
Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3026, United States(1); 
School of Electronics and Computing Systems, University of Cincinnati, 497 
Rhodes Hall, Cincinnati, OH 45221, United States.

Detecting brain structural changes from magnetic resonance (MR) images can 
facilitate early diagnosis and treatment of neurological and psychiatric 
diseases. Many existing methods require an accurate deformation registration, 
which is difficult to achieve and therefore prevents them from obtaining high 
accuracy. We develop a novel local feature based support vector machine (SVM) 
approach to detect brain structural changes as potential biomarkers. This 
approach does not require deformation registration and thus is less influenced 
by artifacts such as image distortion. We represent the anatomical structures 
based on scale invariant feature transform (SIFT). Likelihood scores calculated 
using feature-based morphometry is used as the criterion to categorize image 
features into three classes (healthy, patient and noise). Regional SVMs are 
trained to classify the three types of image features in different brain 
regions. Only healthy and patient features are used to predict the disease 
status of new brain images. An ensemble classifier is built from the regional 
SVMs to obtain better prediction accuracy. We apply this approach to 3D MR 
images of Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and bipolar disorder. The 
classification accuracy ranges between 70% and 87%. The highly predictive 
disease-related regions, which represent significant anatomical differences 
between the healthy and diseased, are shown in heat maps. The common and 
disease-specific brain regions are identified by comparing the highly predictive 
regions in each disease. All of the top-ranked regions are supported by 
literature. Thus, this approach will be a promising tool for assisting automatic 
diagnosis and advancing mechanism studies of neurological and psychiatric 
diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2013.09.001
PMID: 24041480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3216. Presse Med. 2013 Oct;42(10):1398-404. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.012. Epub 2013 
Sep 18.

[Vitamin D and neurology].

[Article in French]

Thouvenot É(1), Camu W.

Author information:
(1)Hôpital Carémeau, service de neurologie, place du Pr-Debré, 30029 Nîmes cedex 
9, France.

Vitamin D deficiency is associated with a higher risk of multiple sclerosis and 
also with a higher relapse rate as well as a higher number of MRI lesions. 
Elders with vitamin D deficiency have worse cognitive performance. Vitamin D 
deficiency is a risk factor for developing Alzheimer's disease. Ischemic stroke 
are more frequent and more severe in patients with low vitamin D levels. Carotid 
atherosclerosis is more frequent and more severe in patients with vitamin D 
deficiency. Vitamin D deficiency is associated with a higher risk and worse 
prognosis of Parkinson's disease. In the different neurological disorders 
discussed herein, gene polymorphisms that could alter vitamin D metabolism are 
also associated with a higher incidence or a worse disease prognosis. Despite 
the links between vitamin D deficiency and the risks of developing neurological 
disorders, there is, to date, no proof that supplementation could alter the 
course of these diseases.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2013.07.012
PMID: 24054766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3217. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Sep 10;7:150. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00150.

Circulating cell-free microRNA as biomarkers for screening, diagnosis and 
monitoring of neurodegenerative diseases and other neurologic pathologies.

Sheinerman KS(1), Umansky SR.

Author information:
(1)DiamiR, LLC Princeton, NJ, USA.

Many neurodegenerative diseases, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson disease, 
vascular and frontotemporal dementias, as well as other chronic neurological 
pathologies, are characterized by slow development with a long asymptomatic 
period followed by a stage with mild clinical symptoms. As a consequence, these 
serious pathologies are diagnosed late in the course of a disease, when massive 
death of neurons has already occurred and effective therapeutic intervention is 
problematic. Thus, the development of screening tests capable of detecting 
neurodegenerative diseases during early, preferably asymptomatic, stages is a 
high unmet need. Since such tests are to be used for screening of large 
populations, they should be non-invasive and relatively inexpensive. Further, 
while subjects identified by screening tests can be further tested with more 
invasive and expensive methods, e.g., analysis of cerebrospinal fluid or imaging 
techniques, to be of practical utility screening tests should have high 
sensitivity and specificity. In this review, we discuss advantages and 
disadvantages of various approaches to developing screening tests based on 
analysis of circulating cell-free microRNA (miRNA). Applications of circulating 
miRNA-based tests for diagnosis of acute and chronic brain pathologies, for 
research of normal brain aging, and for disease and treatment monitoring are 
also discussed.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00150
PMCID: PMC3767917
PMID: 24058335


3218. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 18;8(9):e73094. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073094. 
eCollection 2013.

Plasma ceramide and glucosylceramide metabolism is altered in sporadic 
Parkinson's disease and associated with cognitive impairment: a pilot study.

Mielke MM(1), Maetzler W, Haughey NJ, Bandaru VV, Savica R, Deuschle C, Gasser 
T, Hauser AK, Gräber-Sultan S, Schleicher E, Berg D, Liepelt-Scarfone I.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Health Science Research and Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, 
Minnesota, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the gene coding for glucocerebrosidase (GBA), which 
metabolizes glucosylceramide (a monohexosylceramide) into glucose and ceramide, 
is the most common genetic risk factor for sporadic Parkinson's disease (PD). 
GBA mutation carriers are more likely to have an earlier age of onset and to 
develop cognitive impairment and dementia. We hypothesized that plasma levels of 
lipids involved in ceramide metabolism would also be altered in PD non-GBA 
mutation carriers and associated with worse cognition.
METHODS: Plasma ceramide, monohexosylceramide, and lactosylceramide levels in 26 
cognitively normal PD patients, 26 PD patients with cognitive impairment or 
dementia, and 5 cognitively normal non-PD controls were determined by 
LC/ESI/MS/MS.
RESULTS: Levels of all lipid species were higher in PD patients versus controls. 
Among PD patients, levels of ceramide C16:0, C18:0, C20:0, C22:0, and C24:1 and 
monohexosylceramide C16:0, C20:0 and C24:0 species were higher (all P<0.05) in 
those with versus without cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that plasma ceramide and monohexosylceramide 
metabolism is altered in PD non-GBA mutation carriers and that higher levels are 
associated with worse cognition. Additional studies with larger sample sizes, 
including cognitively normal controls, are needed to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073094
PMCID: PMC3776817
PMID: 24058461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Dr. Mielke has consulted 
for Eli Lilly. Dr. Maetzler received honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline (2011). Dr. 
Thomas Gasser serves as an editorial board member of Movement Disorders, 
Parkinsonism and Related Disorders, Journal of Parkinson's Disease and 
Neurogenetics and is funded by Novartis Pharma. Prof. Gasser received speaker 
honoraria from Novartis, Merck-Serono, Schwarz Pharma, Boehringer Ingelheim and 
Valeant Pharma and royalties for his consulting activities from Cefalon Pharma 
and Merck-Serono. Prof. Gasser holds a patent concerning the LRRK2 gene and 
neurodegenerative disorders (EP2316927 A3 and US8409809 B2). Dr. Daniela Berg 
receives funding from Janssen Pharmaceutica, and speaker honoraria from 
Novartis, GSK, TEVA and Lundbeck. This work was partly supported by an 
unrestricted grant from Novartis. There are no further patents, products in 
development or marketed products to declare. This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to all the PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


3219. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 18;8(9):e74453. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074453. 
eCollection 2013.

Leucine-rich α2-glycoprotein is a novel biomarker of neurodegenerative disease 
in human cerebrospinal fluid and causes neurodegeneration in mouse cerebral 
cortex.

Miyajima M(1), Nakajima M, Motoi Y, Moriya M, Sugano H, Ogino I, Nakamura E, 
Tada N, Kunichika M, Arai H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Juntendo University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Tokyo, Japan.

Leucine-rich α2-glycoprotein (LRG) is a protein induced by inflammation. It 
contains a leucine-rich repeat (LRR) structure and easily binds with other 
molecules. However, the function of LRG in the brain during aging and 
neurodegenerative diseases has not been investigated. Here, we measured human 
LRG (hLRG) concentration in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and observed hLRG 
expression in post-mortem human cerebral cortex. We then generated transgenic 
(Tg) mice that over-expressed mouse LRG (mLRG) in the brain to examine the 
effects of mLRG accumulation. Finally, we examined protein-protein interactions 
using a protein microarray method to screen proteins with a high affinity for 
hLRG. The CSF concentration of hLRG increases with age and is significantly 
higher in patients with Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) and progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP) than in healthy elderly people, idiopathic normal 
pressure hydrocephalus (iNPH) patients, and individuals with Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Tg mice exhibited neuronal degeneration and neuronal decline. Accumulation 
of LRG in the brains of PDD and PSP patients is not a primary etiological 
factor, but it is thought to be one of the causes of neurodegeneration. It is 
anticipated that hLRG CSF levels will be a useful biomarker for the early 
diagnosis of PDD and PSP.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074453
PMCID: PMC3776841
PMID: 24058569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3220. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2014 Apr;13(3):467-77. doi: 
10.2174/18715273113126660153.

Alzheimer disease and type 2 diabetes mellitus: the link to tyrosine hydroxylase 
and probable nutritional strategies.

Aliev G, Shahida K, Gan SH, Firoz C, Khan A, Abuzenadah AM, Kamal W, Kamal MA, 
Tan Y, Qu X, Reale M(1).

Author information:
(1)(Mohammad Amjad Kamal) Fundamental and Applied Biology Group, King Fahd 
Medical Research Center, King Abdulaziz University, P.O. Box 80216, Jeddah 
21589, Saudi Arabia. meu.fabg@hotmail.com.

Alzheimer disease (AD) and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) are chronic health 
disorders that affect millions of people around the world. According to recent 
studies, there are molecular similarities in the inflammatory pathways involved 
in both AD and T2DM, which opens a new avenue for researchers with different 
perspectives to target the cause of these diseases rather than their obvious 
symptoms. Several links between inflammation, cardiovascular disease, T2DM and 
central nervous system disorders such as AD and Parkinson's disease have been 
elucidated. Mutations in the hippocampal-β-amyloid precursor protein gene in 
genetically high-risk individuals have been shown to cause the early onset of AD 
symptoms. The overexpression of β-amyloid protein in the hippocampal region and 
the synaptotoxicity that occurs as a result have been considered a typical 
feature of AD and leads to neuronal loss and cognitive decline. However, the 
identity of the cellular components that cause the late onset of the disease 
seen in the majority of the cases is still unknown. Synaptic insults associated 
with neuronal dysfunction may involve several cascades and molecules, one of 
which has been hypothesized to be tyrosine hydroxylase (TH). The axons of the 
noradrenergic cells that project to the hippocampus appear to be affected by the 
β-amyloid protein, which subsequently contributes to TH loss in Alzheimer brain 
cells. In this review, we attempt to shed light on the important mechanisms 
involved in AD as well as T2DM such as inflammatory factors, abnormalities in 
the insulin signaling system and the possible role of the endocrine enzyme TH.

DOI: 10.2174/18715273113126660153
PMID: 24059309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3221. J Nanobiotechnology. 2013 Sep 23;11:32. doi: 10.1186/1477-3155-11-32.

Age-dependent effects of microglial inhibition in vivo on Alzheimer's disease 
neuropathology using bioactive-conjugated iron oxide nanoparticles.

Glat M(1), Skaat H, Menkes-Caspi N, Margel S, Stern EA.

Author information:
(1)Gonda Multidisciplinary Brain Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 
52900, Israel. sterned@mail.biu.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Tau dysfunction is believed to be the primary cause of 
neurodegenerative disorders referred to as tauopathies, including Alzheimer's 
disease, Pick's disease, frontotemporal dementia and Parkinsonism. The role of 
microglial cells in the pathogenesis of tauopathies is still unclear. The 
activation of microglial cells has been correlated with neuroprotective effects 
through the release of neurotrophic factors and through clearance of cell debris 
and phagocytosis of cells with intracellular inclusions. In contrast, microglial 
activation has also been linked with chronic neuroinflammation contributing to 
the development of neurodegenerative diseases such as tauopathies. Microglial 
activation has been recently reported to precede tangle formation and the 
attenuation of tau pathology occurs after immunosuppression of transgenic mice.
METHODS: Here we report the specific inhibition of microglial cells in rTg4510 
tau-mutant mice by using fibrin γ377-395 peptide conjugated to iron oxide 
(γ-Fe2O3) nanoparticles of 21 ± 3.5 nm diameter.
RESULTS: Stabilization of the peptide by its covalent conjugation to the γ-Fe2O3 
nanoparticles significantly decreased the number of the microglial cells 
compared to the same concentration of the free peptide. The specific microglial 
inhibition induces different effects on tau pathology in an age dependent 
manner. The reduction of activation of microglial cells at an early age 
increases the number of neurons with hyperphosphorylated tau in transgenic mice. 
In contrast, reduction of activation of microglial cells reduced the severity of 
the tau pathology in older mice. The number of neurons with hyperphosphorylated 
tau and the number of neurons with tangles are reduced than those in animals not 
receiving the fibrin γ377-395 peptide-nanoparticle conjugate.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate a differential effect of microglial 
activity on tau pathology using the fibrin γ377-395 peptide-nanoparticle 
conjugate, depending on age and/or stage of the neuropathological accumulation 
and aggregation.

DOI: 10.1186/1477-3155-11-32
PMCID: PMC3851539
PMID: 24059692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3222. Ann Nucl Med. 2013 Dec;27(10):898-906. doi: 10.1007/s12149-013-0768-7. Epub 2013 
Sep 6.

Prediction of outcomes in MCI with (123)I-IMP-CBF SPECT: a multicenter 
prospective cohort study.

Ito K(1), Mori E, Fukuyama H, Ishii K, Washimi Y, Asada T, Mori S, Meguro K, 
Kitamura S, Hanyu H, Nakano S, Matsuda H, Kuwabara Y, Hashikawa K, Momose T, 
Uchida Y, Hatazawa J, Minoshima S, Kosaka K, Yamada T, Yonekura Y; J-COSMIC 
Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Neuroimaging, Center for Development 
of Advanced Medicine for Dementia, National Center for Geriatrics and 
Gerontology, 35 Gengo Morioka-cho, Obu-shi, Aichi, 474-8511, Japan, 
kito@ncgg.go.jp.

OBJECTIVE: The multicenter prospective cohort study (Japan Cooperative SPECT 
Study on Assessment of Mild Impairment of Cognitive Function: J-COSMIC) aimed to 
examine the value of (123)I-N-isopropyl-4-iodoamphetamine cerebral blood flow 
(IMP-CBF) SPECT in regards to early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) in 
patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Three hundred and nineteen patients with amnestic MCI at 41 
participating institutions each underwent clinical and neuropsychological 
examinations and (123)I-IMP-CBF SPECT at baseline. Subjects were followed up 
periodically for 3 years, and progression to dementia was evaluated. SPECT 
images were classified as AD/DLB (dementia with Lewy bodies) pattern and 
non-AD/DLB pattern by central image interpretation and automated region of 
interest (ROI) analysis, respectively. Logistic regression analyses were used to 
assess whether baseline (123)I-IMP-CBF SPECT was predictive of longitudinal 
clinical outcome.
RESULTS: Ninety-nine of 216 amnestic MCI patients (excluding 3 cases with 
epilepsy (n = 2) or hydrocephalus (n = 1) and 100 cases with incomplete 
follow-up) converted to AD within the observation period. Central image 
interpretation and automated ROI analysis predicted conversion to AD with 56 and 
58 % overall diagnostic accuracy (sensitivity, 76 and 81 %; specificity, 39 and 
37 %), respectively. Multivariate logistic regression analysis identified SPECT 
as a predictor, which distinguished AD converters from non-converters. The odds 
ratio for a positive SPECT to predict conversion to AD with automated ROI 
analysis was 2.5 and combining SPECT data with gender and mini-mental state 
examination (MMSE) further improved classification (joint odds ratio 20.08).
CONCLUSIONS: (123)I-IMP-CBF SPECT with both automated ROI analysis and central 
image interpretation was sensitive but relatively nonspecific for prediction of 
clinical outcome during the 3-year follow-up in individual amnestic MCI 
patients. A combination of statistically significant predictors, both SPECT with 
automated ROI analysis and neuropsychological evaluation, may increase 
predictive utility.

DOI: 10.1007/s12149-013-0768-7
PMCID: PMC4328132
PMID: 24061691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3223. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Sep 24;7:164. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00164. 
eCollection 2013.

C9orf72 mutation is rare in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
essential tremor in China.

Jiao B(1), Guo JF, Wang YQ, Yan XX, Zhou L, Liu XY, Zhang FF, Zhou YF, Xia K, 
Tang BS, Shen L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University Changsha, 
China.

GGGGCC repeat expansions in the C9orf72 gene have been identified as a major 
contributing factor in patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Given the overlapping of clinical phenotypes and 
pathological characteristics between these two diseases and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), and essential tremor (ET), we speculated 
regarding whether C9orf72 repeat expansions also play a major role in these 
three diseases. Using the repeat-primed polymerase chain reaction method, we 
screened for C9orf72 in three groups of patients with PD (n = 911), AD (n = 
279), and ET (n = 152) in the Chinese Han population. There were no pathogenic 
repeats (>30 repeats) detected in either the patients or controls (n = 314), 
which indicated that the pathogenic expansions of C9orf72 might be rare in these 
three diseases. However, the analysis of the association between the number of 
repeats (p = 0.001), short/intermediate genotype (short: <7 repeats; 
intermediate: ≥7 repeats) (odds ratio 1.37 [1.05, 1.79]), 
intermediate/intermediate genotype (Odds ratio 2.03 [1.17, 3.54]), and PD risks 
indicated that intermediate repeat alleles could act as contributors to PD. To 
the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to reveal the correlation 
between C9orf72 and Chinese PD, AD, or ET patients. Additionally, the results of 
this study suggest the novel idea that the intermediate repeat allele in C9orf72 
is most likely a risk factor for PD.

DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00164
PMCID: PMC3782144
PMID: 24068985


3224. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2013;35(9):926-33. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2013.838940. 
Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Predictors of performance-based measures of instrumental activities of daily 
living in nondemented patients with Parkinson's disease.

Pirogovsky E(1), Martinez-Hannon M, Schiehser DM, Lessig SL, Song DD, Litvan I, 
Filoteo JV.

Author information:
(1)a Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, San Diego , CA , USA.

Few studies have examined instrumental activities of daily living (iADLs) in 
nondemented Parkinson's disease (PD), and the majority of these studies have 
used report-based measures, which can have limited validity. The present study 
had two main goals: (a) to examine the performance of nondemented PD patients on 
two performance-based measures of iADLs, which are considered more objective 
functional measures, and (b) to examine the cognitive, motor, and psychiatric 
correlates of iADL impairment in PD. Ninety-eight nondemented PD patients and 47 
healthy older adults were administered performance-based measures that assess 
the ability to manage medications (Medication Management Ability Assessment) and 
finances (University of California, San Diego, UCSD, Performance-based Skills 
Assessment), the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale to assess global cognitive 
functioning, the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale Part III to assess 
motor symptom severity, and the Geriatric Depression Scale to assess depressive 
symptoms. Nondemented PD patients demonstrated significantly impaired scores 
relative to the healthy comparison group on the performance-based measure of 
financial management, but there were no significant group differences in 
medication management. Global cognitive functioning, motor severity, and 
depressive symptoms did not correlate with scores on either of the functional 
measures, except for a small correlation between depressive symptoms and 
financial management. The two performance-based measures of iADL functioning did 
not correlate with one another. These findings suggest that medication and 
financial management may not be predicted based on global cognitive functioning 
and that iADLs may not be represented by a single construct. Furthermore, these 
findings suggest the potential need for a multidimensional approach to assessing 
iADLs.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2013.838940
PMID: 24074137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3225. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Feb;35(2):444.e5-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.08.013. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

No association of the LRRK2 genetic variants with Alzheimer's disease in Han 
Chinese individuals.

Bi R(1), Zhao L, Zhang C, Lu W, Feng JQ, Wang Y, Ni J, Zhang J, Li GD, Hu QX, 
Wang D, Yao YG, Li T.

Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Animal Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese 
Academy of Sciences and Yunnan Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming, 
Yunnan 650223, China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

The leucine-rich repeat kinase-2 (LRRK2) gene has been regarded as 1 of the most 
common genetic causes of Parkinson's disease (PD). We hypothesized that 
LRRK2-susceptible allele(s) for PD might pose a risk for Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). In this study, we screened 12 LRRK2 gene variants in 2 independent cohorts 
from southwestern China (341 AD patients and 435 normal individuals) and eastern 
China (297 AD patients and 384 normal individuals), to discern the potential 
association between this gene and AD. No variant was identified to be associated 
with AD in either case-control sample. As both of the cohorts were of Han 
Chinese origin, we combined the LRRK2 variant data for the 2 sample sets 
together (a total of 638 AD patients and 819 normal individuals) and still found 
no association between the LRRK2 gene and AD, suggesting that LRRK2 gene 
variants may not affect the development of AD in Han Chinese individuals.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.08.013
PMID: 24080176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3226. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;38(4):705-18. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131400.

Can BACE1 inhibition mitigate early axonal pathology in neurological diseases?

Yan XX(1), Ma C, Gai WP, Cai H, Luo XG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology, Central South University Xiangya 
School of Medicine, Changsha, Hunan, China.

β-Secretase-1 (BACE1) is the rate-limiting enzyme for the genesis of amyloid-β 
(Aβ) peptides, the main constituents of the amyloid plaques in the brains of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients. BACE1 is being evaluated as an anti-Aβ target 
for AD therapy. Recent studies indicate that BACE1 elevation is associated with 
axonal and presynaptic pathology during plaque development. Evidence also points 
to a biological role for BACE1 in axonal outgrowth and synapse formation during 
development. Axonal, including presynaptic, pathology exists in AD as well as 
many other neurological disorders such as Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, stroke, 
and trauma. In this review, we discuss pharmaceutical BACE1 inhibition as a 
therapeutic option for axonal pathogenesis, in addition to amyloid pathology. We 
first introduce the amyloidogenic processing of amyloid-β protein precursor and 
describe the normal expression pattern of the amyloidogenic proteins in the 
brain, with an emphasis on BACE1. We then address BACE1 elevation relative to 
amyloid plaque development, followed by updating recent understanding of a 
neurotrophic role of BACE1 in axon and synapse development. We further elaborate 
the occurrence of axonal pathology in some other neurological conditions. 
Finally, we propose pharmacological inhibition of excessive BACE1 activity as an 
option to mitigate early axonal pathology occurring in AD and other neurological 
disorders.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-131400
PMCID: PMC3995167
PMID: 24081378 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3227. Sleep. 2013 Oct 1;36(10):1527-32. doi: 10.5665/sleep.3050.

Cognitive performances and mild cognitive impairment in idiopathic rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder: results of a longitudinal follow-up study.

Terzaghi M(1), Zucchella C, Rustioni V, Sinforiani E, Manni R.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Medicine Unit, C. Mondino National Institute of Neurology Foundation, 
IRCCS, Pavia, Italy.

STUDY OBJECTIVES: To investigate the capacity of neuropsychological deficits in 
idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) to predict the 
development of dementia and/or parkinsonism.
DESIGN: Prospective longitudinal follow-up study.
SETTING: Tertiary sleep center.
PATIENTS: Twenty patients with initial iRBD (19 males, mean age 66.1 ± 7.1) 
underwent a clinical and neuropsychological follow-up within a mean of 43 ± 19 
months. Neuropsychological performances at baseline were compared with those of 
healthy controls matched for sex, age, and education.
INTERVENTIONS: Discontinuation of clonazepam at least 7 days before the 
follow-up evaluation.
RESULTS: At follow-up, the Wilcoxon test showed a significant worsening of 
scores on Raven Colored Matrices 47 (P = 0.01), Attentive matrices (P = 0.002), 
phonemic (P = 0.04) and sematic (P = 0.04) fluency. Thirteen patients (65%) 
showed cognitive deterioration involving multiple domains. Of these, four 
patients (20%) maintained a stable cognitive dysfunction and nine (45%) showed a 
progression of cognitive dysfunction: six (30%) in constructional abilities (P = 
0.03), four (20%) in short-term memory (P = NS), three (15%) in executive 
functions and non-verbal logic (P = NS), one (5%) in verbal fluency (P = NS), 
and one (5%) in long-term memory (P = NS) (McNemar test). Seven patients (35%) 
retained a normal cognitive profile. Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) was 
diagnosed at baseline in seven patients (35%). At follow-up, three of these 
patients showed overt dementia that was accompanied by parkinsonism in all 
cases; one had worsened from non-amnesic single-domain to nonamnesic 
multiple-domain MCI, two were stable, and one patient no longer met the criteria 
for MCI. Four patients (20%) without MCI at baseline had MCI at follow-up. 
Patients who developed MCI/dementia had an older age at disease onset (65.8 ± 
5.4 versus 56.8 ± 9.3; P = 0.01) compared with those who did not.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings corroborate evidence that visuospatial abilities 
constitute the area most affected in idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep 
behavior disorder (learning as a stable deficit and copying as an evolving 
deficit). Cognitive deterioration, involving mainly nonverbal logic, attention, 
and executive functions, can be observed in rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder follow-up, suggesting an underlying evolving degenerative process. Our 
data confirm that mild cognitive impairment is frequent in idiopathic rapid eye 
movement sleep behavior disorder. The presence of mild cognitive impairment 
predicts the eventual risk of developing dementia, which seemed to be associated 
with parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.5665/sleep.3050
PMCID: PMC3773202
PMID: 24082312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3228. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20(1):32-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.09.008. Epub 2013 Sep 19.

Validation and attempts of revision of the MDS-recommended tests for the 
screening of Parkinson's disease dementia.

Isella V(1), Mapelli C(2), Siri C(3), De Gaspari D(3), Pezzoli G(3), Antonini 
A(4), Poletti M(5), Bonuccelli U(5), Vista M(6), Appollonio IM(2).

Author information:
(1)Neurology Section, S. Gerardo Hospital, University of Milan Bicocca, Monza, 
Italy. Electronic address: valeria.isella@unimib.it.
(2)Neurology Section, S. Gerardo Hospital, University of Milan Bicocca, Monza, 
Italy.
(3)Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy.
(4)Parkinson Institute, Istituti Clinici di Perfezionamento, Milan, Italy; 
Department of Neurology, IRCCS San Camillo, University of Padua, Venice, Italy.
(5)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pisa, Italy.
(6)Neurology Section, Campo di Marte Hospital, Lucca, Italy.

The Movement Disorders Society (MDS) formulated diagnostic criteria and 
assessment guidelines for the screening of dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD). 
We carried out a validation of the cognitive measures suggested in the screening 
algorithm (i.e. the Mini Mental State Examination - MMSE - total score, serial 
7s subtraction, 3-word recall, pentagons copy, and one minute letter fluency) in 
86 patients with PD. Thirty-six percent of participants were diagnosed with 
dementia using the MDS algorithm, but with the Dementia Rating Scale instead of 
the MMSE. The original MDS procedure misclassified 11 patients (12.8%) as false 
negatives and 3 (3.5%) as false positives, leading to 65% sensitivity and 95% 
specificity. The main reason for misdiagnoses was insensitivity of the MMSE 
total score. Three attempts were made to reach a better screening performance, 
which warrants high sensitivity more than high specificity: 1. exclusion of the 
MMSE total score as a diagnostic requirement; 2. determination of a better cut 
off through Receiver Operating Characteristic curve analysis; 3. replacement of 
the MMSE with the equally undemanding, but more PD-specific, Mini Mental 
Parkinson. The first two strategies generally yielded high sensitivity, but poor 
specificity. The best outcome was achieved using a Mini Mental Parkinson total 
score <27 as cognitive criterion: sensitivity was 87% and negative predictive 
value was 90%; however, specificity was only 67%. Our findings seem to suggest 
that MDS practical guidelines are specific, but might benefit from the use of 
more PD-oriented tools than the MMSE in terms of sensitivity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.09.008
PMID: 24084382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3229. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2014 Feb;29(1):45-9. doi: 
10.1177/1533317513505134. Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Hippocampal and mesial temporal sclerosis in early-onset frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration versus Alzheimer's disease.

Karve SJ(1), Teng E, Tassniyom K, Mendez MF.

Author information:
(1)1Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine, University of 
California, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Hippocampal sclerosis (HS) and mesial temporal sclerosis (MTS) may occur with 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) as well as 
with normal aging. Prior studies suggest that HS/MTS may be more closely 
associated with FTLD but have not directly compared the prevalence and clinical 
characteristics of HS/MTS between neuropathologically confirmed early-onset (age 
≤ 65) cohorts of FTLD and AD. We identified patients with early-onset FTLD (n = 
136) and AD (n = 267) from National Alzheimer's Center Consortium databases and 
compared neuropathological and clinical data between these 2 groups. The FTLD 
group had a significantly higher prevalence of HS/MTS than that of the AD group. 
However, HS/MTS was associated with increasing age and memory impairment in the 
AD group but not in the FTLD group. These findings are consistent with the 
hypothesis that HS/MTS in FTLD occurs as part of the primary pathological 
process, rather than as a secondary, nonspecific effect of aging on memory and 
hippocampal function.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317513505134
PMCID: PMC3947801
PMID: 24085254 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declared no potential conflicts of 
interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of this 
article.


3230. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;117:45-57. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53491-0.00005-5.

Central control of autonomic function and involvement in neurodegenerative 
disorders.

Cersosimo MG(1), Benarroch EE.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorder Unit, Hospital de Clínicas, 
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina.

The central autonomic network includes the insular cortex, anterior cingulate 
cortex, amygdala, hypothalamus, periaqueductal gray, parabrachial nucleus, 
nucleus of the solitary tract, ventrolateral reticular formation of the medulla, 
and medullary raphe. These areas: are reciprocally interconnected; receive 
converging visceral and somatosensory information; generate stimulus-specific 
patterns of autonomic, endocrine, and motor responses; and are regulated 
according to the behavioral state, including the sleep-wake cycle. Several 
components of the central autonomic networks are affected in neurodegenerative 
disorders characterized by the presence of intracellular inclusions containing 
α-synuclein. These include multiple system atrophy (MSA), characterized by 
accumulation of glial cytoplasmic inclusions, and Lewy body disorders, including 
Parkinson disease (PD), dementia with Lewy bodies, and the so-called "pure" 
autonomic failure. In MSA, involvement of the rostral ventrolateral medulla may 
be primarily responsible for orthostatic hypotension; involvement in the pontine 
micturition area, sacral preganglionic nucleus, and Onuf nucleus is responsible 
for neurogenic bladder; and involvement of the pre-Bötzinger complex and 
medullary raphe may contribute to sleep-related respiratory abnormalities. In 
contrast, Lewy body disorders are characterized by early involvement of the 
enteric nervous system and cardiac sympathetic ganglia. The dorsal motor nucleus 
of the vagus is affected both in MSA and at early stages of PD.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53491-0.00005-5
PMID: 24095115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3231. Sleep Med. 2013 Nov;14(11):1059-63. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.06.013. Epub 2013 
Sep 8.

Electroencephalogram slowing in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder is 
associated with mild cognitive impairment.

Rodrigues Brazète J(1), Montplaisir J, Petit D, Postuma RB, Bertrand JA, Génier 
Marchand D, Gagnon JF.

Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Sleep Medicine, Hôpital du Sacré-Cœur de 
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada; Department of Psychology, Université de 
Montréal, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Comment in
    Sleep Med. 2013 Nov;14(11):1041-2.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) 
is a well-documented risk factor for synucleinopathies such as Parkinson disease 
(PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Moreover, approximately 50% of iRBD 
patients have mild cognitive impairment (MCI). The purpose of our study was to 
investigate waking electroencephalogram (EEG) abnormalities specific to iRBD 
patients with MCI.
METHODS: Forty-two polysomnographically confirmed iRBD patients, including 23 
iRBD [+]MCI patients 19 patients without MCI (iRBD [-]MCI), and 37 healthy 
subjects participated in the study. All participants underwent a complete 
neuropsychologic assessment for MCI diagnosis and a waking quantitative EEG 
recording.
RESULTS: iRBD [+]MCI patients had a higher slow-to-fast frequency ratio than 
iRBD [-]MCI patients and controls in the parietal, temporal, and occipital 
regions. iRBD [+]MCI patients also had higher relative θ power in the parietal, 
temporal, and occipital regions and lower relative α power in the occipital 
region compared to iRBD [-]MCI patients and controls. Moreover, iRBD [+]MCI 
patients had higher relative θ power in the frontal and central areas and lower 
relative β power in the central, parietal, and temporal regions compared to 
controls. The dominant occipital frequency also was slower in iRBD [+]MCI 
patients compared to controls. No between-group differences were observed 
between iRBD [-]MCI patients and controls.
CONCLUSION: In iRBD patients, only those with concomitant MCI showed waking EEG 
slowing in the posterior cortical regions, providing a potential marker for an 
increased risk for developing DLB or PD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.06.013
PMID: 24095264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3232. Neurology. 2013 Nov 5;81(19):1681-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000435299.57153.f0. 
Epub 2013 Oct 9.

MRI and pathology of REM sleep behavior disorder in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Murray ME(1), Ferman TJ, Boeve BF, Przybelski SA, Lesnick TG, Liesinger AM, 
Senjem ML, Gunter JL, Preboske GM, Lowe VJ, Vemuri P, Dugger BN, Knopman DS, 
Smith GE, Parisi JE, Silber MH, Graff-Radford NR, Petersen RC, Jack CR Jr, 
Dickson DW, Kantarci K.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neuroscience (M.E.M., A.M.L., B.N.D., D.W.D.), 
Psychiatry and Psychology (T.J.F.), and Neurology (N.R.G.-R.), Mayo Clinic, 
Jacksonville, FL; and Department of Neurology (B.F.B., D.S.K., M.H.S., R.C.P.), 
Biomedical Statistics (S.A.P., T.G.L.), Radiology (M.L.S., J.L.G., G.M.P., P.V., 
C.R.J., K.K.), Nuclear Medicine (V.J.L.), Psychology (G.E.S.), Laboratory 
Medicine and Pathology (J.E.P.), and Center for Sleep Medicine (M.H.S.), Mayo 
Clinic, Rochester, MN.

OBJECTIVE: To determine structural MRI and digital microscopic characteristics 
of REM sleep behavior disorder in individuals with low-, intermediate-, and 
high-likelihood dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) at autopsy.
METHODS: Patients with autopsy-confirmed low-, intermediate-, and 
high-likelihood DLB, according to the probability statement recommended by the 
third report of the DLB Consortium, and antemortem MRI, were identified (n = 
75). The clinical history was assessed for presence (n = 35) and absence (n = 
40) of probable REM sleep behavior disorder (pRBD), and patients' antemortem 
MRIs were compared using voxel-based morphometry. Pathologic burdens of 
phospho-tau, β-amyloid, and α-synuclein were measured in regions associated with 
early neuropathologic involvement, the hippocampus and amygdala.
RESULTS: pRBD was present in 21 patients (60%) with high-likelihood, 12 patients 
(34%) with intermediate-likelihood, and 2 patients (6%) with low-likelihood DLB. 
Patients with pRBD were younger, more likely to be male (p ≤ 0.001), and had a 
more frequent neuropathologic diagnosis of diffuse (neocortical) Lewy body 
disease. In the hippocampus and amygdala, phospho-tau and β-amyloid burden were 
lower in patients with pRBD compared with those without pRBD (p < 0.01). 
α-Synuclein burden did not differ in the hippocampus, but trended in the 
amygdala. Patients without pRBD had greater atrophy of temporoparietal cortices, 
hippocampus, and amygdala (p < 0.001) than those with pRBD; atrophy of the 
hippocampus (p = 0.005) and amygdala (p = 0.02) were associated with greater 
phospho-tau burdens in these regions.
CONCLUSION: Presence of pRBD is associated with a higher likelihood of DLB and 
less severe Alzheimer-related pathology in the medial temporal lobes, whereas 
absence of pRBD is characterized by Alzheimer-like atrophy patterns on MRI and 
increased phospho-tau burden.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000435299.57153.f0
PMCID: PMC3812105
PMID: 24107861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3233. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;116:599-611. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53497-2.00048-6.

Dementia.

Nardone R(1), Golaszewski S, Trinka E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Christian Doppler Clinic, Paracelsus Medical 
University, Salzburg, Austria; Department of Neurology, Franz Tappeiner 
Hospital, Merano, Italy. Electronic address: raffaele.nardone@asbmeran-o.it.

Transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) has been used extensively to 
characterize motor system pathophysiology in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other 
forms of dementia, as well to monitor the effects of certain pharmacological 
agents. Among the studies focusing on motor cortical excitability measures, the 
most consistent finding is a significant reduction of short-latency afferent 
inhibition (SAI) in AD and other forms of dementia in which the cholinergic 
system is affected, such as dementia with Lewy bodies. SAI evaluation may thus 
provide a reliable biomarker of cortical cholinergic dysfunction in dementias. 
Moreover, most TMS studies have demonstrated cortical hyperexcitability and 
asymptomatic motor cortex functional reorganization in the early stages of the 
disease. Integrated approaches utilizing TMS together with high-density EEG have 
indicated impaired cortical plasticity and functional connectivity across 
different neural networks in AD. Paired associative stimulation-induced 
plasticity has also been found to be abnormal in patients with AD. The 
development of novel noninvasive methods of brain stimulation, in particular 
repetitive TMS (rTMS) and transcranial direct current stimulation (tDCS), has 
increased the interest in neuromodulatory techniques as potential therapeutic 
tools for cognitive rehabilitation in AD. Preliminary studies have revealed that 
rTMS and tDCS can induce beneficial effects on specific cognitive functions in 
AD. Future studies are warranted to replicate and extend the initial findings.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-53497-2.00048-6
PMID: 24112927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3234. Acta Neurol Scand. 2014 May;129(5):307-18. doi: 10.1111/ane.12189. Epub 2013 Oct 
11.

Cognitive impairment in early-stage non-demented Parkinson's disease patients.

Pfeiffer HC(1), Løkkegaard A, Zoetmulder M, Friberg L, Werdelin L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Bispebjerg University Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark; 
Department of Clinical Physiology and Nuclear Medicine, Bispebjerg University 
Hospital, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVES: In Parkinson's disease (PD), Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) and 
Parkinson's disease-mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) are common. PD-MCI is a 
risk factor for developing PDD. Knowledge of cognition in early-stages PD is 
essential in understanding and predicting the dementia process.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We describe the cognitive profile in early-stage PD 
patients with no prior clinical suspicion of cognitive impairment, depression or 
psychiatric disturbances, and investigate possible features distinguishing 
patients with cognitive deficits, defining a PD-MCI risk-profile. Single Photon 
Emission Computerized Tomography (SPECT) DaT-scan and neurological examination 
confirmed the diagnosis. Mini-mental state examination-, Addenbrooke's Cognitive 
Examination, Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale scoring, Hoehn 
&Yahr/Activity of Daily Living staging and a neuropsychological test battery 
were applied. Mild cognitive impairment patients were identified according to 
modified criteria by Troster necessarily omitting subjective cognitive 
complaints. 80 patients, mean age 61.0 years (SD 6.6), mean duration of disease 
3.4 years (SD 1.2) were included. 76 patients were neuropsychologically tested.
RESULTS: 26 (34%) patients fulfilled modified PD-MCI criteria, 18 (69%) of these 
showed episodic memory deficits, 14 (54%) executive dysfunction, 13 (50%) 
language/praxis deficits, 12 (46%) visuospatial/constructional deficits and 9 
(35%) attention/working memory deficits. Cognitive impairment was associated 
with higher Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating scale (UPDRS)-, bradykinesia- and 
rigidity scores and more symmetric distribution of symptoms, but not tremor 
scores. Patients with cognitive impairment were less educated. Other demographic 
and clinical variables were comparable.
CONCLUSIONS: 34% of early-stage PD patients without prior clinical suspicion of 
cognitive impairment exhibit cognitive impairment, which is associated to 
disease severity, especially bradykinesia, rigidity, axial symptoms and less 
asymmetry of motor symptoms, even at early disease stages and when cognitive 
symptoms are mild.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ane.12189
PMID: 24117192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3235. Int J Urol. 2014 Jan;21(1):33-8. doi: 10.1111/iju.12288. Epub 2013 Sep 30.

Is overactive bladder a brain disease? The pathophysiological role of cerebral 
white matter in the elderly.

Sakakibara R(1), Panicker J, Fowler CJ, Tateno F, Kishi M, Tsuyusaki Y, 
Yamanishi T, Uchiyama T, Yamamoto T, Yano M.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Toho University, Sakura, 
Japan.

Comment in
    Int J Urol. 2014 Jan;21(1):39.

Small-vessel disease of the brain affecting the deep white matter 
characteristically manifests with neurological syndromes, such as vascular 
dementia and vascular parkinsonism. There is, however, compelling evidence to 
suggest that white matter disease can cause overactive bladder and incontinence, 
and in some patients these might be the initial manifestation. As white matter 
disease increases significantly with age, and preferentially affects the 
prefrontal deep white matter, white matter disease becomes an anatomical 
substrate in the brain etiology of overactive bladder. Treatment entails the 
management of small-vessel disease risk factors and anticholinergic drugs that 
do not easily penetrate the blood-brain barrier, to improve bladder control. In 
short, when caring for elderly overactive-bladder patients, we should look at 
both the brain and the bladder.

© 2013 The Japanese Urological Association.

DOI: 10.1111/iju.12288
PMID: 24118122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3236. Neurology. 2013 Nov 12;81(20):1741-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000435553.67953.81. 
Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Myocardial scintigraphy may predict the conversion to probable dementia with 
Lewy bodies.

Oda H(1), Ishii K, Terashima A, Shimada K, Yamane Y, Kawasaki R, Ohkawa S.

Author information:
(1)From the Institute for Aging Brain and Cognitive Disorders (H.O., A.T., 
K.-i.S., Y.Y., S.O.) and Department of Radiology (K.I., R.K.), Hygo Brain and 
Heart Center, Himeji, Hyogo; and the Neurocognitive Disorders Center (K.I.), 
Kinki University Faculty of Medicine, Osakasayama, Osaka, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the usefulness of brain perfusion SPECT and 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine ((123)I-MIBG) in predicting the conversion of 
possible dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) to probable DLB.
METHODS: We examined 94 patients with possible DLB based on the Consensus 
Criteria for the Clinical Diagnosis of DLB by 
N-Isopropyl-p-(123)I-iodoamphetamine ((123)I-IMP) brain perfusion SPECT and 
(123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy. After 1 year of follow-up, 33 of 94 
patients met the criteria for probable DLB. (123)I-IMP brain perfusion SPECT and 
(123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy were tested as predictors of the conversion 
from possible DLB to probable DLB. A receiver operating characteristic (ROC) 
analysis was performed.
RESULTS: The areas under the ROC curves for SPECT for predicting the conversion 
to probable DLB from possible DLB based on the occipital/cerebellum and 
occipital/striatum cortex ratios of blood flow counts were 0.591 and 0.585, 
respectively. The areas under the ROC curves for (123)I-MIBG based on the early 
heart to mediastinum (H/M) ratio, delayed H/M ratio, and washout rate were 
0.935, 0.936, and 0.884, respectively.
CONCLUSION: (123)I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy is a good predictor of the 
future conversion of possible DLB to probable DLB.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000435553.67953.81
PMID: 24122183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3237. Mov Disord. 2013 Nov;28(13):1832-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.25649. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Dementia in Parkinson's disease: usefulness of the pill questionnaire.

Martinez-Martin P(1).

Author information:
(1)Research Unit, Alzheimer Centre Reina Sofia Foundation, and CIBERNED, CIEN 
Foundation. Carlos III Institute of Health, Madrid, Spain.

The Level I algorithm for the diagnosis of dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease (PD-D) recommended by the Movement Disorder Society task force includes 
a Pill Questionnaire to determine the impact of cognitive decline on daily 
activities. The objective of this study was to test the performance of the Pill 
Questionnaire as a screening tool for the detection of dementia (all-cause) in 
patients with PD and to test the performance of another functional scale 
substituting the Pill Questionnaire for the diagnosis of "probable PD-D" 
(pPD-D). Data were collected from 529 patients who had PD in Hoehn and Yahr 
stages 1 through 5. The measures used include the Scales for Outcomes in 
PD-Motor (SCOPA-Motor), scales for psychiatric complications, the Mini Mental 
State Examination, the Clinical Impression of Severity Index, and the Pill 
Questionnaire. The SCOPA-Motor functional subscale score was categorized as 
"impact" or "no impact" of PD on daily activities. According to clinical 
judgment, 13.3% of patients had dementia. For detecting dementia, the Pill 
Questionnaire had 89% accuracy, although its positive predictive value was 55%. 
Performance was worse with the categorized SCOPA-Motor subscale. According to 
the Movement Disorder Society task force criterion, 85 patients (16.1%) had 
pPD-D. When the Pill Questionnaire was substituted by the categorized 
SCOPA-Motor subscale, the modified algorithm showed sensitivity, specificity, 
and accuracy indexes over 90% but had positive predictive value of 66% for pPD-D 
diagnosis. Although the Pill Questionnaire demonstrated acceptable basic 
properties as a screening tool for dementia, its positive predictive value was 
low. The SCOPA-Motor subscale cannot be proposed as a substitute for the Pill 
Questionnaire.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25649
PMID: 24123241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3238. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Apr;35(4):935.e3-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.019. Epub 2013 Oct 12.

Clinicogenetic study of GBA mutations in patients with familial Parkinson's 
disease.

Li Y(1), Sekine T(2), Funayama M(1), Li L(2), Yoshino H(3), Nishioka K(2), 
Tomiyama H(4), Hattori N(5).

Author information:
(1)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.
(3)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan; Department of Neuroscience for Neurodegenerative Disorders, Juntendo 
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
(5)Research Institute for Diseases of Old Age, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of 
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan; Department of Neuroscience for Neurodegenerative 
Disorders, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. Electronic 
address: nhattori@juntendo.ac.jp.

The glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) is a known risk factor of Parkinson's disease 
(PD). We sequenced entire coding exons and exon/intron boundaries of GBA in 147 
Japanese familial PD (FPD) patients from 144 families and 100 unrelated control 
subjects. Twenty-seven of 144 (18.8%) of index patients were heterozygous for 
known Gaucher disease mutations, suggesting that GBA heterozygous mutations are 
strongly associated with FPD (odds ratio = 22.9, 95% confidence interval = 
3.1-171.2). The frequency was significantly higher in autosomal dominant PD 
(ADPD) compared with autosomal recessive PD. According to clinical assessments, 
PD patients with GBA mutations exhibited typical manifestations of PD or 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), such as L-dopa responsive parkinsonism with 
psychiatric problems and/or cognitive decline. Interestingly, they also 
presented with reduced myocardial (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine uptake. Our 
findings suggest that heterozygous GBA mutations are strong risk factors in FPD, 
especially for autosomal dominant PD. Some patients with GBA heterozygous 
mutations develop clinical features of DLB. We speculate that GBA dysfunction 
may promote Lewy body formation, resulting in more severe PD or DLB phenotypes 
that are inherited in families.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.09.019
PMID: 24126159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3239. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Dec;70(12):1520-30. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.4408.

Natural history of Huntington disease.

Dorsey ER(1), Beck CA(2), Darwin K(3), Nichols P(3), Brocht AF(4), Biglan KM(5), 
Shoulson I(6); Huntington Study Group COHORT Investigators.

Collaborators: Shoulson I, Gusella J, Foroud T, Van Kammen DP, Foroud T, Dorsey 
R, Warner J, Giuliano J, Vetter L, Suchowersky O, Beck C, Oakes D, Marshall F, 
Hickey C, Marder K, Frucht S, Moskowitz C, Clouse R, Wasserman P, Muratori L, 
Louis E, Shannon K, Jaglin J, Jankovic J, Palao A, Harrison M, Davis R, Dietrich 
S, Singer C, Quesada M, Hersch S, Rosas D, Tanev K, Malarick K, McInnis R, 
Colcher A, Sanchez-Ramos J, Kostyk S, Doucette N, Paulsen J, Uc E, Rodnitzky R, 
Leserman A, Vik S, Perlmutter J, Tabbal S, Schmidt A, Barton S, Ross C, Dorsey 
R, Nucifora F, Welsh C, Dubinsky R, Dubinsky H, Broyles J, Suchowersky O, Klimek 
ML, Jones R, Testa C, Factor S, Sperin E, Testa C, Jennings D, Higgins D, Molho 
E, Adams J, Frank S, Saint-Hilaire M, Diggin M, Furtado S, Walker F, O'Neill C, 
Hunt V, Quaid K, Wesson M, Zauber S, Wesson M, LeDoux M, Raymond L, Leavitt B, 
Decolongon J, Perlman S, Corey-Bloom J, Peavy G, Goldstein J, Kumar R, Segro V, 
Erickson D, McCusker E, Griffith J, Loy C, Wheelock V, Tempkin T, Martin A, 
Nance M, Mallonee W, Suter G, Revilla F, Gartner M, Drazinic C, Fitzpatrick MJ, 
Panisset M, Duff K, Scott B, Weiner W, Robottom B, Chiu E, Yastrubetskaya O, 
Churchyard A, Greenamyre TJ, Lucarelli N, Agarwal P, Parkinson BG, Antonijevic 
I, DeLaRosa J, Panegyres P, Coleman A, Oakes D, Beck C, Robertson S, Holt D, 
Eaton K, Lindsay P, Deuel L, MacDonald M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland6now with 
the University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York.
(2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational Biology, University of 
Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York.
(3)Department of Neurology, Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(4)Center for Human Experimental Therapeutics, University of Rochester Medical 
Center, Rochester, New York.
(5)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, 
New York.
(6)Department of Neurology, Georgetown University Medical Center, Washington, 
DC.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2014 Jan;10(1):12-3.

IMPORTANCE: Understanding the natural history of Huntington disease will inform 
patients and clinicians on the disease course and researchers on the design of 
clinical trials.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the longitudinal change in clinical features among 
individuals with Huntington disease compared with controls.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective, longitudinal cohort study at 44 
research sites in Australia (n = 2), Canada (n =4), and the United States (n = 
38). Three hundred thirty-four individuals with clinically manifest Huntington 
disease who had at least 3 years of annually accrued longitudinal data and 142 
controls consisting of caregivers and spouses who had no genetic risk of 
Huntington disease.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Change in movement, cognition, behavior, and 
function as measured by the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale, the 
Mini-Mental State Examination, and vital signs.
RESULTS: Total motor score worsened by 3.0 points (95% CI, 2.5-3.4) per year and 
chorea worsened by 0.3 point per year (95% CI, 0.1-0.5). Cognition declined by 
0.7 point (95% CI, 0.6-0.8) per year on the Mini-Mental State Examination. 
Behavior, as measured by the product of frequency and severity score on the 
Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale, worsened by 0.6 point per year (95% 
CI, 0.0-1.2). Total functional capacity declined by 0.6 point per year (95% CI, 
0.5-0.7). Compared with controls, baseline body mass index was lower in those 
with Huntington disease (25.8 vs 28.8; P < .001), and average pulse was higher 
(74.2 vs 69.6 beats/min; P < .001).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Over 3 years, the cardinal features of Huntington 
disease all declined in a monotonic manner. These data quantify the natural 
history of the disease and may inform the design of trials aimed at reducing its 
burden.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: clinicaltrials.gov Identifier: NCT00313495.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.4408
PMID: 24126537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3240. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Nov;72(11):1009-15. doi: 
10.1097/01.jnen.0000435847.59828.db.

Abnormal gephyrin immunoreactivity associated with Alzheimer disease pathologic 
changes.

Hales CM(1), Rees H, Seyfried NT, Dammer EB, Duong DM, Gearing M, Montine TJ, 
Troncoso JC, Thambisetty M, Levey AI, Lah JJ, Wingo TS.

Author information:
(1)From the Department of Neurology (CMH, HR, AIL, JJL, TSW), Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disease (CMH, HR, NTS, EBD, DMD, MG, AIL, JJL, TSW), 
Departments of Biochemistry (NTS) and Human Genetics (EBD, TSW), and Pathology 
and Laboratory Medicine (MG), Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia; Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington 
(TJM); Departments of Pathology and Neurology, Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, 
Baltimore, Maryland (JCT); National Institute of Aging, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, Maryland (MT); and Atlanta Veterans Administration Medical 
Center, Atlanta, Georgia (TSW).

Many neurodegenerative disorders involve the abnormal accumulation of proteins. 
In addition to the pathologic hallmarks of neurofibrillary tangles and β-amyloid 
plaques in Alzheimer disease (AD), here we show that abnormal accumulations of 
gephyrin, an inhibitory receptor-anchoring protein, are highly correlated with 
the neuropathologic diagnosis of AD in 17 AD versus 14 control cases. 
Furthermore, gephyrin accumulations were specific for AD and not seen in normal 
controls or other neurodegenerative diseases including Parkinson disease, 
corticobasal degeneration, and frontotemporal degeneration. Gephyrin 
accumulations in AD overlapped with β-amyloid plaques and, more rarely, 
neurofibrillary tangles. Biochemical and proteomic studies of AD and control 
brain samples suggested alterations in gephyrin solubility and reveal elevated 
levels of gephyrin lower-molecular-weight species in the AD insoluble fraction. 
Because gephyrin is involved in synaptic organization and synaptic dysfunction 
is an early event in AD, these findings point to its possible role in the 
pathogenesis of AD.

DOI: 10.1097/01.jnen.0000435847.59828.db
PMCID: PMC4037931
PMID: 24128675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3241. Mov Disord. 2013 Nov;28(13):1847-53. doi: 10.1002/mds.25653. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Subtle gait changes in patients with REM sleep behavior disorder.

McDade EM(1), Boot BP, Christianson TJ, Pankratz VS, Boeve BF, Ferman TJ, 
Bieniek K, Hollman JH, Roberts RO, Mielke MM, Knopman DS, Petersen RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, 
Minnesota, USA.

Many people with rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) have an 
underlying synucleinopathy, the most common of which is Lewy body disease. 
Identifying additional abnormal clinical features may help in identifying those 
at greater risk of evolving to a more severe syndrome. Because gait disorders 
are common in the synucleinopathies, early abnormalities in gait in those with 
RBD could help in identifying those at increased risk of developing overt 
parkinsonism and/or cognitive impairment. We identified 42 probable RBD subjects 
and 492 controls using the Mayo Sleep Questionnaire and assessed gait velocity, 
cadence, and stride dynamics with an automated gait analysis system. Cases and 
controls were similar in age (79.9 ± 4.7 and 80.1 ± 4.7, P = 0.74), Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale Part III (UPDRS) score (3.3 ± 5.5 and 
1.9 ± 4.1, P = 0.21) and Mini-Mental State Examination scores (27.2 ± 1.9 and 
27.7 ± 1.6, P = 0.10). A diagnosis of probable RBD was associated with decreased 
velocity (-7.9 cm/s; 95% confidence interval [CI], -13.8 to -2.0; P < 0.01), 
cadence (-4.4 steps/min; 95% CI, -7.6 to -1.3; P < 0.01), significantly 
increased double limb support variability (30%; 95% CI, 6-60; P = 0.01), and 
greater stride time variability (29%; 95% CI, 2-63; P = 0.03) and swing time 
variability (46%; 95% CI, 15-84; P < 0.01). Probable RBD is associated with 
subtle gait changes prior to overt clinical parkinsonism. Diagnosis of probable 
RBD supplemented by gait analysis may help as a screening tool for disorders of 
α-synuclein.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25653
PMCID: PMC3952497
PMID: 24130124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Author Funding & Conflict of Interest Specific 
to this work Eric M McDade - None Brendon P Boot - None Teresa J H Christianson 
– None V. Shane Pankratz - Dr. Pankratz receives research support from the NIH. 
Bradley F Boeve - He has served as an investigator for clinical trials sponsored 
by Cephalon, Inc., Allon Pharmaceuticals and GE Healthcare. He receives 
royalties from the publication of a book entitled Behavioral Neurology of 
Dementia (Cambridge Medicine, 2009). He serves on the Scientific Advisory Board 
of the Tau Consortium. He has received honoraria from the American Academy of 
Neurology. He receives research support from the National Institute on Aging and 
the Mangurian Foundation. Tanis J. Ferman - She receives support from the 
National Institute on Aging and the Mangurian Foundation Kevin Bieniek - None 
John H. Hollman - None Rosebud O. Roberts - National Institute on Aging, 
Driskill Foundation. Michelle M. Mielke - She receives support from the National 
Institute on Aging and the Lewy Body Dementia Association David S Knopman - Dr. 
Knopman serves as Deputy Editor for Neurology®; served on a Data Safety 
Monitoring Board for Lilly Pharmaceuticals; served as a consultant to TauRx, was 
an investigator in clinical trials sponsored by Baxter, Elan Pharmaceuticals, 
and Forest Pharmaceuticals in the past 2 years; and receives research support 
from the NIH. Ronald C Petersen - Dr. Petersen serves on scientific advisory 
boards for Pfizer, Inc., Janssen Alzheimer Immunotherapy, Elan Pharmaceuticals, 
and GE Healthcare; receives royalties from the publication of Mild Cognitive 
Impairment (Oxford University Press, 2003); and receives research support from 
the NIH /NIA.


3242. Thorax. 2013 Nov;68(11):1057-65. doi: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-204282.

Risk factors for community-acquired pneumonia in adults in Europe: a literature 
review.

Torres A(1), Peetermans WE, Viegi G, Blasi F.

Author information:
(1)Servei de Pneumologia, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, Institut 
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), CIBER de Enfermedades 
Respiratorias (CIBERes), University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Community-acquired pneumonia (CAP) causes considerable morbidity and 
mortality in adults, particularly in the elderly.
METHODS: Structured searches of PubMed were conducted to identify up-to-date 
information on the incidence of CAP in adults in Europe, as well as data on 
lifestyle and medical risk factors for CAP.
RESULTS: The overall annual incidence of CAP in adults ranged between 1.07 to 
1.2 per 1000 person-years and 1.54 to 1.7 per 1000 population and increased with 
age (14 per 1000 person-years in adults aged ≥65 years). Incidence was also 
higher in men than in women and in patients with chronic respiratory disease or 
HIV infection. Lifestyle factors associated with an increased risk of CAP 
included smoking, alcohol abuse, being underweight, having regular contact with 
children and poor dental hygiene. The presence of comorbid conditions, including 
chronic respiratory and cardiovascular diseases, cerebrovascular disease, 
Parkinson's disease, epilepsy, dementia, dysphagia, HIV or chronic renal or 
liver disease all increased the risk of CAP by twofold to fourfold.
CONCLUSION: A range of lifestyle factors and underlying medical conditions are 
associated with an increased risk of CAP in European adults. Understanding of 
the types of individual at greatest risk of CAP can help to ensure that 
interventions to reduce the risk of infection and burden of disease are targeted 
appropriately.

DOI: 10.1136/thoraxjnl-2013-204282
PMCID: PMC3812874
PMID: 24130229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3243. Mov Disord. 2013 Sep 15;28(11):1520-33. doi: 10.1002/mds.25674.

Cognitive contributions to gait and falls: evidence and implications.

Amboni M(1), Barone P, Hausdorff JM.

Author information:
(1)Isituto di Diagnosi e Cura Hermitage-Capodimonte, Naples, Italy; 
Neurodegenerative Diseases Center, Department of Medicine and Surgery, 
University of Salerno, Salerno, Italy.

Dementia and gait impairments often coexist in older adults and patients with 
neurodegenerative disease. Both conditions represent independent risk factors 
for falls. The relationship between cognitive function and gait has recently 
received increasing attention. Gait is no longer considered merely automated 
motor activity but rather an activity that requires executive function and 
attention as well as judgment of external and internal cues. In this review, we 
intend to: (1) summarize and synthesize the experimental, neuropsychological, 
and neuroimaging evidence that supports the role played by cognition in the 
control of gait; and (2) briefly discuss the implications deriving from the 
interplay between cognition and gait. In recent years, the dual task paradigm 
has been widely used as an experimental method to explore the interplay between 
gait and cognition. Several neuropsychological investigations have also 
demonstrated that walking relies on the use of several cognitive domains, 
including executive-attentional function, visuospatial abilities, and even 
memory resources. A number of morphological and functional neuroimaging studies 
have offered additional evidence supporting the relationship between gait and 
cognitive resources. Based on the findings from 3 lines of studies, it appears 
that a growing body of evidence indicates a pivotal role of cognition in gait 
control and fall prevention. The interplay between higher-order neural function 
and gait has a number of clinical implications, ranging from integrated 
assessment tools to possible innovative lines of interventions, including 
cognitive therapy for falls prevention on one hand and walking program for 
reducing dementia risk on the other.

© 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25674
PMCID: PMC4119872
PMID: 24132840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Relevant conflicts of interest/financial 
disclosures: Nothing to report. Full financial disclosures and author roles may 
be found in the online version of this article.


3244. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 May;85(5):576-80. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-305805. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Cognitive deficits in mild Parkinson's disease are associated with distinct 
areas of grey matter atrophy.

Mak E(1), Zhou J, Tan LC, Au WL, Sitoh YY, Kandiah N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The neuroanatomical substrates underlying cognitive 
impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD) remain poorly understood. To address this 
gap, we compared the grey matter atrophy patterns in PD patients with mild 
cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) with PD patients having no cognitive impairment 
(PD-NCI), and examined relationships between atrophic regions and cognitive 
performance in specific domains.
METHODS: 90 non-demented PD patients (64.95±7.54 years, Hoehn and 
Yahr=1.88±0.39) were classified using formal diagnostic criteria as PD-MCI 
(n=23) or PD-NCI (n=67). Grey matter volume differences were examined using 
voxel-based morphometry on structural MRI, and multivariate linear regressions 
were employed to assess the relationships between cognitive performance in 
specific domains and atrophic regions.
RESULTS: Patients with PD-MCI had lower global cognition scores compared with 
PD-NCI (Mini Mental State Examination: 26.9 vs. 28.4, p=0.011; Montreal 
Cognitive Assessment: 24.5 vs. 27.0, p<0.001). The PD-MCI group demonstrated 
significantly poorer performance on executive function, attention, memory and 
language abilities. Patients with PD-MCI had reductions in grey matter volumes 
in the left insular, left superior frontal and left middle temporal areas 
compared to PD-NCI. Multiple regressions controlling for age, education and 
cardiovascular risk factors revealed significant positive correlations between 
left insular atrophy and executive-attention dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS: Domain specific cognitive impairment in mild PD is associated with 
distinct areas of grey matter atrophy. These regions of atrophy are demonstrable 
early in the disease course and may serve as a biomarker for dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-305805
PMID: 24133286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3245. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2014;37(1-2):104-12. doi: 10.1159/000354368. Epub 
2013 Oct 10.

Neuropsychiatric symptom profile differs based on pathology in patients with 
clinically diagnosed behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia.

Léger GC(1), Banks SJ.

Author information:
(1)Cleveland Clinic Lou Ruvo Center for Brain Health, Las Vegas, Nev., USA.

BACKGROUND: Behavioral variant frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD) is pathologically 
heterogeneous. With emerging therapeutics, determining underlying pathology 
during life is increasingly important. Neuropsychiatric symptoms are prevalent 
and diagnostic in bvFTD.
METHODS: We assessed the neuropsychiatric profile of patients with clinically 
diagnosed bvFTD as a function of pathology at autopsy. Patients with a clinical 
diagnosis of bvFTD at the initial visit were selected from the National 
Alzheimer's Coordinating Center (NACC) database. Neuropsychiatric symptoms 
endorsed on the Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI-Q) were analyzed.
RESULTS: Of 149 patients with clinically diagnosed bvFTD, pathology was 
primarily Alzheimer's disease (AD) in 20.5%. These patients differed from those 
with underlying frontotemporal lobar degeneration: patients with AD pathology 
(plaques and tangles) were more likely to have hallucinations, delusions, or 
agitation. Patients were further differentiated into tau-positive (30% of cases, 
including Pick's disease, FTD and parkinsonism with tau-positive or argyrophilic 
inclusions, and other tauopathies) or tau-negative cases (70% of cases, 
including bvFTD tau-negative ubiquitin-positive inclusions). These patients also 
differed in some of the neuropsychiatric symptoms seen. Tau-negative cases were 
more likely to demonstrate depression, delusions, and changes in appetite and 
eating.
CONCLUSIONS: These preliminary findings contribute to our increasing ability to 
predict, using simple clinical tools, the neuropathological underpinnings of 
bvFTD during life.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000354368
PMCID: PMC4041327
PMID: 24135712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3246. Neurology. 2013 Nov 19;81(21):1832-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000436070.28137.7b. 
Epub 2013 Oct 18.

Classification and pathology of primary progressive aphasia.

Harris JM(1), Gall C, Thompson JC, Richardson AM, Neary D, du Plessis D, Pal P, 
Mann DM, Snowden JS, Jones M.

Author information:
(1)From the Manchester Academic Health Sciences Centre (J.M.H., C.G., J.C.T., 
A.M.T.R., D.N., D.d.P., P.P., D.M.A.M., J.S.S., M.J.), Cerebral Function Unit, 
Greater Manchester Neuroscience Centre, Salford Royal NHS Foundation Trust, 
Salford; and Institute of Brain, Behaviour and Mental Health (J.M.H., D.N., 
D.M.A.M., J.S.S., M.J.), University of Manchester, UK.

OBJECTIVE: We aimed to determine the extent to which patients with progressive 
language impairment conform to 2011 primary progressive aphasia (PPA) 
classification and to examine clinicopathologic correlations within PPA 
variants.
METHODS: Sixty-two consecutive patients with pathologically confirmed dementia 
who presented clinically with aphasia were identified. Patients with 
insufficient clinical information were excluded. PPA classifications were 
applied to anonymized clinical data taken from patients' initial assessment by 
raters who were blinded to clinical and pathologic diagnosis.
RESULTS: The final cohort comprised 52 patients, 30 of whom met basic PPA 
criteria. Twenty-five patients met one of the 3 PPA classifications (13 
logopenic, 8 nonfluent/agrammatic, and 4 semantic). Five patients did not meet 
the criteria for any of the PPA variants. All patients who met semantic variant 
PPA and 75% of patients who met nonfluent/agrammatic variant PPA classifications 
had frontotemporal lobar degeneration spectrum pathology. Pathologies were 
heterogeneous in patients who met logopenic variant PPA criteria (46% Alzheimer 
disease [AD], 8% AD mixed with dementia with Lewy bodies, 23% frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration, and 23% other).
CONCLUSION: The 2011 PPA recommendations classify a large proportion of patients 
who meet basic PPA criteria. However, some patients had aphasic syndromes that 
could not be classified, suggesting that the 2011 recommendations do not cover 
the full range of PPA variants. Classification of semantic variant PPA provides 
a good prediction of underlying pathology. Classification of logopenic variant 
does not successfully differentiate PPA due to AD from PPA due to other 
pathologies.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000436070.28137.7b
PMID: 24142474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3247. Psychiatr Danub. 2013 Sep;25 Suppl 2:S358-61.

Reversible mild cognitive impairment--a case report.

Seshadri M(1), Mazi-Kotwal N, Aguis M.

Author information:
(1)Weller Wing Mental Health Unit, South Essex Partnership University NHS 
Foundation Trust, Bedford, UK, seshmadhavan@gmail.com.

With an increased general practitioner and public awareness, patients are being 
referred on to Memory Clinics earlier and Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) is 
often a conclusion of the assessment. The function of memory clinics is to 
facilitate early and accurate diagnosis of dementia and its management. Mild 
Cognitive Impairment is an organic condition which in significant proportion of 
cases, progresses to Dementia. In Bedfordshire and Luton, patients with MCI are 
followed up at nine months to yearly intervals and detailed neuropsychological 
assessments are carried out to monitor cognitive functions in order to detect 
dementia early and plan care at an early stage in line with the NICE guidance 
CG42. An interesting patient presented to the Memory Clinic. He suffered from 
bipolar disorder with age of onset after 50 years. He was successfully treated 
with a combination of antidepressants, antipsychotics and lithium carbonate. He 
started complaining of memory difficulties and the initial memory assessment 
concluded that he had MCI. He was followed up by the clinical psychologist at 
memory assessment services at yearly intervals. There were no active cognitive 
interventions done by the psychologist. In the meanwhile the patient developed 
Parkinson's disease and was treated successfully with levodopa. Following this, 
neuropsychological tests demonstrated a significant improvement in cognitive 
functions. The patient was assessed as having recovered from mild cognitive 
disorder. In this article the authors discuss the possible differential 
diagnosis and causative factors for the presentation of MCI in this patient. 
Furthermore the possible reasons for recovery are explored. This also raised 
interesting questions as to the pharmacological management of mild cognitive 
disorder secondary to neurological conditions and as to how the course of mild 
cognitive disorders could be modified by effective interventions.

PMID: 23995209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3248. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 17;8(10):e77688. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077688. 
eCollection 2013.

Prevalence of dementia and subtypes in Valladolid, northwestern Spain: the 
DEMINVALL study.

Tola-Arribas MA(1), Yugueros MI, Garea MJ, Ortega-Valín F, Cerón-Fernández A, 
Fernández-Malvido B, San José-Gallegos A, González-Touya M, Botrán-Velicia A, 
Iglesias-Rodríguez V, Díaz-Gómez B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Universitario Río Hortega, Valladolid, 
Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the prevalence of dementia and subtypes in a general 
elderly population in northwestern Spain and to analyze the influence of 
socio-demographic factors.
METHODS: Cross-sectional, two-phase, door-to-door, population-based study. A 
total of 870 individuals from a rural region and 2,119 individuals from an urban 
region of Valladolid, Spain, were involved. The seven-minute screen 
neurocognitive battery was used in the screening phase. A control group was 
included.
RESULTS: A total of 2,170 individuals aged 65 to 104 years (57% women) were 
assessed. There were 184 subjects diagnosed with dementia. The crude prevalence 
was 8.5% (95% CI: 7.3-9.7). Age- and sex-adjusted prevalence was 5.5 (95% CI: 
4.5-6.5). Main subtypes of dementia were: Alzheimer's disease (AD) 77.7%, Lewy 
Body disease, 7.6% and vascular dementia (VD) 5.9%. Crude prevalences were 6.6% 
(AD), 0.6% (Lewy Body disease), and 0.5% (VD). Dementia was associated with age 
(OR 1.14 for 1-year increase in age), female sex (OR 1.79) and the absence of 
formal education (OR 2.53 compared to subjects with primary education or more).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of dementia in the study population was lower than 
the most recent estimates for Western Europe. There was a high proportion of AD 
among all dementia cases and very low prevalence of VD. Old age, female sex, and 
low education level were independent risk factors for dementia and AD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077688
PMCID: PMC3798383
PMID: 24147055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3249. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Jun;29(6):569-76. doi: 10.1002/gps.4039. Epub 
2013 Oct 21.

Clinical presentation and differential diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies: a 
review.

Morra LF(1), Donovick PJ.

Author information:
(1)State University of New York at Binghamton, Binghamton, NY, USA.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies is one of the most prevalent dementia 
diagnoses. However, differential diagnosis between dementia with Lewy bodies, 
Alzheimer's disease, and Parkinson's disease with dementia can still be very 
difficult given the overlap in neuropathology, clinical presentation, cognitive, 
and neuroanatomical changes.
METHOD: A literature review of dementia with Lewy bodies, Alzheimer's disease, 
and Parkinson's disease with dementia was conducted using PubMed.
RESULTS AND IMPLICATIONS: Accurate diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies is 
crucial in order to more accurately predict the progression of the disease and 
negative side effects from pharmacological treatment. The differences and 
similarities between dementia with Lewy bodies, Alzheimer's disease, and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia are highlighted in order to aid clinicians in 
differential diagnosis.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.4039
PMID: 24150834 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3250. Mov Disord. 2014 Jan;29(1):83-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.25707. Epub 2013 Oct 22.

Fluctuations in cognition and alertness vary independently in dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Bliwise DL(1), Scullin MK, Trotti LM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, 
Georgia, USA.

Fluctuations in mental status are 1 of the core diagnostic criteria for dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) and are thought to reflect variability in daytime 
alertness. Previous attempts to study fluctuations have been limited to 
caregiver reports, observer rating scales, short segments of 
electroencephalography, or motor-dependent, reaction time tests. Concordance 
among such measures is often poor, and fluctuations remain difficult to 
quantify. We compared fluctuations in cognition and alertness in patients with 
DLB (n = 13) and idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) (n = 64), a condition 
associated with deficits in daytime alertness. We systematically and repeatedly 
collected cognitive and physiologic measures during a 48-hour inpatient protocol 
in a sound-attenuated sleep laboratory in a geriatric hospital. Cognitive 
fluctuations were analyzed using coefficients of variation (COVs) derived from 
performance on a bedside examination familiar to clinicians (digit span). 
Alertness fluctuations were assessed objectively using COVs from the 
polysomnographically-based Maintenance of Wakefulness Test. Despite predictably 
lower mean digit span performances, DLB patients demonstrated significantly 
greater cognitive fluctuations than PD patients (P < 0.001), even when groups 
were matched on general cognitive impairment. There were no group differences in 
alertness fluctuations, although DLB patients were less alert than PD patients 
not receiving dopaminergics. The prevailing assumption that fluctuations in 
cognition in DLB are reflected in fluctuations in daytime alertness was not 
supported by objective, physiological measurements. Fluctuating mental status in 
DLB patients can be detected with repeated administration of a simple bedside 
exam that can be adapted to a clinic setting.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25707
PMCID: PMC3946909
PMID: 24151106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3251. Sleep Med. 2013 Dec;14(12):1413-6. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.08.781. Epub 2013 
Sep 21.

Autonomic complaints in patients with restless legs syndrome.

Shneyder N(1), Adler CH, Hentz JG, Shill H, Caviness JN, Sabbagh MN, Beach TG, 
Driver-Dunckley E.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, Mayo Clinic, Scottsdale, 
AZ, United States.

BACKGROUND: Data regarding autonomic function in restless legs syndrome (RLS) 
are limited to heart rate and blood pressure changes in cases with periodic limb 
movements (PLMS).
METHODS: We compared autonomic symptoms of 49 subjects with RLS vs 291 control 
subjects using the Scales for Outcome in Parkinson disease-Autonomic (SCOPA-AUT) 
questionnaire, consisting of 23 items in six domains scored from 0 to 3. The 
total score and domain scores were transformed to 0-100 points. Subjects with 
neurodegenerative disorders (i.e., dementia, Parkinsonism) were excluded.
RESULTS: The RLS group was younger (mean±standard deviation, 77.9±8.0 vs 
80.5±7.9years; P=.03) and included more women (84% vs 69%; P=.04). The mean 
SCOPA-AUT total score was higher in the RLS group compared with the control 
group (20±11 vs 16±9; P=.005). Additionally the RLS group had abnormalities in 
gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and pupillomotor domains. When comparing the 
percentage of subjects with any complaint on individual questions (score of ⩾1), 
the RLS group had a greater number of subjects with sialorrhea, constipation, 
early abdominal fullness, lightheadedness when standing, and heat intolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Autonomic complaints, especially gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, 
and oversensitivity to light, were significantly increased in subjects with RLS. 
Causes for autonomic dysfunction in RLS require further investigation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.08.781
PMCID: PMC4105217
PMID: 24152795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3252. Science. 2013 Nov 22;342(6161):983-7. doi: 10.1126/science.1245296. Epub 2013 
Oct 24.

Identification and rescue of α-synuclein toxicity in Parkinson patient-derived 
neurons.

Chung CY(1), Khurana V, Auluck PK, Tardiff DF, Mazzulli JR, Soldner F, Baru V, 
Lou Y, Freyzon Y, Cho S, Mungenast AE, Muffat J, Mitalipova M, Pluth MD, Jui NT, 
Schüle B, Lippard SJ, Tsai LH, Krainc D, Buchwald SL, Jaenisch R, Lindquist S.

Author information:
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2014 Jan;13(1):19.
    Mov Disord. 2014 Jan;29(1):34.

The induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cell field holds promise for in vitro disease 
modeling. However, identifying innate cellular pathologies, particularly for 
age-related neurodegenerative diseases, has been challenging. Here, we exploited 
mutation correction of iPS cells and conserved proteotoxic mechanisms from yeast 
to humans to discover and reverse phenotypic responses to α-synuclein (αsyn), a 
key protein involved in Parkinson's disease (PD). We generated cortical neurons 
from iPS cells of patients harboring αsyn mutations, who are at high risk of 
developing PD dementia. Genetic modifiers from unbiased screens in a yeast model 
of αsyn toxicity led to identification of early pathogenic phenotypes in patient 
neurons. These included nitrosative stress, accumulation of endoplasmic 
reticulum (ER)-associated degradation substrates, and ER stress. A small 
molecule identified in a yeast screen (NAB2), and the ubiquitin ligase Nedd4 it 
affects, reversed pathologic phenotypes in these neurons.

DOI: 10.1126/science.1245296
PMCID: PMC4022187
PMID: 24158904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3253. Przegl Lek. 2013;70(7):443-7.

[Homocysteine and its role in pathogenesis of Parkinson's disease and other 
neurodegenerative disorders].

[Article in Polish]

Szadejko K(1), Szabat K, Ludwichowska A, Sławek J.

Author information:
(1)Oddział Neurologii, 7 Szpital Marynarki Wojennej w Gdańsku-Oliwie. 
kmottkarol@hotmail.com

Homocysteine (Hcy) has recently become the focus of interest in the research on 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and other neurodegenarative disorders. Chronic 
treatment with levodopa (LD), considered the standard treatment for PD, leads to 
an increase in homocysteine concentration in serum and cerebro-spinal fluid. 
Independently from this effect, homocysteine is also regarded as a marker of 
neurodegenerative disorders. Main interest was focused on hyperhomocysteinemia 
(hHcy) as the potential risk factor for atheromatosis. Subsequently, its role in 
neuropsychiatric diseases, e.g. depression, mild cognitive impairment and 
dementia was investigated. The potential pathogenic role of Hcy in peripheral 
neuropathy in patients with PD that are treated with LD is an interesting 
hypothesis but the literature is scarce. Confirmation of this association may 
lead to introduction of preventive therapies, e.g. administration of vitamin B 
and inhibitors of catechol-O-methyl transferase (COMT) that may decrease the Hcy 
blood concentrations.

PMID: 24167945 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3254. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2013 Sep;15(3):315-28. doi: 
10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.3/ekim.

Molecular imaging as a guide for the treatment of central nervous system 
disorders.

Kim E(1), Howes OD, Kapur S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, 
Gyeonggi-do 463-707, Korea.

Molecular imaging techniques have a number of advantages for research into the 
pathophysiology and treatment of central nervous system (CNS) disorders. 
Firstly, they provide a noninvasive means of characterizing physiological 
processes in the living brain, enabling molecular alterations to be linked to 
clinical changes. Secondly, the pathophysiological target in a given CNS 
disorder can be measured in animal models and in experimental human models in 
the same way, which enables translational research. Moreover, as molecular 
imaging facilitates the detection of functional change which precedes gross 
pathology, it is particularly useful for the early diagnosis and treatment of 
CNS disorders. This review considers the application of molecular imaging to CNS 
disorders focusing on its potential to inform the development and evaluation of 
treatments. We focus on schizophrenia, Parkinson's disease, depression, and 
dementia as major CNS disorders. We also review the potential of molecular 
imaging to guide new drug development for CNS disorders.

Publisher: Las técnicas de imaginología molecular tienen numerosas ventajas para 
la investigación acerca de la fisiopatología y el tratamiento de los trastornos 
del sistema nervioso central (SNC). Primero, porque ellas aportan formas no 
invasoras para la caracierización de procesos fisiológicos en el cerebro vivo, 
permitiendo que las alteraciones moleculares se relacionen con cambios clínicos. 
Segundo, porque el blanco fisiopatológico de un determinado trastorno del SNC 
puede ser medido de la misma forma en modelos animales y en modelos humanos 
experimentales, lo que permite la investigación translacional. Sin embargo, como 
la imaginología molecular facilita la detección del cambio funcional que precede 
a la patología grave, resulta especialmente útil para el diagnóstico y 
tratamiento precoces de los trastornos del SNC. Esta revisión examina la 
aplicación de la imaginología molecular en los trastornos del SNC y se enfoca en 
su potencial para informar sobre el desarrollo y evaluación de los 
tratamientos.Este artículo centra la atención en esquizofrenia, Enfermedad de 
Parkinson, depresión y demencia como los principales trastornos del SNC. También 
se revisa el potencial de la imaginología molecular como guía para el desarrollo 
de nuevos fármacos para trastornos del SNC.

Publisher: Les avantages des techniques d'imagerie moléculaire sont nombreux 
pour la recherche physiopathologique et le traitement des troubles du SNC 
(système nerveux central). Elles permettent tout d'abord d'explorer de façon non 
invasive les processus physiologiques du cerveau vivant en liant les changements 
moléculaires aux modifications cliniques. Deuxièmement, une recherche 
translationnelle est rendue possible mesurant de la même façon dans un trouble 
donné du SNC, la cible physiopathologique dans des modèles animaux et dans des 
modèles humains expérimentaux. De plus, l'imagerie moléculaire permet la 
détection de modifications fonctionnelles précédant la pathologie manifeste, ce 
qui est particulièrement utile pour le diagnostic précoce et le traitement des 
troubles du SNC.Dans cet article, nous nous intéressons à la capacité de 
l'imagerie moléculaire d'informer sur le développement et l'évaluation des 
traitements dans son application aux troubles du SNC, en particulier pour la 
schizophrénie, la maladie de Parkinson, la dépression et la démence, troubles 
majeurs du SNC. Nous analysons également la possibilité de piloter le 
développement de nouveaux médicaments des troubles du SNC par l'imagerie 
moléculaire.

DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2013.15.3/ekim
PMCID: PMC3811103
PMID: 24174903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3255. BMC Health Serv Res. 2013 Nov 1;13:457. doi: 10.1186/1472-6963-13-457.

Diagnostic data for neurological conditions in interRAI assessments in home 
care, nursing home and mental health care settings: a validity study.

Foebel AD(1), Hirdes JP, Heckman GA, Kergoat MJ, Patten S, Marrie RA; ideas PNC 
research team.

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health & Health Systems, University of Waterloo, Waterloo, 
ON, Canada. adfoebel@uwaterloo.ca.

BACKGROUND: The interRAI suite of assessment instruments can provide valuable 
information to support person-specific care planning across the continuum of 
care. Comprehensive clinical information is collected with these instruments, 
including disease diagnoses. In Canada, interRAI data holdings represent some of 
the largest repositories of clinical information in the country for persons with 
neurological conditions. This study examined the accuracy of the diagnostic 
information captured by interRAI instruments designed for use in the home care, 
long-term care and mental health care settings as compared with national 
administrative databases.
METHODS: The interRAI assessments were matched with an inpatient hospital record 
and emergency department (ED) visit record in the preceding 90 days. Diagnoses 
captured on the interRAI instruments were compared to those recorded in either 
administrative record for each individual. Diagnostic validity was examined 
through sensitivity, specificity and positive predictive value analysis for the 
following conditions: multiple sclerosis, epilepsy, Alzheimer's disease and 
other dementias, Parkinson's disease, traumatic brain injury, stroke, diabetes 
mellitus, heart failure and reactive airway disease.
RESULTS: In the three large study samples (home care: n = 128,448; long-term 
care: n = 26,644; mental health: n = 13,812), interRAI diagnoses demonstrated 
high specificity when compared to administrative records, for both neurological 
conditions (range 0.80-1.00) and comparative chronic diseases (range 0.83-1.00). 
Sensitivity and positive predictive values (PPV) were more varied by specific 
diagnosis, with sensitivities and PPV for neurological conditions ranging from 
0.23 to 0.94 and 0.14 to 0.77, respectively. The interRAI assessments routinely 
captured more cases of the diagnoses of interest than the administrative 
records.
CONCLUSIONS: The interRAI assessment collected accurate information about 
disease diagnoses when compared to administrative records within three months. 
Such information is likely relevant to day-to-day care in these three 
environments and can be used to inform care planning and resource allocation 
decisions.

DOI: 10.1186/1472-6963-13-457
PMCID: PMC3893477
PMID: 24176093 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3256. Neurosci Lett. 2013 Dec 17;557 Pt B:177-80. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.045. 
Epub 2013 Oct 30.

Association of a polymorphism in mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) 
with Parkinson's disease dementia but not dementia with Lewy bodies.

Gatt AP(1), Jones EL, Francis PT, Ballard C, Bateman JM.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London SE1 1UL, UK.

Erratum in
    Neurosci Lett. 2014 Mar 20;563:44.

The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) A>G rs2306604 in the gene encoding 
mitochondrial transcription factor A (TFAM) has been associated with Alzheimer's 
disease, with the A allele being recognised as a risk factor, but has not been 
studied in other types of dementia. We hypothesised that TFAM SNP rs2306604 
might also be associated with Lewy body dementias. To test this hypothesis 
rs2306604 genotype was determined in 141 controls and 135 patients with dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) or Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). rs2306604 genotype 
frequencies were significantly different to controls in PDD (p=0.042), but not 
in DLB (p=0.529). The A allele was also associated with PDD (p=0.024, OR=2.092), 
but not DLB (p=0.429, OR=1.308). Moreover, the A allele was strongly associated 
with PDD in males (p=0.001, OR=5.570), but not in females (p=0.832, OR=1.100). 
Mitochondrial DNA copy number in the prefrontal cortex was also significantly 
reduced in PDD patients, but this reduction was not associated with rs2306604 
genotype. These data show that the TFAM SNP rs2306604 A allele may be a risk 
factor for PDD, particularly in males, but not for DLB. Therefore, the genetic 
factors that predispose individuals to develop dementia may differ in PDD and 
DLB.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2013.10.045
PMID: 24184878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3257. JAMA Neurol. 2014 Jan;71(1):62-7. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.4498.

Cognitive and motor function in long-duration PARKIN-associated Parkinson 
disease.

Alcalay RN(1), Caccappolo E(2), Mejia-Santana H(2), Tang MX(1), Rosado L(2), 
Orbe Reilly M(2), Ruiz D(2), Louis ED(3), Comella CL(4), Nance MA(5), Bressman 
SB(6), Scott WK(7), Tanner CM(8), Mickel SF(9), Waters CH(2), Fahn S(2), Cote 
LJ(10), Frucht SJ(2), Ford B(2), Rezak M(11), Novak KE(12), Friedman JH(13), 
Pfeiffer RF(14), Marsh L(15), Hiner B(16), Payami H(17), Molho E(18), Factor 
SA(19), Nutt JG(20), Serrano C(21), Arroyo M(21), Ottman R(22), Pauciulo MW(23), 
Nichols WC(23), Clark LN(24), Marder KS(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York2Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York.
(2)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York.
(3)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York2Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York3Gertru.
(4)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
Illinois.
(5)Struthers Parkinson's Center, Park Nicollet Clinic, Golden Valley, Minnesota.
(6)The Alan and Barbara Mirken Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Medical 
Center, New York, New York8Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of 
Medicine, Bronx, New York.
(7)Dr John T. Macdonald Foundation, Department of Human Genetics, Miami 
Institute for Human Genomics, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, 
Miami, Florida.
(8)Parkinson's Institute, Sunnyvale, and Department of Health Research and 
Policy, Stanford University, Palo Alto, California.
(9)Marshfield Clinic, Department of Neurology, Marshfield, Wisconsin.
(10)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York3Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York.
(11)Central DuPage Hospital, Neurosciences Institute, Movement Disorders Center, 
Winfield, Illinois.
(12)Department of Neurology, NorthShore University Health System, Evanston, 
Illinois14Department of Neurology, University of Chicago, Pritzker School of 
Medicine, Chicago, Illinois.
(13)Department of Neurology, Butler Hospital, Providence, Rhode 
Island16Department of Neurology, Alpert Medical School, Brown University, 
Providence, Rhode Island.
(14)Department of Neurology, College of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health 
Science Center, Memphis.
(15)Morris K. Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence and 
Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Neurology and Neurological 
Sciences, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.
(16)Department of Neurology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee.
(17)New York State Department of Health Wadsworth Center, Albany, New York.
(18)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center of Albany Medical Center, 
Albany, New York.
(19)Department of Neurology, Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia.
(20)Portland VA Medical Center, Parkinson Disease Research, Education and 
Clinical Center, and Oregon Health and Science University, Portland.
(21)Department of Neurology, University of Puerto Rico, San Juan.
(22)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York3Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York4Department of 
Epidemiology, Mailman School of P.
(23)Division of Human Genetics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
and Department of Pediatrics; University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, 
Ohio.
(24)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New 
York27Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, Columbia University, New Yor.

IMPORTANCE: Data on the long-term cognitive outcomes of patients with 
PARKIN-associated Parkinson disease (PD) are unknown but may be useful when 
counseling these patients.
OBJECTIVE: Among patients with early-onset PD of long duration, we assessed 
cognitive and motor performances, comparing homozygotes and compound 
heterozygotes who carry 2 PARKIN mutations with noncarriers.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Cross-sectional study of 44 participants at 
17 different movement disorder centers who were in the Consortium on Risk for 
Early-Onset PD study with a duration of PD greater than the median duration (>14 
years): 4 homozygotes and 17 compound heterozygotes (hereafter referred to as 
carriers) and 23 noncarriers.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale Part III 
(UPDRS-III) and Clinical Dementia Rating scores and neuropsychological 
performance. Linear regression models were applied to assess the association 
between PARKIN mutation status and cognitive domain scores and UPDRS-III scores. 
Models were adjusted for age, education, disease duration, language, and 
levodopa equivalent daily dose.
RESULTS: Carriers had an earlier age at onset of PD (P < .001) and were younger 
(P = .004) at time of examination than noncarriers. They performed better than 
noncarriers on the Mini-Mental State Examination (P = .010) and were more likely 
to receive lower scores on the Clinical Dementia Rating (P = .003). In 
multivariate analyses, carriers performed better than noncarriers on the 
UPDRS-III (P = .02) and on tests of attention (P = .03), memory (P = .03), and 
visuospatial (P = .02) cognitive domains.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In cross-sectional analyses, carriers demonstrated 
better cognitive and motor performance than did noncarriers with long disease 
duration, suggesting slower disease progression. A longitudinal follow-up study 
is required to confirm these findings.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.4498
PMCID: PMC3947132
PMID: 24190026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors report no conflicts of 
interest.


3258. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2014;37(3-4):207-13. doi: 10.1159/000354372. Epub 
2013 Oct 26.

Application of the PredictAD decision support tool to a Danish cohort of 
patients with Alzheimer's disease and other dementias.

Simonsen AH(1), Mattila J, Hejl AM, Garde E, van Gils M, Thomsen C, Lötjönen J, 
Soininen H, Waldemar G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Copenhagen University Hospital Rigshospitalet, 
Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is based on an 
ever-increasing body of data and knowledge making it a complex task. The 
PredictAD tool integrates heterogeneous patient data using an interactive user 
interface to provide decision support. The aim of this project was to 
investigate the performance of the tool in distinguishing AD from non-AD 
dementia using a realistic clinical dataset.
METHODS: We retrieved clinical data from a group of patients diagnosed with AD 
(n = 72), vascular dementia (VaD, n = 30), frontotemporal dementia (FTD, n = 25) 
or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB, n = 14) at the Copenhagen Memory Clinic at 
Rigshospitalet. Three classification methods were applied to the data in order 
to differentiate between AD and a group of non-AD dementias. The methods were 
the PredictAD tool's Disease State Index (DSI), the naïve Bayesian classifier 
and the random forest.
RESULTS: The DSI performed best for this realistic dataset with an accuracy of 
76.6% compared to the accuracies for the naïve Bayesian classifier and random 
forest of 67.4 and 66.7%, respectively. Furthermore, the DSI differentiated 
between the four diagnostic groups with a p value of <0.0001.
CONCLUSION: In this dataset, the DSI method used by the PredictAD tool showed a 
superior performance for the differentiation between patients with AD and those 
with other dementias. However, the methods need to be refined further in order 
to optimize the differential diagnosis between AD, FTD, VaD and DLB.

DOI: 10.1159/000354372
PMID: 24193095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3259. Neurobiol Aging. 2014 Apr;35(4):819-26. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.10.074. Epub 2013 Oct 9.

Disentangling the effects of age and APOE on neuropathology and late life 
cognitive decline.

Yu L(1), Boyle PA(2), Leurgans S(3), Schneider JA(4), Bennett DA(5).

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA. Electronic address: lei_yu@rush.edu.
(2)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA; Department of Behavioral Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(3)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA; Department of Preventive Medicine, Rush University Medical 
Center, Chicago, IL, USA.
(4)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA; Department of Pathology, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL, 
USA; Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, 
Chicago, IL, USA.

Age and APOE are the most robust risk factors for dementia and cognitive 
decline, but the underlying neurobiology remains unclear. We examined the extent 
to which the hallmark pathologies of Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body disease, and 
cerebrovascular diseases account for the association of age and APOE with 
decline in episodic memory versus nonepisodic cognitive abilities. Up to 20 
waves of longitudinal cognitive data were collected from 858 autopsied 
participants in 2 ongoing clinical-pathologic cohort studies of aging. 
Neuropathologic examinations quantified measures of beta amyloid (Aβ) plaque, 
mesial temporal and neocortical neurofibrillary tangles, macro- and 
microinfarcts, and neocortical Lewy bodies. Random coefficient models estimated 
person-specific slopes of decline in episodic memory and nonepisodic cognition. 
Path analysis examined the relation of age, APOE, and the 6 pathologic indices 
to the slopes of cognitive decline. The effect of age on decline in episodic 
memory was mediated by Aβ, mesial temporal and neocortical tau tangles, and 
macroscopic infarcts; age on decline in nonepisodic cognition was mediated by 
Aβ, neocortical tangles, and macroscopic infarcts. The effect of APOE on decline 
in episodic memory was mediated by Aβ, mesial temporal and neocortical tangles, 
and neocortical Lewy bodies; APOE on nonepisodic cognition was mediated by Aβ, 
neocortical tangles, and neocortical Lewy bodies. There were no direct effects 
of age and APOE on decline after accounting for these pathologic pathways.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.10.074
PMCID: PMC3882071
PMID: 24199961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: DISCLOSURES The authors have no conflicts to 
disclose that relate to this study.


3260. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 30;8(10):e77711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077711. 
eCollection 2013.

SMG1 identified as a regulator of Parkinson's disease-associated alpha-synuclein 
through siRNA screening.

Henderson-Smith A(1), Chow D, Meechoovet B, Aziz M, Jacobson SA, Shill HA, 
Sabbagh MN, Caviness JN, Adler CH, Driver-Dunckley ED, Beach TG, Yin H, Dunckley 
T.

Author information:
(1)Neurogenomics Division, Translational Genomics Research Institute, Phoenix, 
Arizona, United States of America.

Synucleinopathies are a broad class of neurodegenerative disorders characterized 
by the presence of intracellular protein aggregates containing α-synuclein 
protein. The aggregated α-synuclein protein is hyperphosphorylated on serine 129 
(S129) compared to the unaggregated form of the protein. While the precise 
functional consequences of S129 hyperphosphorylation are still being clarified, 
numerous in vitro and in vivo studies suggest that S129 phosphorylation is an 
early event in α-synuclein dysfunction and aggregation. Identifying the kinases 
and phosphatases that regulate this critical phosphorylation event may 
ultimately prove beneficial by allowing pharmacological mitigation of synuclein 
dysfunction and toxicity in Parkinson's disease and other synucleinopathies. We 
report here the development of a high-content, fluorescence-based assay to 
quantitate levels of total and S129 phosphorylated α-synuclein protein. We have 
applied this assay to conduct high-throughput loss-of-function screens with 
siRNA libraries targeting 711 known and predicted human kinases and 206 
phosphatases. Specifically, knockdown of the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase 
related kinase SMG1 resulted in significant increases in the expression of pS129 
phosphorylated α-synuclein (p-syn). Moreover, SMG1 protein levels were 
significantly reduced in brain regions with high p-syn levels in both dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD). These 
findings suggest that SMG1 may play an important role in increased α-synuclein 
pathology during the course of PDD, DLB, and possibly other synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0077711
PMCID: PMC3813773
PMID: 24204929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3261. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Dec;21(12):1277-86. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.062. Epub 2013 Feb 6.

The differential impact of unique behavioral and psychological symptoms for the 
dementia caregiver: how and why do patients' individual symptom clusters impact 
caregiver depressive symptoms?

Ornstein K(1), Gaugler JE, Devanand DP, Scarmeas N, Zhu C, Stern Y.

Author information:
(1)Geriatrics Department, The Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY. 
Electronic address: Katherine.ornstein@mssm.edu.

OBJECTIVE: The behavioral and psychological symptoms associated with dementia 
(BPSD) are highly burdensome to caregivers. While BPSD consist of a wide variety 
of patient behaviors including depression, physical aggression, and paranoid 
delusions, it remains unclear whether specific symptoms have a differential 
impact on caregivers. The aims of this study were 1) to assess how individual 
BPSD, categorized based on how they may affect caregivers, impact depressive 
symptoms for dementia patient caregivers and 2) to test the pathways by which 
BPSD clusters impact caregiver depressive symptoms.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of data from a longitudinal study of patients 
with Alzheimer disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.
SETTING: Multiple U.S. dementia clinics.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred sixty patient-caregiver dyads.
METHODS: Using multivariate generalized estimating equation logistic models, we 
analyzed the relationship between four BPSD clusters (patient depressive 
symptoms, accusatory/aggressive behaviors, nonthreatening psychotic symptoms, 
and difficult to manage behaviors) and caregiver depressive symptoms and 
assessed mediators of these relationships.
RESULTS: Only the presence of patient depressive symptoms was associated with 
caregiver depression (odds ratio: 1.55; 95% confidence interval: 1.14-2.1). This 
relationship was mediated by caregiver report of both the symptom's impact on 
the patient and perceived burden to caregivers.
CONCLUSION: Patient depressive symptoms may be the most important driver of the 
relationship between BPSD and caregiver depression. Research in this field 
should further test the effects of individual BPSD and also consider how 
symptoms may negatively impact caregivers by increasing burden and evoking 
empathy for the patient.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.01.062
PMCID: PMC3543497
PMID: 24206939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3262. Int Rev Neurobiol. 2013;110:85-90. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-410502-7.00005-3.

BPAN: the only X-linked dominant NBIA disorder.

Haack TB(1), Hogarth P, Gregory A, Prokisch H, Hayflick SJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany; 
Institute of Human Genetics, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany.

Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration (BPAN) is the most recently 
identified subtype of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation (NBIA), 
being unique with respect to the underlying disease genetics, the associated 
clinical presentation, and the suggested pathomechanism. Mutations in 
X-chromosomal WDR45 arise de novo; however, the dominant pattern of inheritance 
is unusual for an X-linked disorder and additional mechanisms such as 
X-inactivation or somatic mosaicism are likely to contribute to the phenotype 
that is indistinguishable between males and females. The course of the disease 
is two-staged with developmental delay and intellectual disability in childhood 
and a second phase of rapid neurological deterioration characterized by 
parkinsonism and dementia occurring in adolescence or early adulthood. At this 
time, neuroimaging findings are characteristic and provide excellent diagnostic 
guidance. There is increasing evidence that human WDR45 deficiency impairs 
autophagy, thereby raising the possibility that this rare disorder will offer 
insights into more common neurodegenerative disorders such as Parkinson or 
Alzheimer disease.

© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-12-410502-7.00005-3
PMID: 24209435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3263. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2013 Oct;71(10):757-62. doi: 10.1590/0004-282X20130117.

Vascular parkinsonism: a case series of 17 patients.

Vale TC(1), Caramelli P, Cardoso F.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital das Clínicas, Federal University of Minas Gerais.

Comment in
    Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2013 Oct;71(10):755-6.

OBJECTIVE: To report the clinical and neuroimaging findings in a case series of 
vascular parkinsonism (VP).
METHODS: Seventeen patients with VP were evaluated with motor, cognitive, and 
neuroimaging standardized tests and scales.
RESULTS: All patients had arterial hypertension. Ten patients were male and the 
mean age of the whole sample was 75.8±10.1 years. The mean age of parkinsonism 
onset was 72.2±10.0 years. Common clinical features were urinary incontinence 
(88.2%), lower limb parkinsonism with freezing of gait and falls (82.3%), and 
pyramidal signs (76.4%). The mean Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale 
(UPDRS) and Hoehn-Yahr scores were 72.5±21.6 points and 3.3±0.9 points, 
respectively. Sixteen (94.1%) patients had freezing of gait and executive 
dysfunction. Twelve (70.5%) patients had probable vascular dementia. The mean 
dose of levodopa was 530.9 mg/day. Unresponsiveness to the drug was confirmed by 
a 6.9 mean point reduction in the UPDRS score after the "practically defined 
off" test.
CONCLUSION: This series provides a profile of VP with predominant lower-limb 
involvement, freezing of gait and falls, pyramidal signs, executive dysfunction, 
concomitant vascular dementia, and poor levodopa response.

DOI: 10.1590/0004-282X20130117
PMID: 24212510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3264. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Apr 1;23(7):1794-801. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddt570. Epub 2013 Nov 
11.

DNAJC13 mutations in Parkinson disease.

Vilariño-Güell C(1), Rajput A, Milnerwood AJ, Shah B, Szu-Tu C, Trinh J, Yu I, 
Encarnacion M, Munsie LN, Tapia L, Gustavsson EK, Chou P, Tatarnikov I, Evans 
DM, Pishotta FT, Volta M, Beccano-Kelly D, Thompson C, Lin MK, Sherman HE, Han 
HJ, Guenther BL, Wasserman WW, Bernard V, Ross CJ, Appel-Cresswell S, Stoessl 
AJ, Robinson CA, Dickson DW, Ross OA, Wszolek ZK, Aasly JO, Wu RM, Hentati F, 
Gibson RA, McPherson PS, Girard M, Rajput M, Rajput AH, Farrer MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC 
V6T 2B5, Canada.

A Saskatchewan multi-incident family was clinically characterized with Parkinson 
disease (PD) and Lewy body pathology. PD segregates as an autosomal-dominant 
trait, which could not be ascribed to any known mutation. DNA from three 
affected members was subjected to exome sequencing. Genome alignment, variant 
annotation and comparative analyses were used to identify shared coding 
mutations. Sanger sequencing was performed within the extended family and 
ethnically matched controls. Subsequent genotyping was performed in a 
multi-ethnic case-control series consisting of 2928 patients and 2676 control 
subjects from Canada, Norway, Taiwan, Tunisia, and the USA. A novel mutation in 
receptor-mediated endocytosis 8/RME-8 (DNAJC13 p.Asn855Ser) was found to 
segregate with disease. Screening of cases and controls identified four 
additional patients with the mutation, of which two had familial parkinsonism. 
All carriers shared an ancestral DNAJC13 p.Asn855Ser haplotype and claimed 
Dutch-German-Russian Mennonite heritage. DNAJC13 regulates the dynamics of 
clathrin coats on early endosomes. Cellular analysis shows that the mutation 
confers a toxic gain-of-function and impairs endosomal transport. DNAJC13 
immunoreactivity was also noted within Lewy body inclusions. In late-onset 
disease which is most reminiscent of idiopathic PD subtle deficits in endosomal 
receptor-sorting/recycling are highlighted by the discovery of pathogenic 
mutations VPS35, LRRK2 and now DNAJC13. With this latest discovery, and from a 
neuronal perspective, a temporal and functional ecology is emerging that 
connects synaptic exo- and endocytosis, vesicular trafficking, endosomal 
recycling and the endo-lysosomal degradative pathway. Molecular deficits in 
these processes are genetically linked to the phenotypic spectrum of 
parkinsonism associated with Lewy body pathology.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddt570
PMCID: PMC3999380
PMID: 24218364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3265. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 Sep;85(9):969-73. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-306381. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Comparison of activities of daily living impairments in Parkinson's disease 
patients as defined by the Pill Questionnaire and assessments by neurologists.

Lee WJ(1), Chang YY(2), Lin JJ(3), Sung YF(4), Li JY(5), Wang SJ(6), Chen RS(7), 
Yang YH(8), Hu CJ(9), Tsai CH(10), Wang HC(11), Wu SL(12), Chang MH(13), Fuh 
JL(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan 
Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Schools of Medicine, Taipei, 
Taiwan Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Schools of 
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Neurology and Center for Parkinson's Disease, Kaohsiung Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, 
Taiwan.
(3)Department of Neurology Chushang Show-Chwan Hospital, Nantou and Chung-Shan 
University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan.
(4)Department of Neurology, Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense 
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Schools of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan Division of Neurology, Kaohsiung Veterans General Hospital, 
Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(6)Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Schools of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan Department of Neurology, Neurological Institute, Taipei Veterans 
General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan.
(7)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital and Chang Gung 
University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(8)Department of and Master's Program in Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, 
Kaohsiung Medical University, Taiwan Department of Neurology, Kaohsiung 
Municipal Ta Tung Hospital, Kaohsiung Medical University, Kaohsiung, Taiwan.
(9)Department of Neurology, Shung Ho Hospital, Taipei Medical University, New 
Taipei City, Taiwan.
(10)Department of Neurology, China Medical University Hospital; School of 
Medicine, Medical College and Graduate Institute of Neural and Cognitive 
Sciences, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(11)Department of Neurology, Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital, College of 
Medicine, Taipei Medical University, and College of Medicine, National Taiwan 
University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(12)Department of Neurology, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan.
(13)Department of Neurology, Taichung Veterans General Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan Faculty of Medicine, National Yang-Ming University Schools of Medicine, 
Taipei, Taiwan.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 Sep;85(9):949.

OBJECTIVES: To compare the clinical judgment of experienced neurologists after 
interviewing Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and their caregivers with the use 
of the Pill Questionnaire to determine the presence of impairments on activities 
of daily living (ADL).
BACKGROUND: ADL impairment is a criterion for the diagnosis of dementia 
associated with PD. The Pill Questionnaire has been recommended as a screening 
tool to assess ADL impairment in PD patients, but its usefulness and validity 
have not been fully investigated.
METHODS: We recruited idiopathic PD patients from 12 hospitals in Taiwan, and 
the patients underwent clinical assessments, a neuropsychological test battery 
and the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale evaluation. The Pill 
Questionnaire was administered by study assistants. Patient and caregiver 
interviews were performed by experienced neurologists who were blinded to the 
Pill Questionnaire results.
RESULTS: In total, 284 PD patients (mean age 71.8±9 years, mean education 
8.7±5.3 years, mean disease duration 5.4±5.3 years) were recruited. 63 patients 
showed ADL impairment by the Pill Questionnaire, and 108 patients showed ADL 
impairment by neurologists' clinical interviews. κ Statistics showed moderate 
agreement between the two methods (κ=0.521, p<0.001). Of the 108 patients who 
were diagnosed with ADL impairment by neurologists, only 56 patients (51.9%) 
showed impairment according to the Pill Questionnaire. Most of the missed 
patients had milder cognitive impairment and lower motor disability.
CONCLUSIONS: A comprehensive interview is essential to determine the presence of 
ADL impairment in PD patients, especially in patients with early PD.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not 
already granted under a licence) please go to 
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-306381
PMID: 24218526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3266. Neurol Sci. 2014 Apr;35(4):537-44. doi: 10.1007/s10072-013-1538-y. Epub 2013 Sep 
25.

Validation of the Italian version of Parkinson's disease-cognitive rating scale 
(PD-CRS).

Santangelo G(1), Barone P, Abbruzzese G, Ferini-Strambi L, Antonini A; IRIS 
Study Group.

Collaborators: Bandettini M, Fabbrini G, Di Stasio F, Tinazzi M, Bovi T, Ramat 
S, Meoni S, Pezzoli G, Siri C, Canesi M, Martinelli P, Scaglione CL, Rossi A, 
Tambasco N, Picillo M, Morgante L, Morgante F, Quatrale R, Sensi MC, Pilleri M, 
Biundo R, Nordera G, Caria A, Pacchetti C, Zangaglia R, Lopiano L, Zibetti M, 
Martinelli P, Scaglione CL, Rossi A, Tambasco N, Picillo M, Morgante L, Morgante 
F, Quatrale R, Pilleri M, Biundo R, Nordera G, Caria A, Pacchetti C, Zangaglia 
R, Lopiano L, Zibetti M, Zappia M, Nicoletti A, Quattrone A, Salsone M, Cossu G, 
Murgia D, Albanese A, Del Sorbo F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Second University of Naples, Caserta, Italy.

Erratum in
    Neurol Sci. 2015 Feb;36(2):349.

Cognitive impairment (CI) is a frequent feature associated with both early and 
advanced stages of Parkinson's disease (PD). An evaluation of cognitive 
functions is relevant to identify those parkinsonians at risk of developing 
dementia. In the present study, the Italian version of Parkinson's 
Disease-Cognitive Rating Scale (PD-CRS) assessing fronto-subcortical and 
cortical cognitive functions in PD was validated in 387 parkinsonians and was 
used to test the empirical validity of the item 1.1 (cognitive impairment) of 
the Italian version of MDS-UPDRS as screening tool for CI in PD. PD-CRS was free 
from floor and ceiling effect. The mean PD-CRS score was 76.1 (mean cortical 
score, 24.5 ± 4.6; mean subcortical score, 51.5 ± 17.5). The internal 
consistency was satisfactory (α = 0.89); corrected item-total correlation was 
0.570 (naming) to 0.696 (working memory). The correlation between PD-CRS and 
part I-IV of MDS-UPDRS was weak. The low agreement between classification of PD 
sample into patients with mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI), dementia (PD-D) 
and normal cognition (PD-NC) according to scores of item 1.1 and classification 
according to cutoff scores of PD-CRS for PD-MCI, PD-D and PD-NC indicated a poor 
empirical validity of item 1.1 of MDS-UPDRS as cognitive screening tool for CI 
in PD (Κ = 0.114; weighted Κ = 0.17; SE of Κ = 0.038; 95 % confidence interval 
from 0.040 to 0.1895). The Italian version of PD-CRS is an easy, consistent and 
valid tool for assessment of the cognitive cortical and subcortical impairments 
in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-013-1538-y
PMID: 24221858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3267. Redox Rep. 2014 Mar;19(2):49-58. doi: 10.1179/1351000213Y.0000000071. Epub 2013 
Nov 12.

Paraoxonase 1 in neurological disorders.

Menini T, Gugliucci A.

Paroxonase 1 displays multiple physiological activities that position it as a 
putative player in the pathogenesis of neurological disorders. Here we reviewed 
the literature focusing on the role of paraoxonase 1 (PON1) as a factor in the 
risk of stroke and the major neurodegenerative diseases. PON1 activity is 
reduced in stroke patients, which significantly correlates inversely with 
carotid and cerebral atherosclerosis. The presence of the R allele of the Q192R 
PON1 polymorphism seems to potentiate this risk for stroke. PON1 exerts 
peroxidase activities that may be important in neurodegenerative disorders 
associated with oxidative stress. PON1 is also a key detoxifier of 
organophosphates and organophosphate exposure has been linked to the development 
of neurological disorders in which acetylcholine plays a significant role. In 
Parkinson's disease most of the studies suggest no participation of either L55M 
or the Q192R polymorphisms in its pathogenesis. However, many studies suggest 
that the MM55 PON1 genotype is associated with a higher risk for Parkinson's 
disease in individuals exposed to organophosphates. In Alzheimer's disease most 
studies have failed to find any association between PON1 polymorphisms and the 
development of the disease. Some studies show that PON1 activity is decreased in 
patients with Alzheimer's disease or other dementias, suggesting a possible 
protective role of PON1. No links between PON1 polymorphisms or activity have 
been found in other neurodegenerative diseases such as multiple sclerosis and 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. PON1 is a potential player in the pathogenesis of 
several neurological disorders. More research is warranted to ascertain the 
precise pathogenic links and the prognostic value of its measurement in 
neurological patients.

DOI: 10.1179/1351000213Y.0000000071
PMCID: PMC6837708
PMID: 24225313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3268. J Parkinsons Dis. 2013;3(4):593-601. doi: 10.3233/JPD-130276.

Brain volumetric correlates of memory in early Parkinson's disease.

Ellfolk U(1), Joutsa J, Rinne JO, Parkkola R, Jokinen P, Karrasch M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Abo Akademi University, Turku, 
Finland Division of Clinical Neurosciences, Turku University Hospital and 
University of Turku, Turku, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Free recall memory deficits are common in Parkinson's disease (PD), 
even at early stages before mild cognitive impairment or dementia. Their 
association with brain structural changes has not been established.
OBJECTIVE: We studied local gray matter volumes in relation to different memory 
tasks in early stage PD.
METHODS: Magnetic resonance images (MRI) and neuropsychological data were 
obtained from 28 non-demented, medicated PD patients, and 28 healthy controls. 
The gray matter segments of T1-weighted MRI images were analyzed using 
voxel-based morphometry in relation to visual and verbal memory tasks. Measures 
of immediate free recall, verbal learning, delayed recall and memory 
consolidation were obtained. A novel measure of incidental memory was included.
RESULTS: Patients and controls showed no significant group differences in local 
gray matter volumes. Voxel-based morphometry analyses revealed that worse 
performance on an incidental visual memory task was associated with smaller 
right parietal gray matter volume (Family-wise error corrected P = 0.002). This 
association was present in the PD group (corrected P = 0.005), but not in 
controls (corrected P > 0.99). No associations between gray matter volumes and 
the other memory tasks were found in either group.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that right parietal cortical gray matter volume 
is related to free recall memory deficits in early stage PD in conditions not 
involving an intention to memorize visual items. This preliminary finding needs 
to be established in further studies utilizing incidental memory tasks in PD.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-130276
PMID: 24225360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3269. Ther Adv Neurol Disord. 2013 Nov;6(6):353-68. doi: 10.1177/1756285613489591.

The cognitive side of essential tremor: what are the therapeutic implications?

Janicki SC(1), Cosentino S, Louis ED.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, G.H. Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Research 
on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, College of Physicians and Surgeons, 
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA.

While essential tremor (ET) has traditionally been categorized as a pure motor 
disease, cross-sectional and longitudinal studies of cognition in ET have 
demonstrated that these patients may have cognitive dysfunction. Recent 
epidemiological studies demonstrate an association between ET (particularly with 
onset after age 65) and increased risk for cognitive impairment and dementia. 
Although existing studies have generally conceptualized cognitive changes in ET 
as consistent with a 'frontosubcortical' or 'corticocerebellar' profile, results 
from these same studies suggest that cognitive impairment in ET may in fact be 
heterogeneous. Furthermore, the underlying mechanisms remain uncertain. 
Cognitive changes could be a byproduct of the cerebellar dysfunction of ET 
itself; alternately, they may be a feature of concomitant neurodegenerative 
diseases that have been associated in several studies with ET, including 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease or progressive supranuclear palsy. 
While the study of cognitive dysfunction in ET has received research attention 
in recent years, the results of these studies have not been translated into the 
clinical domain and clinical practice. This review first summarizes the current 
literature on the potential relationships between ET and cognitive change. We 
then suggest areas of further clinical evaluation and treatment; these 
suggestions are directed at physicians caring for ET patients who may 
demonstrate or complain of cognitive impairment. As we discuss, clinicians 
should ideally screen ET patients for possible signs or symptoms of cognitive 
impairment in addition to assessing for psychiatric comorbidity and quality of 
life. These recommendations are in contrast to most current clinical practice, 
which does not routinely include such assessment among ET patients. To our 
knowledge, there have been no pharmacotherapeutic trials to date of any agent 
for cognitive change associated with ET. We believe that studies for this 
indication are now called for. Future efforts in this direction will also need 
to take into account the pathobiology of cognitive changes in ET, which itself 
is an area that is ripe for future investigations.

DOI: 10.1177/1756285613489591
PMCID: PMC3825113
PMID: 24228071

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Conflicting Interests: The 
authors declare no conflicts of interest and no competing financial interests in 
preparing this article.


3270. Semin Neurol. 2013 Sep;33(4):330-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1359315. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

Dementia with Lewy bodies.

Molano JR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Rehabilitation Medicine, The University of 
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a synucleinopathy that is clinically distinct 
from Alzheimer's disease, associated with cognitive decline, fluctuations in 
alertness and cognition, visual hallucinations, and parkinsonism. Other clinical 
symptoms that can occur with DLB include dysautonomia and sleep disorders such 
as rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD). The pathological criteria 
of DLB are associated with the location of Lewy body pathology and the extent of 
Alzheimer's pathology seen. Treatment is symptomatic. The genetic basis of DLB 
is being explored, and future studies will investigate ways to identify those 
most at risk for DLB prior to the onset of cognitive symptoms.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1359315
PMID: 24234353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3271. Semin Neurol. 2013 Sep;33(4):336-41. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1359316. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

Frontotemporal dementia.

Perry DC(1), Miller BL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, California.

Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) encompasses several clinical syndromes that 
involve a progressive change in behavior and/or language; it is more common than 
Alzheimer's disease in early-onset dementia under the age of 60 years. In the 
behavioral variant of FTD (bvFTD) patients have social and emotional changes 
with prominent disinhibition, apathy, lack of empathy, changes in diet, and 
repetitive behaviors. Motor neuron disease or parkinsonism are seen in 
association with bvFTD. Frontal and/or temporal atrophy are often seen on 
structural brain imaging. Several pathological entities can cause bvFTD, and 
they are defined by the presence of specific abnormal protein accumulations. 
Most cases are characterized by accumulation of the proteins tau, 
TAR-DNA-binding protein-43 (TDP-43), and fused in sarcoma (FUS). Though most 
cases are sporadic, a variety of genes have been identified that cause autosomal 
dominant forms of FTD. The most common mutations occur in C9ORF72, MAPT, and 
GRN. No disease-modifying treatments have been currently identified, but limited 
evidence supports the use of antidepressants or neuroleptics in symptomatic 
management, and education regarding nonpharmacologic methods may be helpful to 
caregivers.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1359316
PMID: 24234354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3272. Semin Neurol. 2013 Sep;33(4):365-85. doi: 10.1055/s-0033-1359320. Epub 2013 Nov 
14.

Young-onset dementia.

Kuruppu DK(1), Matthews BR.

Author information:
(1)Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana.

Young-onset dementia is a neurologic syndrome that affects behavior and 
cognition of patients younger than 65 years of age. Although frequently 
misdiagnosed, a systematic approach, reliant upon attainment of a detailed 
medical history, a collateral history, neuropsychological testing, laboratory 
studies, and neuroimaging, may facilitate earlier and more accurate diagnosis 
with subsequent intervention. The differential diagnosis of young-onset dementia 
is extensive and includes early-onset forms of adult neurodegenerative 
conditions including Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, frontotemporal 
dementia, Lewy body dementias, Huntington's disease, and prion disease. 
Late-onset forms of childhood neurodegenerative conditions may also present as 
young-onset dementia and include mitochondrial disorders, lysosomal storage 
disorders, and leukodystrophies. Potentially reversible etiologies including 
inflammatory disorders, infectious diseases, toxic/metabolic abnormalities, 
transient epileptic amnesia, obstructive sleep apnea, and normal pressure 
hydrocephalus also represent important differential diagnostic considerations in 
young-onset dementia. This review will present etiologies, diagnostic 
strategies, and options for management of young-onset dementia with 
comprehensive summary tables for clinical reference.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0033-1359320
PMCID: PMC4033406
PMID: 24234358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3273. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jul;10(4):448-455.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.05.1775. 
Epub 2013 Nov 13.

Addition of MHPG to Alzheimer's disease biomarkers improves differentiation of 
dementia with Lewy bodies from Alzheimer's disease but not other dementias.

Herbert MK(1), Aerts MB(2), Kuiperij HB(1), Claassen JAHR(3), Spies PE(4), 
Esselink RAJ(2), Bloem BR(2), Verbeek MM(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Centre, and Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Radboud 
Alzheimer Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Centre, and Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Centre, and Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; 
Department of Geriatrics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Radboud Alzheimer Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of 
Geriatrics, Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Neurology, Radboud University Medical Centre, and Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Radboud 
Alzheimer Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
Radboud University Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic 
address: m.verbeek@neuro.umcn.nl.

BACKGROUND: Overlapping clinical features make it difficult to distinguish 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) from Alzheimer's disease (AD) and other dementia 
types. In this study we aimed to determine whether the combination of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers, amyloid-β42 (Aβ42), total tau protein 
(t-tau), and phosphorylated tau protein (p-tau), in combination with 
3-methoxy-4-hydroxyphenylethyleneglycol (MHPG), could be useful in 
discriminating DLB from vascular dementia (VaD) and frontotemporal dementia 
(FTD), as we previously demonstrated for differentiation of DLB from AD.
METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed concentrations of MHPG, Aβ42, t-tau, and 
p-tau in CSF in patients with DLB, AD, VaD, and FTD. Using previously developed 
multivariate logistic regression models we assessed the diagnostic value of 
these CSF parameters.
RESULTS: The currently used combination of Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau yielded a 
sensitivity of 61.9% and a specificity of 91.7% for the discrimination between 
DLB and AD, but could not discriminate between DLB and VaD or FTD. The addition 
of MHPG to Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau improves the discrimination of DLB from AD, 
yielding a sensitivity of 65.1% and specificity of 100%, but could not 
distinguish DLB from other forms of dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm in a separate patient cohort that addition of 
MHPG to Aβ42, t-tau, and p-tau improves the discrimination of DLB from AD but 
not the differentiation of DLB from VaD or FTD.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.05.1775
PMID: 24239248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3274. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Jan;127(1):53-69. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1210-x. Epub 
2013 Nov 16.

Neuropathology of cigarette smoking.

Chang RC(1), Ho YS, Wong S, Gentleman SM, Ng HK.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Anatomy, LKS Faculty 
of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Rm. L1-49, Laboratory Block, Faculty 
of Medicine Building, 21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, rccchang@hku.hk.

It is well established that cigarette smoking is hazardous to health and is a 
risk factor for many chronic diseases. However, its impact on the brain, whether 
it be from prenatal exposure to maternal cigarette smoking, cerebrovascular 
disease, Alzheimer's disease (AD) or Parkinson's disease, is still not very 
clear. Neuroimaging and neuropathological investigations suggest that there are 
heterogeneous effects of cigarette smoking on the brain. On the one hand, it is 
quite clear that cigarette smoking causes damage to endothelial cells, resulting 
in increased risk of cerebrovascular disease. On the other hand, it seems to be 
associated with different Alzheimer's pathologies in post-mortem brains and 
experimental models, despite the fact that epidemiological studies clearly 
indicate a positive correlation between cigarette smoking and increased risk for 
AD. Interestingly, cigarette smoking appears to be associated with reduced 
Parkinson's pathology in post-mortem brains. However, although nicotine in 
cigarettes may have some neuroprotective actions, the effects of all the other 
toxic compounds in cigarettes cannot be ignored. It is, therefore, our aim to 
summarize what is known about the neuropathology of cigarette smoking and, in 
particular, its implications for neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-013-1210-x
PMID: 24240736 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3275. Eur J Epidemiol. 2014 Jan;29(1):49-56. doi: 10.1007/s10654-013-9864-1. Epub 2013 
Nov 19.

Evidence for modest familial co-aggregation between dementia and parkinsonism.

Feldman AL(1), Wirdefeldt K, Johansson AL, Gatz M, Pedersen NL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
PO-Box 281, 17177, Stockholm, Sweden, adina.feldman@ki.se.

To investigate the contribution of shared familial risk to the co-occurrence of 
dementia and parkinsonism by studying familial co-aggregation of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Using Swedish population-based 
registers we constructed two cohorts; a first-degree relative cohort of persons 
born 1932-1960 (n = 2,775,332) and a spouse cohort of persons born 1890-1960 (n 
= 4,736,006). Study persons were followed up between 1969 and 2009 in the 
National Patient and Cause of Death Registers. We modeled the association 
between incidence of disease and having at least one affected relative using Cox 
proportional hazard regression that estimated hazard ratios (HRs) with 95% 
confidence intervals (CIs) adjusted for age, sex and number of relatives. Within 
each disorder; dementia, AD, parkinsonian disorders and PD, there was a strong 
association between risk of disease and having at least one affected sibling or 
parent. There was also a modest shared familial risk between the diseases; risk 
of parkinsonian disorders was associated with having a sibling with AD (HR 1.35, 
95% CI 1.11-1.65) and risk of dementia was associated with having a sibling with 
PD (HR 1.20, 95% CI 1.02-1.41). There were no meaningful familial risks among 
spouses. The risk of co-occurring dementia in PD was considerably increased (HR 
2.83, 95% CI 2.76-2.89). There is strong familial aggregation within dementia, 
AD, parkinsonian disorders and PD, and modest familial co-aggregation between 
dementia and parkinsonism. Thus, co-occurrence of dementia and parkinsonism is 
not primarily caused by shared familial risk between AD and PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s10654-013-9864-1
PMID: 24248476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3276. Int J Tryptophan Res. 2013 Oct 15;6:73-88. doi: 10.4137/IJTR.S12838. eCollection 
2013.

Big brains, meat, tuberculosis, and the nicotinamide switches: co-evolutionary 
relationships with modern repercussions?

Williams AC(1), Dunbar RI.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cognitive and Evolutionary Anthropology, University of Oxford, 
64 Banbury Road, Oxford, OX2 6PN, UK.

Meat-eating was a game changer for human evolution. We suggest that the limiting 
factors for expanding brains earlier were scarcities of nicotinamide and 
tryptophan. In humans and some other omnivores, lack of meat causes these 
deficiencies. Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH) is necessary to 
synthesize adenosine triphosphate (ATP) via either glycolysis or via the 
mitochondrial respiratory chain. NAD consumption is also necessary for 
developmental and repair circuits. Inadequate supplies result in 
"de-evolutionary" brain atrophy, as seen with pellagra. If trophic 
nicotinamide/tryptophan was a "prime mover" in building bigger brains, back-up 
mechanisms should have evolved. One strategy may be to recruit extra gut 
symbionts that produce NADH precursors or export nicotinamide (though this may 
cause diarrhea). We propose a novel supplier TB that co-evolved early, which did 
not originally and does not now inevitably cause disease. TB has highly 
paradoxical immunology for a pathogen, and secretes and is inhibited by 
nicotinamide and its analogue, isoniazid. Sharp declines in TB and diarrhea 
correlated with increased meat intake in the past, suggesting that dietary 
vitamin B3 and tryptophan deficiencies (also associated with poor cognition and 
decreased lifespans) are still common where meat is unaffordable.

DOI: 10.4137/IJTR.S12838
PMCID: PMC3825668
PMID: 24250227


3277. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2013 Oct 9;1:65. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-65.

Clinical and multimodal biomarker correlates of ADNI neuropathological findings.

Toledo JB(1), Cairns NJ, Da X, Chen K, Carter D, Fleisher A, Householder E, 
Ayutyanont N, Roontiva A, Bauer RJ, Eisen P, Shaw LM, Davatzikos C, Weiner MW, 
Reiman EM, Morris JC, Trojanowski JQ; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI).

Collaborators: Weiner MW, Petersen R, Aisen P, Jack C, Jagust W, Shaw LM, 
Trojanowski J, Beckett L, Toga A, Saykin A, Morris JC, Montine T, Green R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Center for 
Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School 
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA. morrisj@abraxas.wustl.edu.

BACKGROUND: Autopsy series commonly report a high percentage of coincident 
pathologies in demented patients, including patients with a clinical diagnosis 
of dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT). However many clinical and biomarker 
studies report cases with a single neurodegenerative disease. We examined 
multimodal biomarker correlates of the consecutive series of the first 22 
Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative autopsies. Clinical data, 
neuropsychological measures, cerebrospinal fluid Aβ, total and phosphorylated 
tau and α-synuclein and MRI and FDG-PET scans.
RESULTS: Clinical diagnosis was either probable DAT or Alzheimer's disease 
(AD)-type mild cognitive impairment (MCI) at last evaluation prior to death. All 
patients had a pathological diagnosis of AD, but only four had pure AD. A 
coincident pathological diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), medial 
temporal lobe pathology (TDP-43 proteinopathy, argyrophilic grain disease and 
hippocampal sclerosis), referred to collectively here as MTL, and vascular 
pathology were present in 45.5%, 40.0% and 22.7% of these patients, 
respectively. Hallucinations were a strong predictor of coincident DLB (100% 
specificity) and a more severe dysexecutive profile was also a useful predictor 
of coincident DLB (80.0% sensitivity and 83.3% specificity). Occipital FDG-PET 
hypometabolism accurately classified coincident DLB (80% sensitivity and 100% 
specificity). Subjects with coincident MTL showed lower hippocampal volume.
CONCLUSIONS: Biomarkers can be used to independently predict coincident AD and 
DLB pathology, a common finding in amnestic MCI and DAT patients. Cohorts with 
comprehensive neuropathological assessments and multimodal biomarkers are needed 
to characterize independent predictors for the different neuropathological 
substrates of cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-65
PMCID: PMC3893373
PMID: 24252435 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3278. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2013 May 9;1(1):11. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-11.

ATP13A2 (PARK9) protein levels are reduced in brain tissue of cases with Lewy 
bodies.

Murphy KE(1), Cottle L, Gysbers AM, Cooper AA, Halliday GM.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Sydney 2031, Australia. 
g.halliday@neura.edu.au.

BACKGROUND: ATP13A2 (PARK9) loss of function mutations are a genetic cause of an 
early-onset form of Parkinson's disease (PD), with in vitro studies showing that 
ATP13A2 deficits lead to lysosomal and mitochondrial dysfunction and α-synuclein 
accumulation, while elevated ATP13A2 expression reduces α-synuclein toxicity. 
The three human brain tissue studies assessing changes in ATP13A2 expression in 
PD produced divergent results; mRNA is increased while protein levels were 
observed to be either increased or decreased. This apparent conflict in protein 
levels might have arisen from examining Lewy body disease cases with coexisting 
Alzheimer-type pathologies.To assess whether ATP13A2 levels in Lewy body disease 
are modified by Alzheimer-type β-amyloid deposition, we evaluated cases of pure 
PD and pure dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) for changes in ATP13A2, α-synuclein 
and β-amyloid protein levels in cortical regions with and without Lewy bodies.
RESULTS: In all Lewy body disease cases, we identified decreased ATP13A2 protein 
levels that correlated with increases in both α-synuclein and β-amyloid. Partial 
colocalization was observed between ATP13A2 and α-synuclein in Lewy bodies, 
whereas ATP13A2 did not colocalize with pathological β-amyloid deposition.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that patients with Lewy body diseases have an overall 
deficit in ATP13A2 protein levels, with the remaining protein being more 
insoluble and partially redistributing towards Lewy bodies. This supports the 
concept that increasing ATP13A2 levels may offer potential therapeutic benefits 
to patients with Lewy body diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-11
PMCID: PMC4046687
PMID: 24252509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3279. Acta Neuropathol Commun. 2013 Jul 6;1:31. doi: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-31.

The unfolded protein response is activated in disease-affected brain regions in 
progressive supranuclear palsy and Alzheimer's disease.

Stutzbach LD(1), Xie SX, Naj AC, Albin R, Gilman S; PSP Genetics Study Group; 
Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Devlin B, Schellenberg GD.

Collaborators: Höglinger GU, Müller U, Dickson DW, Rademakers R, de Silva R, 
Litvan I, Gross RG, Hardy J, Heutink P, Hurtig HI, Farrer MJ, Uitti RJ, 
Vandrovcova J, van Swieten JC, Wszolek ZK, Tolosa E, Pastor P, Revesz T, Lees 
AJ, Alonso E, Apfelbacher M, Arnold SE, Avila J, Beach TG, Boon AJ, Chiu WZ, 
Kaat LD, De Deyn PP, Duara R, Engelborghs S, Bordelon Y, García de Yebenes J, 
Finch NA, Ross OA, Flook R, Frosch MP, Gaig C, Galasko DR, Masliah E, Gearing M, 
Ghetti B, Spina S, Graff-Radford NR, Grossman M, Juncos JL, Kretzschmar HA, 
Leiberman AP, Lyons KE, Massey LA, O'Sullivan SS, Pahwa R, Silveira-Moriyama L, 
McLean CA, Rabano A, Rajput A, Roeber S, Rohrer JD, Rossor MN, Tourtellotte WW, 
Troakes C, Al-Sarraj S, Troncoso JC, Van Deerlin VM, Vonsattel JP, White CL, 
Zarrow C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, 3630 Hamilton Walk, Perelman 
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. 
gerardsc@mail.med.upenn.edu.

BACKGROUND: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is a neurodegenerative disorder 
pathologically characterized by intracellular tangles of hyperphosphorylated tau 
protein distributed throughout the neocortex, basal ganglia, and brainstem. A 
genome-wide association study identified EIF2AK3 as a risk factor for PSP. 
EIF2AK3 encodes PERK, part of the endoplasmic reticulum's (ER) unfolded protein 
response (UPR). PERK is an ER membrane protein that senses unfolded protein 
accumulation within the ER lumen. Recently, several groups noted UPR activation 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, multiple system atrophy, and in the hippocampus and substantia nigra 
of PSP subjects. Here, we evaluate UPR PERK activation in the pons, medulla, 
midbrain, hippocampus, frontal cortex and cerebellum in subjects with PSP, AD, 
and in normal controls.
RESULTS: We found UPR activation primarily in disease-affected brain regions in 
both disorders. In PSP, the UPR was primarily activated in the pons and medulla 
and to a much lesser extent in the hippocampus. In AD, the UPR was extensively 
activated in the hippocampus. We also observed UPR activation in the hippocampus 
of some elderly normal controls, severity of which positively correlated with 
both age and tau pathology but not with Aβ plaque burden. Finally, we evaluated 
EIF2AK3 coding variants that influence PERK activation. We show that a haplotype 
associated with increased PERK activation is genetically associated with 
increased PSP risk.
CONCLUSIONS: The UPR is activated in disease affected regions in PSP and the 
genetic evidence shows that this activation increases risk for PSP and is not a 
protective response.

DOI: 10.1186/2051-5960-1-31
PMCID: PMC3893579
PMID: 24252572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3280. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Feb;1842(2):220-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.009. Epub 2013 Nov 16.

Inhibition of ERK-DLP1 signaling and mitochondrial division alleviates 
mitochondrial dysfunction in Alzheimer's disease cybrid cell.

Gan X(1), Huang S(1), Wu L(2), Wang Y(2), Hu G(2), Li G(1), Zhang H(2), Yu H(3), 
Swerdlow RH(4), Chen JX(5), Yan SS(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, and Higuchi Bioscience Center, 
School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA; State Key 
Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, Sichuan 
University, Cheng Du 610041, China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, and Higuchi Bioscience Center, 
School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA.
(3)State Key Laboratory of Oral Diseases, West China Hospital of Stomatology, 
Sichuan University, Cheng Du 610041, China.
(4)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 
66160, USA.
(5)Department of Neurology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 
1003, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, and Higuchi Bioscience Center, 
School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas, Lawrence, KS 66047, USA. Electronic 
address: shidu@ku.edu.

Mitochondrial dysfunction is an early pathological feature of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). The underlying mechanisms and strategies to repair it remain 
unclear. Here, we demonstrate for the first time the direct consequences and 
potential mechanisms of mitochondrial functional defects associated with 
abnormal mitochondrial dynamics in AD. Using cytoplasmic hybrid (cybrid) neurons 
with incorporated platelet mitochondria from AD and age-matched non-AD human 
subjects into mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)-depleted neuronal cells, we observed 
that AD cybrid cells had significant changes in morphology and function; such 
changes associate with altered expression and distribution of dynamin-like 
protein (DLP1) and mitofusin 2 (Mfn2). Treatment with antioxidant protects 
against AD mitochondria-induced extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 
activation and mitochondrial fission-fusion imbalances. Notably, inhibition of 
ERK activation not only attenuates aberrant mitochondrial morphology and 
function but also restores the mitochondrial fission and fusion balance. These 
effects suggest a role of oxidative stress-mediated ERK signal transduction in 
modulation of mitochondrial fission and fusion events. Further, blockade of the 
mitochondrial fission protein DLP1 by a genetic manipulation with a dominant 
negative DLP1 (DLP1(K38A)), its expression with siRNA-DLP1, or inhibition of 
mitochondrial division with mdivi-1 attenuates mitochondrial functional defects 
observed in AD cybrid cells. Our results provide new insights into mitochondrial 
dysfunction resulting from changes in the ERK-fission/fusion (DLP1) machinery 
and signaling pathway. The protective effect of mdivi-1 and inhibition of ERK 
signaling on maintenance of normal mitochondrial structure and function holds 
promise as a potential novel therapeutic strategy for AD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.11.009
PMCID: PMC3991235
PMID: 24252614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors have no 
conflict of interest to disclose


3281. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;39(3):669-77. doi: 10.3233/JAD-131337.

Neuropsychological correlates of behavioral symptoms in Alzheimer's disease, 
frontal variant of frontotemporal, subcortical vascular, and lewy body 
dementias: a comparative study.

Perri R(1), Monaco M(1), Fadda L(2), Caltagirone C(2), Carlesimo GA(2).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical and Behavioural Neurology, IRCCS Santa Lucia 
Foundation, Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratory of Clinical and Behavioural Neurology, IRCCS Santa Lucia 
Foundation, Rome, Italy University "Tor Vergata" Rome, Italy.

The aim of this study was to investigate the neuropsychological correlates of 
behavioral and psychological symptoms (BPSD) in patients affected by various 
forms of dementia, namely Alzheimer's disease (AD), frontal-variant 
frontotemporal dementia (fvFTD), Lewy body dementia (LBD), and subcortical 
ischemic vascular dementia (SIVD). 21 fvFTD, 21 LBD, 22 AD, and 22 SIVD patients 
matched for dementia severity received a battery of neuropsychological tests and 
the Neuropsychiatry Inventory (NPI). The possible association between 
performance on neuropsychological tests and severity of BPSD was assessed by 
correlational analysis and multivariate regression. BPSD were present in 99% of 
patients. Most behavioral symptoms were not related to a particular dementia 
group or to a specific cognitive deficit. Euphoria and disinhibition were 
predicted by fvFTD diagnosis. Hallucinations correlated with the severity of 
visuospatial deficits in the whole sample of patients and were predicted by LBD 
diagnosis. Apathy, which was found in all dementia groups, correlated with 
executive functions and was predicted by both reduced set-shifting aptitude and 
fvFTD diagnosis. The results confirm the high prevalence of BPSD in the mild to 
moderate stages of dementia and show that most BPSD are equally distributed 
across dementia groups. Most of the cognitive and behavioral symptoms are 
independent dimensions of the dementia syndromes. Nevertheless, hallucinations 
in LBD and euphoria and disinhibition in fvFTD are related to the structural 
brain alterations that are responsible for cognitive decline in these dementia 
groups. Finally, apathy arises from damage in the frontal cortical areas that 
are also involved in executive functions.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-131337
PMID: 24254701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3282. Acta Neurol Scand. 2014 Feb;129(2):71-9. doi: 10.1111/ane.12201. Epub 2013 Nov 
20.

Parkinson's disease and risk of mortality: meta-analysis and systematic review.

Xu J(1), Gong DD, Man CF, Fan Y.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology & Translational Medicine, Affiliated People's 
Hospital, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, Jiangsu, China.

To evaluate the existing prospective observational studies on the morality risk 
among Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and determine the overall risk ratio 
(RR) of mortality by conducting a meta-analysis and systematic review. Original 
articles published in English were searched in PubMed and Embase databases prior 
to March 2013. Only prospective observational studies providing adjusted risk 
estimates related to PD and future mortality were considered eligible. Pooled 
adjusted RR and 95% confidence interval (CI) were computed either by 
fixed-effects models or by random-effects models. Eight studies with 72,833 
participants were identified and analysed. In the pooled analyses, patients with 
PD had a greater risk of all-cause mortality (RR = 2.22; 95% CI: 1.78-2.77). 
Subgroup analyses based on the design, gender, follow-up duration and sample 
size showed that a consistent positive association between PD and the mortality 
risk in each subgroup. However, no statistical significance was found for the 
baseline age <65 years (RR = 1.42; 95% CI: 0.72-2.77). PD patients with dementia 
had particularly high mortality risks (RR = 3.78; 95% CI: 2.06-6.92). This 
meta-analysis indicated that among patients with PD, the all-cause mortality 
increased by 2.22-fold compared with the general population. PD patients with 
dementia particularly had higher risks of mortality.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ane.12201
PMID: 24256347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3283. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1:S1-4. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)00400-8.

Prodromal Parkinson's disease--using REM sleep behavior disorder as a window.

Postuma RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Canada. Electronic address: ron.postuma@mcgill.ca.

REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is characterized by loss of REM atonia of 
sleep, such that patients act out the contents of their dreams. Perhaps the most 
important facet of idiopathic RBD is that it is a powerful prodromal marker of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and other synucleinopathies. Several prospective 
studies have now established that patients with idiopathic RBD have up to an 80% 
risk of developing a defined neurodegenerative synucleinopathy. This has 
profound implications for understanding and treating early disease. First, the 
extremely high risk and long latency/time to intervene make RBD patients the 
ideal candidates for neuroprotective therapy against synucleinopathy. Second, 
RBD patients can be used as a 'test lab' to assess other potential prodromal 
predictors of PD, which could be applied to the general population in future 
large-scale screening programs. Third, assessing epidemiology of RBD allows us 
to study the epidemiology of PD and dementia with Lewy bodies 10-15 years 
earlier, reducing bias and opening new hypotheses as to the mechanism of action 
of selected risk factors. Finally, by prospectively observing RBD patients as 
they transition to full neurodegenerative synucleinopathy, one has an 
unprecedented window in which to directly observe evolution of PD from its 
prodromal stages. The evidence for RBD as a marker of prodromal PD and all these 
implications will be discussed.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)00400-8
PMID: 24262156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3284. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1:S104-7. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70026-9.

Predictors of Parkinson's disease dementia: towards targeted therapies for a 
heterogeneous disease.

Moore SF(1), Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)John Van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, 
CB2 0PY, UK. Electronic address: sfm28@cam.ac.uk.

Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) has become an increasing area of research as 
treatments for the motor features of Parkinson's disease (PD) have improved and 
the population of patients with PD grows and ages. If predictors could be used 
to identify a sub-population of patients at risk of developing an early PDD then 
research into its neuropathological basis and treatment could be more 
effectively targeted to specific individuals. At present the predictors with the 
most evidence have arisen from longitudinal studies tracking the development of 
dementia in populations of incident, newly diagnosed patients with PD. Evidence 
exists for predictors across multiple domains: clinical, biological, 
neuroimaging and genetic. Some of the most robust of these suggest that PDD may 
develop as the result of an age and tau dependent, posterior cortically based 
process driven in some cases by mutations in the gene for glucocerebrosidase 
(GBA). It is clear, though, that more research needs to be undertaken into 
finding reliable predictors of PDD. At present the best approach may be to 
combine a set of predictors already identified in order to provide a basis for 
understanding why and how it occurs. Through this, new therapeutic strategies 
may emerge.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70026-9
PMID: 24262158 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3285. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1:S35-8. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70011-7.

Genetics of Parkinson's disease: the yield.

Spatola M(1), Wider C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, University Hospital of Lausanne, 
Lausanne, Switzerland.

The discovery of genes implicated in familial forms of Parkinson's disease (PD) 
has provided new insights into the molecular events leading to 
neurodegeneration. Clinically, patients with genetically determined PD can be 
difficult to distinguish from those with sporadic PD. Monogenic causes include 
autosomal dominantly (SNCA, LRRK2, VPS35, EIF4G1) as well as recessively (PARK2, 
PINK1, DJ-1) inherited mutations. Additional recessive forms of parkinsonism 
present with atypical signs, including very early disease onset, dystonia, 
dementia and pyramidal signs. New techniques in the search for 
phenotype-associated genes (next-generation sequencing, genome-wide association 
studies) have expanded the spectrum of both monogenic PD and variants that alter 
risk to develop PD. Examples of risk genes include the two lysosomal enzyme 
coding genes GBA and SMPD1, which are associated with a 5-fold and 9-fold 
increased risk of PD, respectively. It is hoped that further knowledge of the 
genetic makeup of PD will allow designing treatments that alter the course of 
the disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70011-7
PMID: 24262184 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3286. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1:S39-43. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70012-9.

Pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease behavior--a view from the network.

Caviness JN(1).

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic School of Medicine, Mayo Clinic Movement Disorders Division, 
Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Advancements in neuroscience have uncovered an amazing complexity of 
connectivity between nuclei sites and circuits within the brain. Moreover, 
clinical and neuropathological study has revealed diffuse involvement of the 
nervous system in Parkinson's disease associated with early and/or significant 
clinical symptoms. Behavior manifestations in Parkinson's disease include 
cognitive decline and unwanted positive behaviors such as hallucinations and 
impulse-control disorders. The pathophysiology of Parkinson's disease can be 
conceptualized at multiple levels that include: (1) Molecular pathogenesis, (2) 
Cellular/Tissue abnormalities, (3) Neurochemical changes, (4) Site and circuit 
dysfunction, and (5) Network dysfunction. Currently, there is only a vague 
correlation with genetic abnormalities that manifest worse Parkinson's disease 
behavior problems, but abnormalities in misfolded proteins such as α-synuclein 
and Aβ peptide that are increased in cortical and subcortical areas do correlate 
with worse behavior signs and symptoms. Both Lewy-type synucleinopathy and 
Alzheimer's disease pathologies, along with loss of synaptic integrity, seem to 
correlate with Parkinson's disease cognitive decline. Neurochemical changes of 
dopamine, acetylcholine, and other monoamines are associated. The frontostriate 
circuit is most commonly implicated in Parkinson's disease behavior. However, 
there is now beginning to be evidence that diffuse global network dysfunction is 
possibly the unifying pathophysiology from all of these level abnormalities.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70012-9
PMID: 24262185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3287. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1:S76-9. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70020-8.

Quantification of α-synuclein in cerebrospinal fluid: how ideal is this 
biomarker for Parkinson's disease?

Mollenhauer B(1).

Author information:
(1)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Center of Parkinsonism and Movement Disorders, 
Kassel, Germany; University Medical Center, Department of Neurosurgery and 
Neuropathology, Germany. Electronic address: brit.mollenhauer@pk-mx.de.

The quantification of α-synuclein (αSyn) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) has been 
proposed as a diagnostic biomarker for Parkinson's disease and other 
αSyn-related diseases, such as multiple system atrophy and dementia with Lewy 
bodies. Most studies show decreased levels of αSyn in diseased CSF samples 
compared to control samples, but discrepant findings and overlapping values have 
been a major limitation for the use of CSF αSyn as a biomarker. This review 
addresses the current knowledge and investigates whether CSF αSyn is an ideal 
biomarker that can detect fundamental neuropathology features. It will also 
discuss whether CSF αSyn has been validated in neuropathologically confirmed 
cases, whether it shows a diagnostic sensitivity and whether it has a 
specificity above 80%. The review of current literature will also determine if 
sampling CSF αSyn is reliable, reproducible, noninvasive, simple to perform, 
inexpensive, and whether it has been investigated by at least two independent 
studies. CSF αSyn appears to meet most of these criteria, which have been 
proposed for ideal biomarkers, but further validation of this and other markers 
is needed to best introduce a panel of biomarkers in the early and differential 
diagnosis of Parkinson's disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70020-8
PMID: 24262194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3288. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1:S80-4. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70021-X.

Prion, prionoids and infectious amyloid.

Liberski PP(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology and Neuropathology, Medical University of 
Lodz, Lodz, Poland. Electronic address: ppliber@csk.umed.lodz.pl.

"Amyloid" is a generic term and all amyloids, irrespective of amino acid 
sequence, are formed in a seeded nucleation mechanism in which a small aggregate 
(oligomers) of a few amyloid moieties (a seed or a nucleus) seed (nucleate) 
normal amyloid precursor moieties to change conformation to a β-sheet. All 
sporadic neurodegenerative disorders are diseases of old age. This 
epidemiological phenomenon is consistent with a view that spontaneous 
conformational change from soluble, monomeric precursor protein into an 
insoluble amyloid aggregate is accomplished via a seeded nucleation process 
characterized by a long lag phase. Several predictions can be made on the basis 
of this assumption. First, an increase of the precursor monomer concentration 
may favor nucleation and, thus, shorten the lag phase. Second, an increase in 
the number of seeds should lead to amplification of the nucleation reaction. 
There are several protein misfolding disorders - the most widely known include 
Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and other α-synucleinopathies, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), frontotemporal dementias in which 
abnormally phosphorylated MAP-τ protein accumulates and finally, polyglutamine 
expansion diseases such as Huntington's disease and certain spinocerebellar 
ataxias. The proteins involved differ in each of these disorders but the 
molecular mechanism is almost exactly the same, a seeding-nucleation mechanism.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70021-X
PMID: 24262195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3289. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Jan;20 Suppl 1(0 1):S85-7. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70022-1.

Modeling Lewy pathology propagation in Parkinson's disease.

Luk KC(1), Lee VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of Pathology and 
Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia PA, 19104, USA. Electronic address: kelvincl@mail.med.upenn.edu.

Lewy bodies (LBs) and Lewy neurites (LNs), comprised of alpha-synuclein (aSyn), 
are intraneuronal inclusions that characterize Parkinson's disease. Although the 
association between the extent of Lewy pathology and clinical symptoms is well 
established, how these proteinaceous deposits originate and target selectively 
vulnerable cell populations is unknown. Our knowledge of their role in PD 
pathogenesis is also limited. Here, we summarize recent findings demonstrating 
this pathology can be experimentally transmitted between animals by misfolded 
forms of aSyn that are capable of initiating and inducing LB and LN inclusion 
formation through a self-propagating mechanism reminiscent of prions. "Seeded" 
LBs and LNs in animal models also spread to multiple connected nuclei in a 
predictable pattern, recapitulating a phenomenon observed during human PD 
progression, leading to the dysfunction and degeneration of afflicted neurons. 
These models provide new perspectives on how this and other misfolded proteins 
may contribute to neurodegeneration in human disease.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(13)70022-1
PMCID: PMC4034060
PMID: 24262196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3290. Otolaryngol Clin North Am. 2013 Dec;46(6):1137-49. doi: 
10.1016/j.otc.2013.08.005. Epub 2013 Oct 10.

Dysphagia in stroke, neurodegenerative disease, and advanced dementia.

Altman KW(1), Richards A, Goldberg L, Frucht S, McCabe DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology Head & Neck Surgery, Eugen Grabscheid MD Voice 
Center, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, One Gustave L. Levy Place, 
Box 1189, New York, NY 10029, USA. Electronic address: 
kenneth.altman@mountsinai.org.

Aspiration risk from dysphagia increases with central and peripheral neurologic 
disease. Stroke, microvascular ischemic disease, a spectrum of neurodegenerative 
diseases, and advancing dementia all have unique aspects. However, there are 
distinct commonalities in this population. Increasing nutritional requirements 
to stave off oropharyngeal muscular atrophy and a sedentary lifestyle further 
tax the patient's abilities to safely swallow. This article reviews stroke, 
muscular dystrophy, myasthenia gravis, multiple sclerosis, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, and advanced dementia. Approaches to screening 
and evaluation, recognizing sentinel indicators of decline that increase 
aspiration risk, and options for managing global laryngeal dysfunction are also 
presented.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.otc.2013.08.005
PMID: 24262965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3291. J Immunol Methods. 2014 Jan 15;402(1-2):43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jim.2013.11.008. 
Epub 2013 Nov 22.

The impact of pre-analytical variables on the stability of neurofilament 
proteins in CSF, determined by a novel validated SinglePlex Luminex assay and 
ELISA.

Koel-Simmelink MJ(1), Vennegoor A(2), Killestein J(3), Blankenstein MA(4), 
Norgren N(5), Korth C(6), Teunissen CE(7).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, PO 
Box 7057, 1007MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
mja.koel-simmelink@vumc.nl.
(2)Department of Neurology, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, PO Box 7057, 
1007MB Amsterdam. The Netherlands. Electronic address: a.vennegoor@vumc.nl.
(3)Department of Neurology, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, PO Box 7057, 
1007MB Amsterdam. The Netherlands. Electronic address: j.killestein@vumc.nl.
(4)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, PO 
Box 7057, 1007MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
ma.blankenstein@vumc.nl.
(5)UmanDiagnostics, PO Box 7996, 90719 Umeå, Sweden. Electronic address: 
niklas.norgren@umandiagnostics.se.
(6)Neurodegeneration Unit, Department Neuropathology, University of Düsseldorf 
Medical School, Moorenstrase 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany. Electronic address: 
ckorth@uni-duesseldorf.de.
(7)Department of Clinical Chemistry, VU University Medical Center Amsterdam, PO 
Box 7057, 1007MB Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Electronic address: 
c.teunissen@vumc.nl.

BACKGROUND: Neurofilament (Nf) proteins have been shown to be promising 
biomarkers for monitoring and predicting disease progression for various 
neurological diseases. The aim of this study was to evaluate the effects of 
pre-analytical variables on the concentration of neurofilament heavy (NfH) and 
neurofilament light (NfL) proteins.
METHODS: For NfH an in-house newly-developed and validated SinglePlex Luminex 
assay was used; ELISA was used to analyze NfL.
RESULTS: For the NfL ELISA assay, the intra- and inter-assay variation was 
respectively, 1.5% and 16.7%. Analytical performance of the NfH SinglePlex 
Luminex assay in terms of sensitivity (6.6pg/mL), recovery in cerebrospinal 
fluid (CSF) (between 90 and 104%), linearity (from 6.6-1250pg/mL), and inter- 
and intra-assay variation (<8%) were good. Concentrations of both NfL and NfH 
appeared not negatively affected by blood contamination, repeated freeze-thaw 
cycles (up to 4), delayed processing (up to 24hours) and during long-term 
storage at -20°C, 4°C, and room temperature. A decrease in concentration was 
observed during storage of both neurofilament proteins up to 21days at 37°C, 
which was significant by day 5.
CONCLUSIONS: The newly developed NfH SinglePlex Luminex assay has a good 
sensitivity and is robust. Moreover, both NfH and NfL are stable under the most 
prevalent pre-analytical variations.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jim.2013.11.008
PMID: 24275679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3292. BMJ Open. 2013 Nov 25;3(11):e003367. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003367.

The impact of neurological disorders on the risk for falls in the community 
dwelling elderly: a case-controlled study.

Homann B(1), Plaschg A, Grundner M, Haubenhofer A, Griedl T, Ivanic G, Hofer E, 
Fazekas F, Homann CN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University Graz, Graz, Austria.

OBJECTIVES: Owing to a lack of data, our aim was to evaluate and compare the 
impact of various common neurological diseases on the risk for falls in 
independent community dwelling senior citizens.
DESIGN: Prospective case-controlled study.
SETTING: General hospital.
PARTICIPANTS: Of 298 consecutive patients and 214 controls enrolled, 228 
patients (aged 74.5±7.8; 61% women) and 193 controls (aged 71.4±6.8; 63% women) 
were included. The exclusion criteria were as follows: for patients, severe 
disability, disabling general condition or severe cognitive impairment; for 
controls, any history of neurological disorders or disabling medical conditions; 
and for both, age below 60 years. A matching process led to 171 age-matched and 
gender-matched pairs of neurological patients and healthy controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: A 1-year incidence of falls based on patients' 12-month 
recall; motor and non-motor function tests to detect additional risk factors.
RESULTS: 46% of patients and 16% of controls fell at least once a year. Patients 
with stroke (89%), Parkinson's disease (77%), dementia (60%) or epilepsy (57%) 
had a particularly high proportion of fallers, but even subgroups of patients 
with the least fall-associated neurological diseases like tinnitus (30%) and 
headache (28%) had a higher proportion of fallers than the control group. 
Neuropathies, peripheral nerve lesions and Parkinson's disease were predisposing 
to recurrent falls. A higher number of neurological comorbidities (p<0.001), 
lower Barthel Index values (p<0.001), lower Activities-Specific Balance 
Confidence scores (p<0.001) and higher Center of Epidemiological Studies 
Depression scores (p<0.001) as well as higher age (p<0.001) and female gender 
(p=0.003) proved to further increase the risk of falls.
CONCLUSIONS: Medical practitioners, allied health professionals and carers 
should be aware that all elderly neurological patients seen in outpatient 
settings are potentially at high risk for falls; they should query them 
routinely about previous falls and fall risks and advise them on preventive 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003367
PMCID: PMC3845038
PMID: 24282241


3293. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2013;53(11):983-5. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.983.

[Α-synuclein as a biomarker for early diagnosis of Parkinsonism].

[Article in Japanese]

Ono K(1), Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science.

Although α-synuclein protein (αS) aggregates from a monomer to assemblies such 
as oligomer, protofibril and mature fibril, the early intermediate aggregate, 
that is, oligomer has been considered to be most toxic species in recent 
reports. While it was reported that αS concentration in cerebrospinal fluid was 
decreased significantly in the patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies, there were reports that αS oligomer concentration was 
elevated in cerebrospinal fluid of PD patients. Moreover, it was supposed that 
αS oligomer concentration was also elevated in blood of PD patients. Further 
studies of αS in cerebrospinal fluid and blood would lead to establishment of 
the significance of αS as a biomarker for α-synucleinopathies including PD.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.983
PMID: 24291853 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3294. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2013;53(11):1074-6. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.1074.

[C9orf72 in Japanese amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS)].

[Article in Japanese]

Tomiyama H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Department of Neuroscience for Neurodegenerative 
Disorders, Juntendo University School of Medicine.

Recently, C9orf72 hexanucleotide (GGGGCC) repeat expansion in intron 1 was 
reported to be the most common cause of sporadic and familial amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS)/frontotemporal dementia (FTD) in the Caucasian 
population. The frequency of the intronic repeat expansion is up to 21%-57% in 
familial ALS and 3%-21% in sporadic ALS.In the Japanese population, the C9orf72 
repeat expansion was found to account for 2.8% (3/109) of familial ALS, 0.4% 
(4/891) of sporadic ALS, and 0% (0/377) of normal healthy controls. Notably, 
among the Kii peninsula which has recorded a high incidence of ALS or ALS/PDC 
(parkinsonism-dementia complex), the frequency of the C9orf72 repeat expansion 
was 20% (3/15) indicating a high prevalence. All patients with the repeat 
expansion had a common risk haplotype within a narrower region than the Finnish 
one, suggesting a common founder effect which spread from Europe to East Asia in 
human migration history.Although Japanese ALS patients with the C9orf72 repeat 
expansion were rarer than Caucasian patients, we should check family histories 
of other neurological disorders such as dementia and FTD and should do genetic 
testing more actively even in sporadic ALS patients. Further studies of C9orf72 
will clarify the pathogenesis and find the treatments for familial and sporadic 
ALS (or ALS/FTD).

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.1074
PMID: 24291883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3295. J Parkinsons Dis. 2014;4(2):131-7. doi: 10.3233/JPD-130304.

Parkinson's disease mild cognitive impairment: application and validation of the 
criteria.

Geurtsen GJ(1), Hoogland J(1), Goldman JG(2), Schmand BA(3), Tröster AI(4), Burn 
DJ(5), Litvan I(6); MDS Study Group on the Validation of PD-MCI Criteria.

Collaborators: Filoteo J, Litvan I, Goldman JG, Hurtig H, Chen-Plotkin A, Adler 
CH, Jacobson SA, Leverenz J, Zabetian C, Huang X, Eslinger PJ, Marras C, 
Duff-Canning S, Dalrymple-Alford JC, Anderson TJ, Naismith SL, Lewis SJ, Wu RM, 
Yu RL, Bhattacharyya KB, Williams-Gray CH, Breen DP, Barker RA, Yarnall AJ, de 
Bie RM, Koene T, Klein M, Trautmann E, Mollenhauer B, Dodel R, Kulisevsky J, 
Pagonabaragga J, Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Gasca-Salas C, Junque C, Segura B, 
Sportiello MT, Cammisuli DM, Barone P, Pedersen KF, Alves G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, 
IL, USA.
(3)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center Amsterdam, The Netherlands 
Department of Psychology, University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
(4)Barrow Neurological Institute, Muhammad Ali Parkinson Center, Phoenix, AZ, 
USA.
(5)Institute for Aging and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.
(6)Department of Neurosciences University of California, Movement Disorder 
Center, San Diego, CA, USA.

Dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) is a serious health issue and a major 
concern for many patients. In most cases mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is 
considered a transitional stage between normal cognitive functioning and 
dementia which is of potential importance in the early identification of 
patients at risk for dementia. Recently, the Movement Disorder Society (MDS) 
proposed diagnostic criteria for MCI in PD (PD-MCI). These criteria comprise two 
operationalizations: Level I (based on an abbreviated assessment) and Level II 
(based on comprehensive neuropsychological evaluation permitting MCI subtyping). 
These criteria need to be validated. This paper describes a project aiming to 
validate the MDS PD-MCI criteria by pooling and analyzing cross-sectional and 
longitudinal neuropsychological databases comprising ≥5,500 PD patients and 
≥1,700 controls. After applying the MDS PD-MCI Level I and Level II criteria, 
rates of conversion to PD-dementia and predictive variables for conversion to 
PD-dementia will be established. This study will also assist in identifying 
whether revisions of the PD-MCI criteria are required.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-130304
PMCID: PMC4380013
PMID: 24296865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST Gert J. Geurtsen has no 
conflict of interest to report. Jeroen Hoogland has no conflict of interest to 
report. Jennifer G. Goldman – has no conflict of interest to report. 
Grant/research support: NIH K23NS060949, Parkinson’s Disease Foundation, Rush 
University Medical Center, Site-PI for clinical research trial (Teva). Honoraria 
for educational activities: Movement Disorders Society. Ben A. Schmand has no 
conflict of interest to report. Grant/research support: Michael J. Fox 
Foundation and Prinses Beatrix Fonds. Alexander I. Troster has no conflicts 
relevant to this study. David J. Burn has no conflicts relevant to this study. 
Irene Litvan: no conflicts relevant to this study. Grant/research support: 
National Institutes of Aging 5R01AG024040 and CurePSP; Member of the Pfizer and 
Abbvie Advisory Boards and consultant for Novartis.


3296. Neuroepidemiology. 2014;42(2):69-80. doi: 10.1159/000355452. Epub 2013 Nov 30.

Familial coaggregation of Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease: 
systematic review and meta-analysis.

Feldman AL(1), Johansson AL, Lambert PC, Sieurin J, Yang F, Pedersen NL, 
Wirdefeldt K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

BACKGROUND: Familial aggregation has been shown for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD) separately, and it has been hypothesized that these 
diseases also coaggregate in families.
METHODS: The authors investigated familial coaggregation of AD and PD by 
conducting a systematic review and meta-analysis. PubMed was searched for 
relevant studies published through the end of October 2012. Three independent 
investigators screened publications and extracted data. Relative risk estimates 
of AD risk associated with family history of PD or parkinsonism, or PD risk 
associated with family history of AD or dementia, were summarized into 
metaestimates using random effects models. Heterogeneity and publication bias 
were tested using Higgins' and Egger's tests, respectively.
RESULTS: We included 16 studies in the review, with 14 included in any 
meta-analysis. AD risk associated with family history of PD yielded a summary 
hazard ratio of 1.18 (95% CI: 1.00-1.39) based on 5 reconstructed cohort studies 
and a summary odds ratio (OR) of 1.40 (95% CI: 0.92-2.12) based on 7 
case-control studies. PD risk associated with family history of AD yielded a 
summary OR of 0.75 (95% CI: 0.49-1.16) based on 3 studies. There was no 
significant heterogeneity among studies, nor significant publication bias.
CONCLUSIONS: There may be familial coaggregation of AD and PD, although the 
association was modest and only apparent when studying AD risk associated with 
family history of PD.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000355452
PMID: 24296900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3297. Parkinsons Dis. 2013;2013:912037. doi: 10.1155/2013/912037. Epub 2013 Nov 5.

Predictors of cognitive decline in the early stages of Parkinson's disease: a 
brief cognitive assessment longitudinal study.

Bugalho P(1), Viana-Baptista M.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Hospital de Egas Moniz, CHLO, Rua da Junqueira 126, 
1349-019 Lisbon, Portugal ; CEDOC and Neurology Department, Faculdade de 
Ciências Médicas (FCM), Universidade Nova de Lisboa (UNL), Campo dos Mártires da 
Pátria, 130, 1169-056 Lisbon, Portugal.

Our objectives were to perform a longitudinal assessment of mental status in 
early stage Parkinson's disease (PD) patients, with brief neuropsychological 
tests, in order to find predictive factors for cognitive decline. Sixty-one, 
early stage, and nondemented patients were assessed twice, over a 2-year 
interval, with a global cognitive test (mini-mental state examination (MMSE)) 
and a frontal function test (frontal assessment battery (FAB)) and motor 
function scales. Dementia and hallucinations were diagnosed according to the 
DSM-IV criteria. Cognitive function scores did not decrease significantly, 
except for FAB lexical fluency score. Four patients presented with dementia at 
followup. The MMSE score below cut-off, worse gait dysfunction, the nontremor 
motor subtype, and hallucinations were significantly related to dementia. 
Rigidity and speech dysfunction were related to dementia and a decrease in FAB 
scores. We can conclude that decline in the MMSE and FAB scores is small and 
heterogeneous in the early stages of PD. Scores below cut-off in the MMSE could 
be helpful to predict dementia. Nontremor motor deficits could be predictive 
factors for frontal cognitive decline and dementia.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/912037
PMCID: PMC3835472
PMID: 24303226


3298. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Feb;127(2):151-73. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1222-6. Epub 
2013 Dec 5.

Human stem cell models of neurodegeneration: a novel approach to study 
mechanisms of disease development.

Hargus G(1), Ehrlich M, Hallmann AL, Kuhlmann T.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuropathology, University Hospital Münster, Pottkamp 2, 48149, 
Münster, Germany, gunnar.hargus@ukmuenster.de.

The number of patients with neurodegenerative diseases is increasing 
significantly worldwide. Thus, intense research is being pursued to uncover 
mechanisms of disease development in an effort to identify molecular targets for 
therapeutic intervention. Analysis of postmortem tissue from patients has 
yielded important histological and biochemical markers of disease progression. 
However, this approach is inherently limited because it is not possible to study 
patient neurons prior to degeneration. As such, transgenic and knockout models 
of neurodegenerative diseases are commonly employed. While these animal models 
have yielded important insights into some molecular mechanisms of disease 
development, they do not provide the opportunity to study mechanisms of 
neurodegeneration in human neurons at risk and thus, it is often difficult or 
even impossible to replicate human pathogenesis with this approach. The 
generation of patient-specific induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells offers a 
unique opportunity to overcome these obstacles. By expanding and differentiating 
iPS cells, it is possible to generate large numbers of functional neurons in 
vitro, which can then be used to study the disease of the donating patient. 
Here, we provide an overview of human stem cell models of neurodegeneration 
using iPS cells from patients with Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, frontotemporal dementia, Huntington's disease, 
spinal muscular atrophy and other neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, we 
describe how further refinements of reprogramming technology resulted in the 
generation of patient-specific induced neurons, which have also been used to 
model neurodegenerative changes in vitro.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-013-1222-6
PMID: 24306942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3299. J Am Med Dir Assoc. 2014 Feb;15(2):90-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jamda.2013.10.007. Epub 
2013 Dec 4.

Parkinson disease in long term care facilities: a review of the literature.

Weerkamp NJ(1), Tissingh G(2), Poels PJ(3), Zuidema SU(4), Munneke M(3), 
Koopmans RT(5), Bloem BR(6).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Atrium Medical Center, Heerlen, The Netherlands; 
Department of Neurology, Nijmegen Center for Evidence Based Practice, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Atrium Medical Center, Heerlen, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Neurology, Nijmegen Center for Evidence Based Practice, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(4)Department of General Practice, University of Groningen, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Primary and Community Care, Center for Family Medicine, 
Geriatric Care and Public Health, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
(6)Department of Neurology, Nijmegen Center for Evidence Based Practice, Radboud 
University Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The Netherlands; Department of Neurology, Donders 
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behavior, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical 
Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: b.bloem@neuro.umcn.nl.

Parkinson disease (PD) is common in long term care (LTC) facilities. The number 
of institutionalized patients with PD will rise sharply in the coming decades 
because of 2 concurrent phenomena: aging of the population leads to an increased 
PD prevalence and improved quality of care has led to a prolonged survival in 
advanced disease stages. Only a few studies have investigated the prevalence and 
clinical characteristics of patients with PD in LTC facilities. Even fewer 
studies have addressed the treatment strategies used to support these 
institutionalized patients, who are mostly in advanced stages of the disease. 
The available evidence suggests that current management of patients with PD in 
LTC facilities is less than optimal. In the Netherlands, and we suspect in many 
other countries, there are no formal guidelines for treating patients with PD 
who have been admitted to a LTC facility. In this review, we describe the 
epidemiology, clinical characteristics, and clinical management of patients with 
PD in LTC settings. We also address potentially modifiable elements of care and 
provide several recommendations to improve the management of PD in these 
facilities. We conclude by suggesting a possible guide for future research in 
this area.

Copyright © 2014 American Medical Directors Association, Inc. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jamda.2013.10.007
PMID: 24314699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3300. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2014 Feb;20(2):262-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.11.008. Epub 2013 Nov 20.

Clinical and neuroimaging features of patient with early-onset Parkinson's 
disease with dementia carrying SNCA p.G51D mutation.

Tokutake T(1), Ishikawa A(2), Yoshimura N(3), Miyashita A(4), Kuwano R(4), 
Nishizawa M(1), Ikeuchi T(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Brain Research Institute, Niigata University, 
Niigata, Japan.
(2)Department of Neurology, Brain Disease Center Agano Hospital, Niigata, Japan.
(3)Department of Neurology, Tokyo Metropolitan Health and Medical Treatment 
Corporation, Ebara Hospital, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Genetics, Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University, Niigata, Japan.
(5)Department of Molecular Genetics, Brain Research Institute, Niigata 
University, Niigata, Japan. Electronic address: ikeuchi@bri.niigata-u.ac.jp.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.11.008
PMID: 24315198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]