201. Adv Neurol. 1993;60:470-4.

A controlled study of dementia in Parkinson's disease over 54 months.

Mindham RH(1), Biggins CA, Boyd JL, Harrop FM, Madeley P, Randall JI, Spokes EG.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Psychiatry, Leeds, United Kingdom.

PMID: 8420172 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Acta Neurol Scand. 1993 Jan;87(1):19-24. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1993.tb04069.x.

CSF cholinesterase in early-onset and late-onset Alzheimer's disease and 
multi-infarct dementia of Chinese patients.

Shen ZX(1), Ding Q, Wei CZ, Ding MC, Meng JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuan Wu Hospital, Beijing, China.

Using Ellman spectrophotometric method we measured the total cholinesterase 
(ChE) activity in lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 13 persons without 
neurological disorder, 10 non-demented patients with cerebral infarcts, 17 
patients with dementia of Alzheimer's type (DAT) (11 presenile, 6 senile cases), 
10 patients with multi-infarct dementia (MID), 1 patient with Parkinson's 
disease associated with dementia. The ChE activity in CSF was significantly 
lower in the DAT group compared with age-matched control subjects (p < 0.001). 
This paper also analyses the possibility of using CSF ChE activity as a marker 
of DAT, and the relationships between its level of activity and the age of the 
patient at onset, stage of illness and severity of dementia as well as 
discrepancies in the data published so far. Previous work has shown that ChE 
activity in the brain tissue and CSF of MID is normal: therefore, if low ChE 
activity is found in the CSF of MID patients, as was obtained in 8 out of 10 
cases in our series, the diagnosis of mixed dementia should be considered.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1993.tb04069.x
PMID: 8424308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 1993;105(2):37-41.

[Sleep disorders in neurology: hyposomnia].

[Article in German]

Zeitlhofer J(1), Tribl G, Saletu B.

Author information:
(1)Universitätsklinik für Neurologie, Wien.

Sleep disturbances are an important health problem; about 20-33% of the 
population suffer from hyposomnias (lack of sleep). Hyposomnias often accompany 
neurological disorders (head traumas, chronic cephalea, pain, cerebrovascular 
and neuromuscular disorders, M. Parkinson, and dementia). Slow wave sleep 
decreases, arousals increase, and sleep is fragmented; these types of 
hyposomnias are treated by treatment of the basic neurological disease. Some 
sleep disturbances (e.g. sleep apneas) are a risk factor for cerebrovascular 
disorders.

PMID: 8442353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Acta Neuropathol. 1993;85(2):213-6. doi: 10.1007/BF00227770.

Diffuse Lewy body disease with immediate post-partum onset.

Opeskin K(1), Gonzales M, Borenstein R, Anderson R.

Author information:
(1)Victorian Institute of Forensic Pathology.

A previously healthy 27 years-old woman developed psychotic depression and 
parkinsonism shortly after delivery of her first child. Her neuropsychiatric 
symptoms progressed to dementia and she died 5 years after onset. Diffuse Lewy 
body disease was found at autopsy. This case is unusual because of the early age 
of onset and the abrupt development of symptoms following pregnancy.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00227770
PMID: 8442413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Surg Neurol. 1993 Feb;39(2):143-7. doi: 10.1016/0090-3019(93)90093-g.

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy with dementia.

Shiino A(1), Matsuda M, Morikawa S, Inubushi T, Akiguchi I, Handa J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Shiga University of Medical Science, Japan.

To provide new insights into metabolic changes in the brain of patients with 
dementia, we performed in vivo localized proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
in nine patients with primary degenerative dementia and in three patients with 
normal-pressure hydrocephalus. We compared the results with those in 26 healthy 
volunteers. Measurements of regional cerebral blood flow were performed in seven 
patients by means of single photon emission computed tomography with amphetamine 
I 123 as a tracer. The magnetic resonance spectra constantly showed three major 
peaks corresponding to N-acetylaspartate (NAA), creatine and phosphocreatine 
(Cr), and choline-containing compounds. There were no age-related changes in the 
mean area ratio of NAA to Cr in neurologically normal volunteers. The NAA/Cr 
ratio was significantly reduced in patients with primary degenerative dementia. 
The reduction of the NAA/Cr ratio was observed even in dementia patients with no 
significant brain atrophy or reduction in regional cerebral blood flow. No 
significant reduction of the NAA/Cr ratio was seen in patients with 
normal-pressure hydrocephalus. The NAA/Cr ratio might reflect the number and/or 
activity of neuronal cells in the brain. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
may well provide a useful tool for early detection of, and further 
pathophysiological study of, primary degenerative dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/0090-3019(93)90093-g
PMID: 8394604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Arch Neurol. 1993 Feb;50(2):140-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1993.00540020018011.

A clinicopathologic study of 100 cases of Parkinson's disease.

Hughes AJ(1), Daniel SE, Blankson S, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Middlesex Hospital, London, England.

The clinical details of 100 cases of histologically confirmed Parkinson's 
disease were examined and correlated with pathologic findings. Age at disease 
onset (mean, 62.4 years), disease duration (mean, 13.1 years), and age at death 
(mean, 75.5 years) were similar to those in previous smaller series. Asymmetric, 
tremulous onset was most common, although 23% of patients had no rest tremor. 
Motor fluctuations and dyskinesias occurred in 60% of levodopa-treated patients. 
All patients had clinical parkinsonism; however, 12 had atypical clinical 
features of Parkinson's disease, including severe early dementia, fluctuating 
confusional states, no response to levodopa, and early marked autonomic 
disturbance. Neuropathologic examination found coexistent Alzheimer-type change 
in 17 cases and striatal abnormality--mainly vascular--in 34 cases. Cortical 
Lewy bodies were present in all cases, but only four satisfied proposed criteria 
for diffuse Lewy body disease. Dementia occurred in 44% of cases; 29% had 
Alzheimer's disease, 10% had numerous cortical Lewy bodies, and 6% had a 
possible vascular cause; in 55% no definite pathologic cause was found. Nigral 
cell loss correlated with disease duration and severity. Although the general 
pattern of disease conformed to traditional descriptions, the findings broaden 
the present clinical and pathologic spectrum of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1993.00540020018011
PMID: 8431132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Acta Neurol Scand. 1993 Mar;87(3):239-42. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1993.tb04109.x.

Gait disorders of multi-infarct dementia. CT and clinical correlation.

Thajeb P(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Cathay General Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC.

Twenty-five patients with various types of gait disorders of multi-infarct 
dementia (MID) were reported. The types of gait disorders consisted of lower 
body parkinsonism (LBP) plus ataxia (6 patients), LBP plus apraxia (5 patients), 
and a combination of LBP plus ataxia and apraxia (14 patients). Hypertension 
occurred in 23 (92%) of the 25 patients. Nevertheless, individual stroke risk 
factors and the locations of infarcts were not significantly different between 
the subgroups. Ventriculomegaly and "leuko-araiosis" as demonstrated by computed 
tomography occurred in more than 80% of patients in each subgroup. Atrophy of 
the superior vermis was seen in 16 (80%) of 20 patients with ataxia as compared 
to 2 (40%) of the 5 patients without ataxia (p < 0.005). These data suggest that 
LBP and apraxia of MID were probably determined by the presence of 
ventriculomegaly or leuko-araiosis or both, and the presence of ataxic component 
of gait disorder most probably indicates the presence of vermian atrophy.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1993.tb04109.x
PMID: 8475697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Ann Neurol. 1993 Mar;33(3):258-66. doi: 10.1002/ana.410330306.

Risk factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease: a population-based, 
case-control study.

Fratiglioni L(1), Ahlbom A, Viitanen M, Winblad B.

Author information:
(1)Stockholm Gerontology Research Center, Sweden.

Our current knowledge of risk factors for Alzheimer's disease is limited and 
primarily addresses early-onset disease. This study aimed to determine the risk 
factors for late-onset Alzheimer's disease using a case-control approach. 
Ninety-eight cases and 216 controls were gathered from an ongoing population 
survey on aging and dementia in Stockholm (the Kungsholmen Project). We found a 
high relative risk (3.2; 95% confidence interval, 1.8-5.7) with the presence of 
at least one first-degree relative affected by dementia. Among all the other 
risk factors, alcohol abuse (relative risk, 4.4; 95% confidence interval, 
1.4-13.8) and manual work (relative risk for men of 5.3; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.1-25.5) emerged as positively associated. No clear association was 
found with a family history of Parkinson disease, advanced parental age at index 
delivery, season of birth, or previous head trauma. In conclusion, our data 
suggest that the main risk factor for late-onset Alzheimer's disease is a family 
history of dementia, as has been previously reported for early-onset disease. 
Moreover, alcohol abuse and occupational exposure might play a specific role for 
this form of the disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410330306
PMID: 8498809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Ann Neurol. 1993 Mar;33(3):267-74. doi: 10.1002/ana.410330307.

Relationships between extrapyramidal signs and cognitive function in a 
community-dwelling cohort of patients with Parkinson's disease and normal 
elderly individuals.

Richards M(1), Stern Y, Marder K, Cote L, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY.

The relationship between extrapyramidal sign (EPS) severity and cognitive 
function was investigated in 184 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and 301 normal elderly individuals from a community-dwelling cohort in 
northern Manhattan, New York City. Fifty-six of the patients with PD met 
criteria for dementia of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders, third edition, revised, and of the National Institute of Neurological 
and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders 
Association. EPS were rated according to the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale. Cognitive function was assessed by neuropsychological tests of memory, 
orientation, abstract reasoning, language, construction, and psychomotor speed. 
Significant associations were found between EPS and neuropsychological 
performance in PD patients without dementia. Yet EPS severity was unable to 
account for the pronounced cognitive impairment in PD dementia. Individuals in 
the normal group with subtle EPS, but without overt idiopathic PD, showed 
widespread cognitive changes, including impairment in most of the tests that 
differentiated PD patients from normal subjects. Prospective follow-up of these 
individuals will determine whether this represents a preclinical stage of PD or 
constitutes an early manifestation of dementia.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410330307
PMID: 8498810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1993 Apr;33(4):382-8.

[Event-related potentials in progressive supranuclear palsy].

[Article in Japanese]

Sato K(1), Takeuchi H, Kamoda M, Touge T, Yamada A, Nishioka M.

Author information:
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Kagawa Medical School.

Abnormal event-related potential (ERP) has been reported in several types of 
dementing illness including Parkinson's disease (PD) and progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP). In this paper we report the result of EPR recordings 
obtained in normal control subjects (14 cases) and in patients with PSP (6 
cases) and PD (32 cases). ERPs were recorded from 13 scalp electrodes, using the 
acoustic odd-ball paradigm. All PD patients were in early stage (Yahr stage 1 to 
2), and all PSP patients were in the mild-to-moderate state. In control subjects 
and PD patients P3 was normal. In PSP patients, only one subject (17%) showed a 
normal P3 component, three cases (50%) demonstrated low amplitude and normal 
latency P3, and two cases (33%) featured lack of normal P3 sequence. The P3 
abnormalities in PSP patients were not related with dementia, but with low 
amplitude P3 being observed in 2 of 3 non-demented patients, and abolished P3 in 
a patient with only mild dementia. The result suggests that the P3 changes in 
PSP patients develop earlier than the cognitive dysfunction, and they are 
related to the underlying subcortical lesion rather than dementia.

PMID: 8370199 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Eur J Nucl Med. 1993 Apr;20(4):339-44. doi: 10.1007/BF00169811.

Technetium-99m hexamethylpropylene amine oxime single photon emission tomography 
of the brain in early Parkinson's disease: correlation with dementia and 
lateralization.

Wang SJ(1), Liu RS, Liu HC, Lin KN, Shan DE, Liao KK, Fuh JL, Lee LS.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Institute, Veterans General Hospital-Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of 
China.

Regional cerebral blood flow was assessed in 19 patients with early idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (PD) and 12 control subjects of similar age by single-photon 
emission tomography using technetium-99m hexamethylpropylene amine oxime 
(HMPAO). Of the patients with PD, seven were mildly demented and 15 presented 
with hemiparkinsonism. Mean HMPAO cortical or basal ganglia/cerebellum activity 
ratios were calculated. Mean cortical and regional uptake ratios in non-demented 
PD patients were not significantly different from values in the controls. In 
contrast, besides generalized cortical hypoperfusion, demented PD patients had 
significantly lower HMPAO uptake in the frontal and basal ganglia regions than 
non-demented patients. These observations support the hypothesis of impaired 
neuronal activity in both cortical and subcortical regions of the brain in 
demented PD patients. In hemiparkinsonian patients, the only asymmetrical 
finding was a relative hypoperfusion in the contralateral parietal region. This 
may be due to deafferentation of the thalamoparietal pathways. The lack of 
asymmetrical uptake in basal ganglia in our PD patients may be explained by 
their staging at the time of the investigation (stage I and II, Hoehn and Yahr 
scale).

DOI: 10.1007/BF00169811
PMID: 8491227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1993 Apr;187(4):317-30. doi: 10.1007/BF00185889.

Functional neuroanatomy and neuropathology of the human hypothalamus.

Swaab DF(1), Hofman MA, Lucassen PJ, Purba JS, Raadsheer FC, Van de Nes JA.

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Institute for Brain Research, Graduate School Neurosciences 
Amsterdam.

The human hypothalamus is involved in a wide range of functions in the 
developing, adult and aging subject and is responsible for a large number of 
symptoms of neuroendocrine, neurological and psychiatric diseases. In the 
present review some prominent hypothalamic nuclei are discussed in relation to 
normal development, sexual differentiation, aging and a number of 
neuropathological conditions. The suprachiasmatic nucleus, the clock of the 
brain, shows seasonal and circadian variations in its vasopressin neurons. 
During normal aging, but even more so in Alzheimer's disease, the number of 
these neurons decreases. In homosexual men this nucleus is larger than in 
heterosexual men. The difference between the sexually dimorphic nuclei of men 
and women arises between the ages of 2-4 to puberty. In adult men this nucleus 
is twice as large as in adult women. In the process of aging, a sex-dependent 
decrease in cell number occurs. The vasopressin and oxytocin cells of the 
supraoptic and paraventricular nucleus are present in adult numbers as early as 
mid-gestation. Lower oxytocin neuron numbers are found in Prader-Willi syndrome, 
AIDS and Parkinson's disease. Familial hypothalamic diabetes insipidus is based 
upon a point mutation in the vasopressin-neurophysin-glycopeptide gene. 
Parvicellular corticotropin-releasing hormone-containing neurons in the 
paraventricular nucleus increase in number and are activated during the course 
of aging. In post-menopausal women, the infundibular or arcuate nucleus contains 
hypertrophic neurons containing oestrogen receptors. These neurons may be 
involved in the initiation of menopausal flushes. The nucleus tuberalis 
lateralis may be involved in feeding behaviour and metabolism. In Huntington's 
disease the majority of its neurons is lost; in Alzheimer's disease it shows 
very strong cytoskeletal alterations. Tuberomammillary nucleus neurons contain, 
e.g., histamine or galanine, and project to the cortex. Strong cytoskeletal 
changes, as well as plaques and tangles are found in this nucleus in Alzheimer's 
disease. The various hypothalamic nuclei are probably involved in many functions 
and symptoms of which only a minority has been revealed.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00185889
PMID: 8512084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 1993 May;30(5):363-8. doi: 
10.3143/geriatrics.30.363.

[Event-related potential and visual evoked potential in patients with 
Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda M(1), Tachibana H, Okuda B, Kawabata K, Sugita M.

Author information:
(1)Fifth Department of Internal Medicine, Hyogo College of Medicine.

The event-related potential (ERP) and visual evoked potential (VEP) were 
recorded in 28 patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) and 28 normal subjects. 
Nine of the PD patients had dementia and 19 did not. Dementia was evaluated 
according to the criteria for dementia assigned by the DSM III-R, and mental 
faculties were estimated using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). ERP was 
recorded during auditory discriminative tasks. The latencies of N100, P200, N200 
and P300 from the Pz region were measured. VEP was recorded during pattern 
reversal stimulation. The latency of P100 was measured for each eye stimulated. 
PD patients with dementia showed significant prolongation of the N200 and P300 
latencies of ERP and of the P100 latency of VEP compared with the values in 
normal subjects and in PD patients without dementia. There was a significant 
correlation between the N200 latency of ERP and the P100 latency of VEP in PD 
patients with dementia. The findings indicate that the N200 and P300 latencies 
of ERP are related to cognitive information processing and also suggest that 
dysfunction in the central visual system plays a role in abnormal pattern VEP in 
patients with dementia. Furthermore, the disturbance of early sensory processing 
in response to visual stimuli may roughly parallel the impairment of cognitive 
information processing in terms of ERP in PD patients with dementia.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.30.363
PMID: 8331829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Int J Neurosci. 1993 Jun;70(3-4):193-7. doi: 10.3109/00207459309000574.

Cigarette smoking: effects on cognitive functions and drug-induced parkinsonism 
in chronic schizophrenia.

Sandyk R(1).

Author information:
(1)NeuroCommunication Research Laboratories, Danbury, CT 06811.

Epidemiological studies suggest an apparent protective effect of cigarette 
smoking on the risk of Parkinson's disease. There is also a report suggesting 
that patients with Parkinson's disease who smoke are less likely to develop 
dementia. I investigated the relationship of smoking to the severity of 
cognitive functions and presence of drug-induced parkinsonism in a group of 111 
neuroleptic-treated chronic institutionalized schizophrenic patients. Patients 
who smoked had significantly less cognitive impairment (p < .02) and a lower 
prevalence of drug-induced Parkinsonism (p < .02) compared to nonsmokers. These 
findings suggest that cigarette smoking may protect against the development of 
dementia and drug-induced Parkinsonism in schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.3109/00207459309000574
PMID: 8063538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Drugs Aging. 1993 Jul-Aug;3(4):349-57. doi: 10.2165/00002512-199303040-00005.

Drug-induced cognitive impairment. Defining the problem and finding solutions.

Bowen JD(1), Larson EB.

Author information:
(1)University of Washington Alzheimer's Disease Patient Registry, Department of 
Medicine, Seattle.

Drug-induced cognitive impairment is a common cause of delirium and is 
frequently a confounding factor in dementia. Predisposing conditions for 
delirium include age, brain disease and addiction to alcohol and/or drugs. The 
elderly are at particular risk because of multiple diseases, multiple drug use 
and alterations of drug metabolism associated with age. Sedatives such as 
benzodiazepines have a particularly high risk of cognitive impairment. Centrally 
acting sympathetic antihypertensive agents, sedating antipsychotic drugs, 
opioids, digitalis, anti-Parkinsonian drugs, antidepressants and corticosteroids 
are also associated with greater risk relative to other classes of medications. 
Cognitive impairment due to medication may be reduced by recognition of the 
problem. The risk of drug-induced impairment may be minimised by strategies 
which optimise overall health, avoidance of unnecessary medications, and 
selection of medications least likely to cause delirium.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-199303040-00005
PMID: 8369594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1993 Jul-Sep;6(3):170-6. doi: 
10.1177/089198879300600306.

Alzheimer's disease and idiopathic Parkinson's disease coexistence.

Rajput AH(1), Rozdilsky B, Rajput A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine (Neurology), University Hospital, College of Medicine, 
University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) are common 
neurologic diseases of old age. Parkinson syndrome is easy to recognize even at 
an early stage, but identifying early AD is often difficult. Accurate clinical 
diagnosis is important for assigning the prognosis and for studies aimed at 
assessing the efforts to slow down progression of these diseases. During 22 
years, we identified six patients who had clinical features of parkinsonism and 
dementia and who at autopsy had both IDP and AD and 20 parkinsonian patients 
without dementia who at autopsy had only IPD. The clinical profile in these two 
groups was compared. The onset of Parkinson syndrome in the patients with dual 
pathology had a bimodal distribution--before or after age 65 years. In the three 
cases with onset before age 65 years, there was sequential evolution of IPD and 
AD. In contrast, those older than 65 years at onset manifested the clinical 
features of both IPD and AD simultaneously. The mode of onset and the dominant 
parkinsonian features in the three patients with sequential clinical evolution 
were similar to those seen in the nondemented IPD cases; however, lack of 
self-confidence and inability to make decisions resulted in considerably greater 
functional disability than could be accounted for by parkinsonism alone. These 
characteristics may be helpful in early recognition of dual IPD and AD 
pathology. Psychiatric side effects of levodopa therapy were more common in 
those with dual pathology than in those with IPD alone.

DOI: 10.1177/089198879300600306
PMID: 8397761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Can J Neurol Sci. 1993 Aug;20(3):194-8.

Nuclear magnetic resonance study of cerebrospinal fluid from patients with 
multiple sclerosis.

Lynch J(1), Peeling J, Auty A, Sutherland GR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery (Neurosurgery), University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Canada.

Proton nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy was used to examine 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) from patients (n = 30) with actively progressive 
multiple sclerosis (MS). Metabolite concentrations obtained from the spectra 
were compared to those determined from the spectra of CSF from control patients 
(n = 27) with benign spinal disorders. No significant difference was found 
between the 2 groups for most constituents, including lactate, glutamine, 
citrate, creatine and creatinine, and glucose. Acetate levels were significantly 
higher in MS patients, while formate levels were significantly lower, than the 
controls. There were no significant differences in metabolite concentrations in 
CSF from early and longstanding MS patients. A peak due to an unidentified 
compound was found at 2.82 ppm in the spectra of CSF from patients with actively 
progressive MS, but not in the spectra of CSF from the controls. The peak was 
not found in spectra of CSF from patients with AIDS dementia complex (n = 9) or 
Parkinson's disease (n = 5), but it did appear in spectra of CSF from 1 patient 
with Jakob-Creutzfeldt disease (out of 3 examined) and from 1 patient (out of 7) 
with Guillain-Barré disease. The unidentified compound is volatile and, from the 
chemical shift of the observed NMR peak, is probably an N-methyl compound. As 
such, it may be an intermediate in the cholinoglycine cycle, in which an 
abnormality has been proposed to exist in MS patients.

PMID: 8221382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Afr J Med Med Sci. 1993 Sep;22(3):61-4.

Clinically-diagnosed dementing illnesses in Ibadan: features, types and 
associated conditions.

Ogunniyi A(1), Lekwauwa UG, Falope ZF, Osuntokun BO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria.

In this hospital-based study of dementing illnesses in Ibadan, 37 cases were 
seen over a 6 year period from 1984 to 1989 out of 57,440 cases admitted. The 
average hospital frequency was 64 cases per 100,000 admissions. Eighteen cases 
(48.7%) had vascular dementia. The other types encountered were: secondary 
dementias (8), mixed (5), probable primary degenerative (1) and the remaining 5 
cases were unclassifiable. The associated conditions were mainly hypertension, 
parkinsonism, diabetes mellitus and benign prostatic hyperplasia. The findings 
confirm the relative rarity of primary degenerative dementia in Nigeria and 
raise the possibility of prevention of the predominant type by identifying the 
stroke-prone individuals early and intervening.

PMID: 7839914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Neuropsychologia. 1993 Sep;31(9):933-49. doi: 10.1016/0028-3932(93)90149-t.

Short-term memory and temporal ordering in early Parkinson's disease: effects of 
disease chronicity and medication.

Cooper JA(1), Sagar HJ, Sullivan EV.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Royal Hallamshire Hospital, 
Sheffield, U.K.

Studies of Parkinson's disease (PD) have shown impaired temporal ordering but 
interpretation may be confounded by task requirements and the effects of 
medication. We examined item recognition and recency discrimination in PD in 
relation to treatment and performance on other tests. Patients showed increased 
response latency and impaired recency discrimination only at short retention 
intervals. The deficits were greater in chronically medicated patients but 
treatment with levodopa, bromocriptine or anticholinergic drugs did not affect 
performance of newly diagnosed cases. The short-term memory deficits correlated 
with scores on tests of working memory, attention and executive function. These 
results do not indicate a generalised temporal ordering deficit in PD but 
suggest that much of the cognitive impairment in the disorder arises from 
attentional deficits affecting short-term and working memory.

DOI: 10.1016/0028-3932(93)90149-t
PMID: 8232850 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Neurobiol Aging. 1993 Sep-Oct;14(5):407-19. doi: 10.1016/0197-4580(93)90099-w.

Clinical comparison of Alzheimer's disease in pedigrees with the codon 717 
Val-->Ile mutation in the amyloid precursor protein gene.

Mullan M(1), Tsuji S, Miki T, Katsuya T, Naruse S, Kaneko K, Shimizu T, Kojima 
T, Nakano I, Ogihara T, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of South Florida, Tampa 33612.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia (32). Although the 
majority of cases of AD are sporadic, the most consistent risk factor detected 
in several epidemiological studies has been a positive family history of the 
disease (14,21). In addition, many large pedigrees have been described in which 
AD appears to be inherited as an autosomal dominant disorder. In one such 
pedigree (F23) a point mutation within the beta-amyloid precursor protein (APP) 
gene at codon 717 was identified and hypothesized to be pathogenic (10). The 
mutation results in a valine to isoleucine change in APP (APP717 Val-->Ile). 
Subsequent screening has revealed four other pedigrees, detailed in this study, 
in which this mutation co-segregates with AD (13,26,37). In addition, one other 
pedigree (Tor3) with this mutation has been described (15) and detailed 
clinical, neuropsychological, and neuropathological data are reported. Tor3 is 
discussed below in comparison to the findings in the families in this study. The 
five families we report with the mutation were identified in Britain (1 family), 
the United States (1 family), and Japan (3 families). The mutation has not been 
reported in the general population of any of these countries (3,13,26,33). On 
this basis alone it seems this mutation is pathogenic. Other APP codon 717 
mutations have been identified which co-segregate with the disease (4,25). Also, 
a double mutation in APP at codons 670/671 has been shown to cosegregate with 
the disease in two large Swedish pedigrees (22). In all cases, there is complete 
co-segregation of the APP mutation with early onset AD, providing overwhelming 
statistical evidence that these mutations are pathogenic. We present the 
clinical features and limited neuropathology of AD in these families with the 
APP 717 Val-->Ile mutation.

DOI: 10.1016/0197-4580(93)90099-w
PMID: 8247223 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Neurology. 1993 Sep;43(9):1690-2. doi: 10.1212/wnl.43.9.1690.

Antecedent clinical features associated with dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Stern Y(1), Marder K, Tang MX, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, New York, NY.

Comment in
    Neurology. 1994 Aug;44(8):1553.

In a prospective cohort study, we examined clinical features in 250 nondemented 
patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) and then evaluated their 
association with incident dementia during 5 years of follow-up. Seventy-four of 
the patients became demented. Odds ratios for incident dementia with PD were 
increased for the following: being older than 70 years of age (2.7; 1.4 to 5.5), 
having a PD rating scale score greater than 25 (3.0; 1.5 to 6.2), being 
depressed (2.7; 1.5 to 6.6), being confused or psychotic on levodopa (3.3; 1.3 
to 8.7), or having facial masking as a presenting sign (6.1; 1.4 to 26.9).

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.43.9.1690
PMID: 8414013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1993 Sep 24;695:198-202. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1993.tb23052.x.

Alzheimer's disease families with amyloid precursor protein mutations.

Rossor MN(1), Newman S, Frackowiak RS, Lantos P, Kennedy AM.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Research Group, St. Mary's Hospital, London, United Kingdom.

Early onset Familial Alzheimer's Disease (FAD) is an autosomal dominant disease 
with apparent complete penetrance. It is genetically heterogeneous with some 
families carrying mutations in the amyloid precursor protein (APP) gene which 
segregate with the disease. In addition, there is allelic heterogeneity with 
four mutations associated with FAD. Three mutations have been reported at APP 
717, just distal to the C-terminus of the beta-amyloid domain, APP 717 val-ile, 
APP 717 val-phe, and APP 717 val-gly, which are associated with autopsy-proven 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). APP 670/671 lies at the N terminus of the beta-amyloid 
domain and is associated with clinically diagnosed FAD in two Swedish families. 
FAD tends to have prominent myoclonus and this is shared by the cases with APP 
mutations. In two unrelated UK families with APP 717 val-ile mutations there was 
early prominent memory impairment with dyscalculia proceeding to generalized 
cognitive impairment with a lack of insight. There was a late development of a 
gait disturbance with extrapyramidal features in some members. Positron emission 
tomography (PET) with fluorodeoxyglucose demonstrated posterior bitemporal 
biparietal hypometabolism in one case. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed 
generalized cerebral atrophy particularly affecting the temporal lobes and 
hippocampus. At autopsy, a single case showed extensive beta-amyloid deposition 
with congophilic angiopathy and widespread senile plaques and neurofibrillary 
tangles. The cytoskeletal pathology associated with abnormally phosphorylated 
tau was similar to cases of sporadic AD. In addition, there were widespread 
cortical and subcortical Lewy bodies. A single family with the APP 717 val-gly 
mutation also showed prominent myoclonus, lack of insight, and seizures, PET, in 
a single case, showed classical biparietal bitemporal hypometabolism. Autopsy, 
in a single case, showed diffuse deposits of beta-amyloid throughout the cortex 
with frequent neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles. No other inclusion 
bodies were seen. There was severe congophilic angiopathy. The age at onset of 
APP mutations is around 50 years of age by contrast to other early onset FAD 
pedigrees.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1993.tb23052.x
PMID: 8239283 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1993 Nov;56(11):1169-77. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.56.11.1169.

A comparative study of simple and choice reaction time in Parkinson's, 
Huntington's and cerebellar disease.

Jahanshahi M(1), Brown RG, Marsden CD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurology, National Hospital for Neurology and 
Neurosurgery, London, United Kingdom.

The aim of the study was to compare the quantitative and qualitative 
similarities and differences in the performance of patients with Parkinson's 
disease, Huntington's disease and cerebellar disease on a number of reaction 
time tasks. Simple reaction time (SRT), uncued and fully cued four choice (CRT) 
tasks were performed by eight patients with Parkinson's disease after withdrawal 
of dopaminergic medication for an average of 14.4 hours; by seven non-demented 
patients with Huntington's disease and by eight patients with cerebellar 
disease. An S1 (warning signal/precue)-S2 (imperative stimulus) paradigm was 
used in all tasks, with the S1-S2 interval randomly varying between 0, 200, 800, 
1600 and 3200 ms across trials. The patients with Huntington's disease had a 
significantly longer SRT than those with Parkinson's disease. None of the other 
group differences in uncued and unwarned SRT and CRT was significant. For the 
patients with Parkinson's disease and those with cerebellar disease, unwarned 
SRT was faster than uncued and unwarned CRT. For the patients with Huntington's 
disease, this CRT/SRT difference was not significant. A warning signal before 
the imperative stimulus resulted in a reduction of reaction time in all three 
groups. Advance information provided by S1 about the response that would be 
required by S2 was used by patients in all three groups, evident from reaction 
times in the fully cued CRT task being faster than those in the uncued CRT 
condition. Patients with cerebellar disease had slower movement times in the SRT 
and CRT conditions compared with the patients with Parkinson's disease and 
Huntington's disease, whose times did not differ. In one SRT condition, when the 
absence of a warning signal was predictable, patients with cerebellar disease, 
and to a lesser extent those with Huntington's disease, were able to maintain a 
general motor readiness before the imperative stimulus. This was not the case 
for the patients with Parkinson's disease who seemed more dependent on the 
presence of a warning signal to reduce their reaction time. With a few 
exceptions, the pattern of results of the three groups were qualitatively 
similar. It may be concluded that similar reaction time deficits are found in 
Parkinson's disease, in patients with other disorders of the basal ganglia 
(Huntington's disease), as well as those with a disease sparing the basal 
ganglia (cerebellar disease). The non-specific slowness observed at the 
behavioural level may, however, have diverse central mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.56.11.1169
PMCID: PMC489817
PMID: 8229028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Neurology. 1993 Nov;43(11):2184-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.43.11.2184.

Subtle extrapyramidal signs can predict the development of dementia in elderly 
individuals.

Richards M(1), Stern Y, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, New York, N.Y. 10032

To assess the significance of mild extrapyramidal signs (EPSs) in aging, we 
prospectively followed 228 elderly individuals without dementia or major 
neurologic disease at baseline. Seventy-three (32%) showed mild idiopathic EPSs 
at baseline assessment and 32 (14%) of these 228 individuals met NINCDS-ADRDA 
criteria for probable or possible Alzheimer's disease on follow-up. While none 
of these individuals developed Parkinson's disease, those with more than one EPS 
at baseline were significantly more likely to become demented during follow-up 
than were those with one or no EPS, an association not confounded by age, 
education, or gender. Individuals with more than one EPS and with cognitive 
impairment (CI) at baseline were at highest risk for dementia. EPSs were also 
independently associated with incident dementia in the absence of CI at 
baseline. We conclude that mild EPSs are a significant predictor of dementia in 
elderly individuals.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.43.11.2184
PMID: 8232926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Nihon Rinsho. 1993 Nov;51(11):2935-9.

[Genetics in movement disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Sakoda S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Osaka University Medical School.

Genetic considerations in movement disorders are described. 1) Familial 
parkinsonisms are heterogeneous; genes for two of them, 'Lubag' and Waisman 
syndrome have been mapped to X chromosome, though genes for others do not have 
been mapped. 2) The responsible gene for Huntington's disease has been cloned 
recently and named huntingtin. A (CAG)n repeat longer than the normal range was 
observed in huntingtin gene. The (CAG)n repeat appears to be located within the 
coding sequence of a predicted approximately 348 kD protein that is widely 
expressed but unrelated to any known gene. The expansion of an unstable 
trinucleotide CAG repeat are also the causes of hereditary neurodegenerative 
diseases such as X-linked bular and spinal muscular atrophy and spinocerebellar 
ataxia type 1. 3) There are various forms in hereditary dystonia. Although the 
responsible gene for idiopathic torsion dystonia, inherited as an autosomal 
dominant pattern, has been mapped to 9q 32-34, genes for others do not have been 
mapped. 4) The Gilles des la Tourette syndrome (GTS) is a hereditary, 
neuropsychiatric-neurobehavioral disorder with childhood onset that is 
characterized by motor and vocal tics. About 80% of the human genome could be 
excluded as possible site for the GTS gene by studies with over 600 DNA markers 
in an international collaborative effort, but actual localization has not yet 
been accomplished.

PMID: 8277574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Neurosci Lett. 1993 Nov 12;162(1-2):179-82. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(93)90590-h.

Neuropathological staging of Alzheimer lesions and intellectual status in 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease patients.

Bancher C(1), Braak H, Fischer P, Jellinger KA.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Lainz-Hospital, Wien, 
Austria.

In both Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD), neurofibrillary 
tangles (NFT), in contrast to amyloid deposits, show a hierarchical spreading 
pattern from the allocortex to isocortical association areas with early 
involvement of the entorhinal region, a major relay station between hippocampus 
and isocortex. Based on the distribution pattern of NFT in human brain, a 
neuropathological staging of neuritic AD pathology has been proposed. 
Comparative studies of this neuropathological staging of neuritic AD changes 
with psychometrically assessed intellectual status (mini-mental state) in 
prospective cohorts of 29 aged individuals and 28 PD patients showed a linear 
correlation of morphological AD staging with the psychostatus in both disorders. 
The pattern of neuronal degeneration associated with neuritic AD pathology in 
both AD and PD may be an important basis of cognitive decline in both disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(93)90590-h
PMID: 8121624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Med Hypotheses. 1993 Dec;41(6):499-502. doi: 10.1016/0306-9877(93)90103-w.

Hypopigmentation, anomalous cerebral dominance and seasonality.

London WP(1).

Author information:
(1)Adjunct Research Associate in Psychiatry, Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, 
NH 03756.

This paper proposes a prenatal seasonal hypopigmentation influence associated 
with anomalous cerebral dominance that occurs during the winter or early spring. 
A possible mechanism would be seasonal changes in sex hormone levels that affect 
the activation and inactivation of DNA by reversible methylation. The proposed 
prenatal seasonal hypopigmentation effect might be relevant to dyslexia, 
Prader-Willi syndrome, breast cancer, Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease. 
Putative chromosomal loci associated with the proposed seasonal mechanism would 
be 15q11-13 (dyslexia and Prader-Willi syndrome), 21q region (breast cancer and 
Alzheimer's disease) and 19p region (pigmentation gene).

DOI: 10.1016/0306-9877(93)90103-w
PMID: 8183125 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Neurology. 1993 Dec;43(12 Suppl 6):S47-52.

Neuropsychological and psychiatric side effects in the treatment of Parkinson's 
disease.

Saint-Cyr JA(1), Taylor AE, Lang AE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Toronto Hospital, Ontario, Canada.

All medications currently used to treat Parkinson's disease carry some risk of 
causing confusion, hallucinations, or disruption of such higher-order mental 
operations as problem-solving and learning. Although the elderly demented 
patient is at greatest risk, such complications have also been noted during 
treatment of younger patients. Treatment with anticholinergics may lead to a 
confusional state and decreased memory function in some patients, especially the 
elderly and those with preexisting dementia. Monoamine oxidase inhibition is 
considered quite benign when used alone, but may potentiate certain side effects 
when used in combination with other compounds. Ergot alkaloid medication, which 
is usually combined with levodopa, often induces severe psychiatric 
complications. Typical findings with levodopa treatment indicate little or no 
positive impact on cognition, apart from nonspecific arousal and alleviation of 
concomitant depressive affect. Guidelines for the management of 
neuropsychological and psychiatric side effects are suggested.

PMID: 8264912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Genet Epidemiol. 1994;11(6):539-51. doi: 10.1002/gepi.1370110609.

Interaction between genetic and environmental risk factors for Alzheimer's 
disease: a reanalysis of case-control studies.

Van Duijn CM(1), Clayton DG, Chandra V, Fratiglioni L, Graves AB, Heyman A, Jorm 
AF, Kokmen E, Kondo K, Mortimer JA, Rocca WA, Shalat SL, Soininen H, Hofman A; 
EURODEM Risk Factors Research Group, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus University Medical 
School, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

To study the interaction among genetic and environmental risk factors, a 
reanalysis of case-control studies of Alzheimer's disease (AD) was conducted 
based on the original data of all studies carried out to January 1, 1990. Seven 
studies were included in the present analysis, comprising a total of 814 AD 
patients and 894 control subjects. When comparing those with a positive and 
negative family history of dementia, similar odds ratio were found for late 
maternal age [1.7; 95% confidence interval (0.6-4.8) vs. 2.0 (1.1-3.5)], head 
trauma [1.7 (0.7-4.2) vs. 1.9 (1.1-3.2)], and history of depression [2.0 
(0.2-19.8) vs. 2.1 (0.8-1.7)]. This suggests a model in which these risk factors 
increase the risk for AD independent of family history of dementia. Among those 
with a positive family history of dementia, the odds ratios for family history 
of Down's syndrome [4.2 (0.9-20.0)] and of Parkinson's disease [3.3 (0.4-28.2)] 
tended to be higher than among those with a negative family history of dementia 
[2.6 (0.8-8.5) and 2.4 (0.8-7.0), respectively]. However, for both disorders the 
difference in odds ratio was not statistically significant. For history of 
cigarette smoking, there was no association to AD for those with no first degree 
relatives with dementia and an inverse relation with AD for those with a 
positive family history. Although in all analyses, family history of dementia 
remained significantly associated with AD in the absence of other factors, the 
odds ratio associated with family history of dementia tended to be lower for 
those with a positive smoking history, particularly for those with two or more 
affected relatives. These findings suggest that smoking may interact 
specifically with a genetically determined process.

DOI: 10.1002/gepi.1370110609
PMID: 7713394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Acta Neuropathol. 1994;88(3):212-21. doi: 10.1007/BF00293396.

Hippocampal sclerosis: a common pathological feature of dementia in very old (> 
or = 80 years of age) humans.

Dickson DW(1), Davies P, Bevona C, Van Hoeven KH, Factor SM, Grober E, Aronson 
MK, Crystal HA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461.

In a neuropathological study of 81 brains of prospectively studied subjects of 
80 years of age or older at the time of death, 13 cases (16%), including 4 men 
and 9 women, had hippocampal sclerosis (HpScl) affecting the vulnerable region 
of the hippocampus. In demented subjects of 80 years of age or older, the 
frequency of HpScl was even higher, 26%. Cases with HpScl had significantly 
fewer hippocampal senile plaques (SP) and neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) and 
parahippocampal NFT than cases without HpScl, but did not differ significantly 
in any of the other measured pathological parameters. Enzyme-linked analysis of 
synaptic protein immunoreactivity in a subset of 33 cases demonstrated 
significant decreases in the hippocampus, but not in frontal, temporal, parietal 
or parahippocampal cortices. All but 1 of the cases with HpScl had Blessed 
information, memory and concentration scores (BIMC) of 8 or more, and all were 
considered to be demented. In some patients memory disturbance was 
disproportionate to deficits in other cognitive areas. All but 4 of the cases 
with HpScl had many non-neuritic, amyloid plaques in the neocortex meeting NIA 
criteria for Alzheimer's disease (AD); however, given the advanced age of the 
subjects, amyloid plaques were considered to represent age-related cerebral 
amyloid deposition ("pathological aging") in most cases. Only 3 cases had both 
many SP and NFT in multiple cortical regions consistent with AD. Another case 
had brain stem and cortical Lewy bodies consistent with diffuse Lewy body 
disease (DLBD). A few ballooned neurons were present in the limbic cortices in 3 
cases, including one case of dementia with argyrophilic grains (DAG) in limbic 
and orbital frontal and temporal cortices. The 8 cases without AD, DLBD or DAG 
included 4 cases in which no other obvious cause of dementia was detected and 4 
cases in which HpScl was accompanied by either multiple cerebral infarcts or 
leukoencephalopathy, or both, that could have contributed to dementia. Patients 
with HpScl had risk factors, clinical signs and post-mortem pathological 
findings of cardiovascular disease, but due to the high prevalence of these 
conditions in very old humans, no significant correlation with HpScl was 
detected. This study demonstrates that HpScl is a common post-mortem finding in 
demented, but not normal, elderly subjects. It may contribute to. or be a marker 
for, the increased risk of dementia in subjects with documented cardiovascular 
disease or a history of myocardial infarction.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00293396
PMID: 7810292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Biomed Pharmacother. 1994;48(7):287-95. doi: 10.1016/0753-3322(94)90174-0.

Pathological Tau proteins of Alzheimer's disease as a biochemical marker of 
neurofibrillary degeneration.

Delacourte A(1).

Author information:
(1)Unité INSERM 156, Lille, France.

Paired Helical Filaments (PHF) accumulate in the degenerating neurons from the 
associative cortical brain areas during Alzheimer's disease. They are composed 
of a triplet of hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated protein Tau, called 
Tau 55, 64, 69 or PHF-Tau. The distribution of PHF-Tau in the different brain 
areas corroborates neuropathological observations and specifies that: the 
entorhinal cortex and hippocampus are vulnerable regions specifically affected 
by Alzheimer-type neurofibrillary degeneration during aging, the temporal cortex 
is already affected at the very first stage of clinical manifestations, almost 
the whole brain is concerned by neurofibrillary degeneration at the end-stages 
of the disease. Tau-PHF are also observed in the cortical areas from Parkinson 
patients with dementia, and more especially in the prefrontal cortex. Tau 
pathology for Progressive Supranuclear Palsy is significantly different, with a 
doublet of pathological Tau, namely Tau 64 and 69, in almost all cortical and 
subcortical areas. Therefore, the presence of pathological Tau proteins in 
several associative cortical areas is always associated with severe intellectual 
impairment. Finally, PHF-Tau are powerful biochemical markers of the 
degenerating process which could be used for setting up an early biological 
diagnosis test of Alzheimer's disease based upon the immunodetection of PHF 
antigens in the CSF, as well as for developing experimental models of 
neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/0753-3322(94)90174-0
PMID: 7858159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1994 Winter;8(4):250-8. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199408040-00004.

Prolonged latencies of pattern reversal visual evoked early potentials in 
Alzheimer disease.

Partanen J(1), Hartikainen P, Könönen M, Jousmäki V, Soininen H, Riekkinen P Sr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Hospital of Kuopio, 
Finland.

We studied patients with Alzheimer disease, Parkinson disease, and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) with a pattern reversal (checkerboard light diode) 
visual evoked potential (VEP) paradigm to observe the involvement of the visual 
system in these primary neurodegenerative diseases. All patients were in the 
mild or moderate stage of the disease. In Alzheimer disease there was a 
significant increase of the latency of the P55, N65, P100, and N130 components, 
as well as an increase of the P55-P100 interpeak latency, compared with matched 
normals. These alterations indicate dysfunction of both the retinocalcarine 
pathway and the cortex. Patients with Parkinson disease revealed a significant 
delay of the N130 component only. Patients with ALS had normal latency values of 
all VEP components. The P100-N130 amplitude was diminished in all these disease 
groups compared with age-matched controls.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199408040-00004
PMID: 7888155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1994;42:15-31. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6641-3_2.

Clinical diagnosis and diagnostic criteria of progressive supranuclear palsy 
(Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome).

Tolosa E(1), Valldeoriola F, Marti MJ.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Department, Hospital Clinic, Faculty of Medicine, University of 
Barcelona, Spain.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is characterized clinically by supranuclear 
gaze palsy, neck dystonia, parkinsonism, pseudobulbar palsy, gait imbalance with 
frequent falls and frontal lobe-type dementia. In the advanced typical case, 
when supranuclear gaze palsy and other main features are present diagnosis is 
relatively easy. Diagnostic problems, though, are frequent in the early stages 
due to the variable clinical presentation and in those atypical cases in which 
gaze palsy does not develop or that present as a severe dementia disorder or as 
an isolated akinetic-rigid syndrome. In this review we summarize the clinical 
features of PSP and emphasize those aspects helpful in the differential 
diagnosis with Parkinson's disease and other motor and cognitive disorders that 
can pose difficult diagnostic problems. Clinical diagnostic criteria are also 
discussed and modifications of those currently in used are proposed.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-6641-3_2
PMID: 7964684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1994;42:3-14.

Progressive supranuclear palsy. Historical notes.

Steele JC.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is the name Dr. J. Clifford Richardson 
chose to designate an unusual clinical syndrome he first identified in the 
1950s. Neurofibrillary degeneration is the hallmark of this fatal brain disease, 
and during our study of Richardson's patients, Professor Jerzy Olszewski and I 
also observed granulovacuolar degeneration, and widespread nerve cell loss and 
gliosis in subcortical and brain stem nuclei. The histopathological features 
bear a striking resemblance to those seen in postencephalitic parkinsonism after 
von Economo's epidemic encephalitis, and in the parkinsonism-dementia complex of 
Guam (PDC). During the past 30 years, neurologists confirm that progressive 
supranuclear palsy is a universal, sporadic and not uncommon neurodegeneration 
of middle and late life. Many fine studies, as reported here, have advanced our 
understanding of PSP but its cause, and thereby its cure, is still to be 
revealed. These historical notes tell of our observations from 1955 to 1975. We 
are pleased that colleagues remember these early descriptions and honor us by 
calling this disease, the Steele-Richardson-Olszewski (SRO) syndrome.

PMID: 7964694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Life Sci. 1994;55(25-26):1975-6. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(94)00376-9.

Brain aging: a risk factor of neurodegenerative disorders and a target for 
therapeutic intervention.

Müller WE(1), Pedigo NW Jr.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychopharmacology, Central Institute of Mental Health, 
Mannheim, Germany.

DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(94)00376-9
PMID: 7997055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Life Sci. 1994;55(25-26):2097-103. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(94)00390-4.

Role of protein oxidation in aging and in age-associated neurodegenerative 
diseases.

Carney JM(1), Carney AM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky Medical School, Lexington 
40536.

Aging and age-associated neurodegenerative diseases have been proposed to be the 
result of changes in a in anti-oxidant status and in the production of reactive 
oxygen species. Studies in humans have demonstrated a significant increase in 
oxidized protein from brains of neurological normals and from individuals with 
different neurological diseases (Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and Huntington's 
Disease). Preclinical models of these conditions and of cerebral ischemia 
demonstrate the primary role of protein oxidation in the initial steps of these 
neurodegenerative diseases. Aging is a risk factor in the development of these 
diseases and is also associated with a decrease in the anti-oxidant defense 
systems of the brain. It is proposed that free radicals play a primary role in 
the initiation of those biochemical events that ultimately lead to the death of 
the neuron.

DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(94)00390-4
PMID: 7997068 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Int J Psychiatry Med. 1994;24(1):1-29. doi: 10.2190/5HXY-ACM5-Q6PK-04H5.

ECT in the treatment of patients with neurological and somatic disease.

Zwil AS(1), Pelchat RJ.

Author information:
(1)Jefferson Medical College, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

OBJECTIVE: An evaluation of the safety and efficacy of electroconvulsive therapy 
(ECT), for the treatment of patients with severe medical and neurological 
illness, was undertaken.
METHOD: The English-language literature reporting the use of ECT in patients 
with neurological and somatic disease was reviewed. This review included reports 
describing ECT used for the treatment of affective disturbances and catatonia in 
patients with concurrent neurological or somatic disease, as well as reports 
dealing with the efficacy of ECT for the treatment of certain neurological 
conditions for which it has been reported to have some benefit independent of 
its psychiatric effect.
CONCLUSIONS: ECT is safe and effective for the treatment of affective and 
catatonic disorders in patients with most neurological and medical diseases, 
including elderly and debilitated patients with multiple illnesses, if the 
specific medical risks are carefully evaluated in each case, and appropriate 
modifications of technique are used to reduce the risk of potential 
complications. Apart from its use in psychiatry, ECT has been reported to have 
therapeutic effects in Parkinson's disease, neuroleptic malignant syndrome, 
aggressive behavioral disorders following brain injury, certain forms of 
epilepsy, and some forms of delirium due to toxic or metabolic encephalopathies. 
The potential for ECT to play an active role in the clinical management of 
patients with these disorders, many of whom are presently refractory to maximal 
medical treatment, should be evaluated by systematic studies.

DOI: 10.2190/5HXY-ACM5-Q6PK-04H5
PMID: 8077081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 1994;96(5):357-74.

[Disorganized eye movements and visuospatial dysfunctions in an early stage of 
the patients with Alzheimer's disease--the effects of language and visual 
information processing on constructional performances].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujii M(1), Fukatsu R, Takahata N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, School of Medicine, Sapporo Medical 
University.

In Alzheimer's disease higher brain function disorders such as geographical 
disorientation, visual agnosia and constructional disability are frequently 
observed in addition to the progressive memory loss. Visual information 
processing was studied through newly developed technology, vision analyzer, 
since visuospatial functions play an important role in the pathophysiology 
underlying these neuropsychiatric symptoms and dementia itself. We found 
characteristic findings as to eye movements of focus indicating visual cognitive 
disorders. Language or language functions, however, are considered to be 
essentially involved in visuospatial functions. We examined eye movements of 
patients suffering from Alzheimer's disease (15 cases), MID (5 cases), 
Parkinson's disease (5 cases) and 10 control subjects during constructional 
behavior under various conditions in terms of visual information processing. 1. 
Alzheimer's disease (n = 15): All patients showed constructional disabilities 
when copying geometrical figures. 1) Three dimensional drawing was possible 
following verbal instructions in 7 out of 15 patients. 2) Three dimensional 
drawing was successful when the model figure to be copied was covered in 4 out 
of these 7 patients. 3) Three dimensional drawing was possible following verbal 
instruction in a dark room, although they were not so accurate but better than 
those when copied in 4 out of 7 patients. 4) The analysis of eye movements 
revealed that typical eye movements were confirmed during copying geometric 
figures. The distribution of the gazing points of focus, and the average eye 
movement velocity distribution were also distinctive. But these disorganized eye 
movements in description of graphic figures following verbal instruction became 
more similar to those of healthy controls when compared to those in the copying 
graphic figures. 2. MID (n = 5), Parkinson disease (n = 5), healthy controls (n 
= 10): 1) No subject showed constructional disability when copying a graphic 
figure. They were also capable to describe a graphic figure both in the dark and 
following verbal instruction. 2) No remarkable change was observed in the 
distribution of the eye movement, or in the average eye movement velocity on 
these subjects. 3. These results indicate that in an early stage of the patients 
with Alzheimer's disease, primary or fundamental disorders seem to lay in the 
verification process of visual information, which results in the difficulties in 
categorization process of the visual objects. The categorization process is 
involved with language function, which was preserved in a certain period at an 
early stage of the disease.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 8078957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Neuroepidemiology. 1994;13(1-2):50-8. doi: 10.1159/000110358.

Prevalence of cognitive impairment and associated factors among elderly Hong 
Kong Chinese aged 70 years and over.

Woo J(1), Ho SC, Lau S, Lau J, Yuen YK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Chinese University of Hong Kong.

The prevalence of cognitive impairment was determined in a random age- and 
sex-stratified sample of 2,011 elderly Hong Kong Chinese, aged 70 years and 
over, consisting of subjects living in the community and in institutions. The 
Information/Orientation Section of the Clifton Assessment Procedure was used as 
the screening instrument using a cutoff point of 7. The overall age-adjusted 
prevalence was 5% for men and 22% for women, and 15% for both sexes combined. 
Univariate analysis identified the following associated factors in order of 
magnitude of the odds ratio: age; history of Parkinson's disease; functional 
disability; female sex; low educational level; low social class; history of 
stroke, and low monthly income. Other diseases, such as heart disease, 
hypertension, chronic lung diseases or diabetes, were not associated factors. In 
multivariate analysis, all the above factors remained significant with the 
exception of a history of stroke. The prevalence figures are comparable to other 
Caucasian and Chinese studies, and the associated factors identified suggest 
that there may be room for prevention.

DOI: 10.1159/000110358
PMID: 8190206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Neuroepidemiology. 1994;13(1-2):69-74. doi: 10.1159/000110361.

Parkinson's disease in Kin-Hu, Kinmen: a community survey by neurologists.

Wang SJ(1), Fuh JL, Liu CY, Lin KP, Chang R, Yih JS, Chou P, Lin KN, Teng EL, 
Larson EB, et al.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Institute, Veterans General Hospital-Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of 
China.

A door-to-door survey by neurologists in Kin-Hu township, Republic of China, of 
a sample of the Chinese population of 683 persons aged 50 years and over was 
performed in August, 1992. A total of 482 subjects (70.6%) completed the study. 
Kin-Hu, a township of Kinmen, is predominantly rural with agriculture as the 
main occupation. Six subjects (5 men, 1 woman) were diagnosed with Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Of these six, five were newly diagnosed; one of the five also had 
dementia. The crude prevalence rate per 1,000 persons over 50 years of age of PD 
in Kin-Hu was 6.2. The age-specific prevalence rates per 1,000 persons (95% 
confidence intervals) were 0 for age 50-59, 7.8 (0-22.9) for age 60-69, 17.5 
(5.2-29.8) for age 70-79, and 25.4 (10.9-39.9) for age > or = 80. These rates 
are considerably higher than those reported in the People's Republic of China, 
and similar to rates found in Western countries. The higher prevalence of PD 
found in this pilot study suggests that environmental factors may be more 
important than racial factors in the pathogenesis of PD. If confirmed, the 
results suggest that epidemiologic studies looking for environmental risk 
factors might be of value.

DOI: 10.1159/000110361
PMID: 8190209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Stroke Cerebrovasc Dis. 1994;4(2):75-80. doi: 10.1016/S1052-3057(10)80113-2. 
Epub 2010 Jun 9.

Parkinson's disease, ischemic stroke, dementia, and cranial computed tomography: 
Preliminary study.

Levine RL(1), Jones JC(2), Bee N(3).

Author information:
(1)From the Neurology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of Wisconsin 
Medical School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.; The Research, Veterans Affairs Medical 
Center, University of Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.; The GRECC 
Services, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of Wisconsin Medical 
School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.; The Department of Neurology, University of 
Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
(2)From the Neurology, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of Wisconsin 
Medical School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.; The Department of Neurology, University of 
Wisconsin Medical School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.
(3)The Research, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of Wisconsin 
Medical School, Madison, WI, U.S.A.

We sought to determine whether clinical features, stroke profiles, and cranial 
computed tomography (CCT) findings differed in nondemented and demented 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. Data were collected from our previously 
published case-control review of 119 idiopathic PD patients discharged from our 
Veterans Affairs Medical Center Neurology Service from 1982 through 1990. 
Historical, physical, age, age at onset of PD, duration of PD, motor severity, 
frequency of ischemic stroke and stroke risk factors, modified Hachinski 
Ischemic Score (MHIS), and CCT findings were recorded. We previously estimated 
that the number ofpatients with PD and dementia was 31 of 119 (26%) from our 
case-control review of idiopathic PD patients. Eighty-two male PD patients, 31 
demented and 51 nondemented, had CCT data available for review. Demented PD 
patients were older (p < 0.01), had fewer normal CT scans (p = 0.0004), and more 
cerebral atrophy and leuko-araiosis (p = 0.0003) than nondemented PD patients. 
Clinical atherosclerosis did not significantly distinguish the groups, but 9 of 
31 (29%) demented PD patients had a modified HIS ≥ 5 and thus suggestive of, at 
least, multi-infarct dementia. Demented PD patients were older overall at PD 
onset, but did not appear to have significantly longer PD duration or more motor 
severity. Demented PD patients were also apt to have had a much more current CCT 
(p < 0.01) than nondemented patients. Although clinical atherosclerosis did not 
clearly separate groups, more than one-quarter of demented PD patients seem to 
have components of vascular dementia.

Copyright © 1994 National Stroke Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1052-3057(10)80113-2
PMID: 26487606


242. Acta Neurol Scand. 1994 Mar;89(3):175-83. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1994.tb01657.x.

Adult Chédiak-Higashi syndrome presenting as parkinsonism and dementia.

Uyama E(1), Hirano T, Ito K, Nakashima H, Sugimoto M, Naito M, Uchino M, Ando M.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Kumamoto University School of 
Medicine, Japan.

Chédiak-Higashi syndrome (CHS) in children can be a fatal disease. We describe 
the oldest known CHS patient first seen with a neurologic disorder in early 
adult life. From the age of 22, this 39-year-old woman developed mental 
deterioration, parkinsonism including resting tremor at the tongue, mandible, 
and hands, oculogyric crisis, muscular atrophy of limbs, and loss of tendon 
reflexes. MRI showed marked temporal dominant brain atrophy and diffuse spinal 
cord atrophy. Partial albinism, pan-leukocytic giant granules, and profoundly 
decreased NK-cell activity were compatible with childhood CHS, but apparently 
normal neutrophil function prolonged her survival. Stimulated proliferation of 
lymphocytes was less than 40% that of normal controls.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1994.tb01657.x
PMID: 8030398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nurs Clin North Am. 1994 Mar;29(1):101-11.

Frequency, distribution, and risk factors for Alzheimer's disease.

Rocca WA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota.

Both prevalence and incidence of AD increase steeply with advancing age in all 
populations investigated thus far. In general, women have higher prevalence and 
incidence; however, there are exceptions to this pattern. When considering only 
methodologically comparable surveys, and taking age into account, there are no 
major geographic differences in either prevalence or incidence. Data on 
incidence are unfortunately limited worldwide. There are no major time trends in 
either prevalence or incidence. The only definite risk factors for AD are age 
and familial aggregation. Putative risk factors are familial aggregation of 
Down's syndrome, familial aggregation of Parkinson's disease, late maternal age, 
head trauma, history of depression, and history of hypothyroidism. Cigarette 
smoking was found to be less common in the history of patients with AD than in 
that of controls. This association is probably spurious, however. Unfortunately, 
current knowledge about risk factors for AD does not justify the conduct of 
preventive trials or the introduction of large-scale interventions.

PMID: 8121814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Clin Geriatr Med. 1994 May;10(2):257-76.

Differential diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease.

Morris JC(1).

Author information:
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri.

AD is by far the leading cause of dementia, accounting for about 75% of cases. 
Vascular dementia and Parkinson's disease, with or without concomitant AD, are 
responsible for much of the remainder of pathologically confirmed causes of 
dementia. The differential diagnosis of AD remains clinically based; even in the 
absence of a biologic marker for the disease, diagnostic accuracy can be high. 
Informant interviews can be helpful in detecting early dementia and in 
distinguishing the various stages and features of AD. Characterization of 
phenotypic variants of AD and refinement of diagnostic criteria for the non-AD 
dementias is needed to clarify the inter-relationships of these conditions and 
facilitate molecular genetic and other basic investigations of the 
etiopathogenesis of AD.

PMID: 8039098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Am J Pathol. 1994 May;144(5):1082-8.

Development of a monoclonal antibody specific for the COOH-terminal of 
beta-amyloid 1-42 and its immunohistochemical reactivity in Alzheimer's disease 
and related disorders.

Murphy GM Jr(1), Forno LS, Higgins L, Scardina JM, Eng LF, Cordell B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, California.

The beta-amyloid peptide (beta AP) has been characterized by protein sequencing 
techniques as a 39-43 amino acid protein with heterogeneous COOH-termini. 
Controversy exists regarding the predominant form of beta AP in neuritic plaques 
(NP) and cerebral vasculature of Alzheimer's disease (AD) brain. A monoclonal 
antibody was developed that selectively recognizes the free COOH-terminal of 
beta AP 1-42 but not beta AP species with shorter or longer COOH-termini. Brain 
sections from AD and related disorders were examined using this antibody. In AD 
samples, the antibody stained diffuse amyloid and NP cores, many intraneuronal 
and extraneuronal neurofibrillary tangles (NFT), but not cerebrovascular 
amyloid. Pick and Lewy bodies lacked immunoreactivity. These findings suggest 
that beta AP 1-42 is present in early and mature amyloid deposits and NFT, but 
that species of beta AP other than 1-42 comprise human vascular deposits.

PMCID: PMC1887348
PMID: 8178931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Neurology. 1994 May;44(5):872-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.5.872.

An evaluation of the predictive validity and inter-rater reliability of clinical 
diagnostic criteria for senile dementia of Lewy body type.

McKeith IG(1), Fairbairn AF, Bothwell RA, Moore PB, Ferrier IN, Thompson P, 
Perry RH.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Brighton Clinic, Newcastle Mental Health 
(NHS) Trust, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Several recent autopsy studies suggest that senile dementia of Lewy body type 
(SDLT) may be the second most common neuropathologic cause of dementia in the 
elderly, accounting for 7 to 30% of all cases. Operational criteria for the 
antemortem clinical diagnosis of SDLT have already been proposed by our group. 
The performance of these is now examined by randomizing the case notes from a 
new series of SDLT, Alzheimer, and multi-infarct dementia patients for 
psychiatric assessment by four raters of varying clinical experience and blind 
to pathologic diagnosis. Using the SDLT criteria, the two most experienced 
raters agreed in 94% of cases (kappa = 0.87), with the least experienced rater 
agreeing in 78% (kappa = 0.50). Diagnostic specificity for SDLT was uniformly 
high (90.0 to 97.0%), with a mean sensitivity of detection of 74%, and was 
greater by the experienced (90.0%) than the least experienced (55%) clinician. 
The antemortem identification of SDLT patients can therefore be achieved with a 
high degree of diagnostic specificity using such operationalized criteria, 
although there remains a minority of patients who present with either "typical" 
Alzheimer-type symptoms or with paranoid or delusional symptoms in the absence 
of substantial cognitive impairment. Sensitivity to neuroleptics may be a useful 
diagnostic pointer in these patients.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.44.5.872
PMID: 8190290 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1994 Jun;34(6):531-7.

[Cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism in patients with pure akinesia and 
progressive supranuclear palsy].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo S(1), Tanaka M, Sun X, Okamoto K, Hirai S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Gunma University School of Medicine.

We studied cerebral blood flow and oxygen metabolism in 6 patients with pure 
akinesia (PA), 8 patients with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 16 patients 
with Parkinson's disease (PD), and 10 normal control subjects using positron 
emission tomography (PET). Regions of interest were studied in the cerebral 
cortex (the frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital lobe), thalamus, 
cerebellar hemispheres, cerebellar vermis, and brainstem. In patients with PA, 
regional cerebral blood flow (CBF) was significantly decreased in the frontal 
cortex, thalamus, and brainstem compared with normal control subjects. PSP 
patients showed significantly decreased CBF in the entire cerebral cortex, 
thalamus, cerebellar hemispheres, and brainstem and regional cerebral oxygen 
metabolic rate (CMRO2) in the frontal cortex, thalamus, and brainstem, whereas 
patients with PD were revealed to be normal in both CBF and CMRO2 values. In 
conclusion, a part of patients with PA may be in the early stage of PSP or may 
be atypical presentations of PSP whose symptom is only akinesia judging from the 
followings. 1) PET findings demonstrated a close similarity between PA and PSP; 
a pattern of CBF and CMRO2 decrement especially in the frontal cortex, thalamus 
and brainstem. 2) Patients with PA were shown to have similar pathological 
changes to PSP in recent studies. 3) Several authors reported that some PSP 
cases could show only akinesia initially, later developing dementia, 
supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, pseundobulbar palsy, and nuchal rigidity during 
their illnesses.

PMID: 7955710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1994 Jun;17(3):243-59. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-199406000-00004.

Clinical usefulness of apomorphine in movement disorders.

Colosimo C(1), Merello M, Albanese A.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Neurologia, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Roma, Italy.

Apomorphine, the first dopamine agonist to be synthesized, has received a 
renewed interest in the last few years. This compound acts powerfully on D1 and 
D2 dopamine receptors and has the most complete pharmacological profile of all 
clinically available dopamine agonists. When given subcutaneously, apomorphine 
consistently reverses levodopa-resistant "off" periods in parkinsonian subjects: 
thus, it is used in cases with severe motor fluctuations, either by continuous 
infusion with a portable pump or by multiple injections. Studies based on this 
approach have been highly encouraging, as they have shown a significant 
reduction in off time and a good drug tolerability. The main side effect has 
been the occurrence of nodular skin lesions, especially when continuous 
infusions were used. At variance with other dopamine agonists, a low incidence 
of psychiatric morbidity has been reported with apomorphine. The few available 
comparative reports have shown that this compound is more potent and better 
tolerated than lisuride. Parenteral apomorphine has been used in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) to replace levodopa after surgery or to treat the malignant 
syndrome brought about by sudden levodopa withdrawal. Acute challenge with 
apomorphine has been used to test dopaminergic responsiveness in parkinsonian 
syndromes and in dystonia. The clinical response to apomorphine may predict the 
effect of a chronic therapy with levodopa in approximately 90% of PD cases. 
Further studies are still necessary to evaluate the exact relationship between 
the acute response to apomorphine and a chronic therapy. In addition, 
apomorphine has been used to conduct clinical pharmacological studies in PD, for 
it is particularly well suited for research on the pharmacodynamics of central 
dopamine receptors. In summary, apomorphine appears to be an efficacious and 
safe drug for the treatment of advanced PD. It must still be considered under 
clinical evaluation as a test drug for acute challenge in PD and dystonia. 
Finally, in our opinion, the available data suggest apomorphine (in conjunction 
with domperidone) as a first-choice treatment for the neuroleptic malignant 
syndrome and the temporary replacement of levodopa (e.g., after gastrointestinal 
surgery).

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-199406000-00004
PMID: 9316670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Z Gerontol. 1994 Jul-Aug;27(4):260-9.

[Medical management and social status of elderly Parkinson patients].

[Article in German]

Vieregge P(1), Körtke D, Meyer-Bornsen C.

Author information:
(1)Klinik für Neurologie, Medizinischen Universität zu Lbueck.

Seventy-four in- and out-patients (mean age 71.9 years) with Parkinsonian 
syndromes (summarized as "PS": idiopathic Parkinson's disease, vascular pseudo 
Parkinsonian syndrome (VPS), and Parkinson-dementia (PDK)) were prospectively 
evaluated as to present clinical state according to usual rating scales, as to 
clinical syndrome and physician's diagnosis and treatment at the start of the 
illness, and as to current medical and social care. 54% of the patients had 
history and findings of tremor, 14% had visual hallucinations, 19% had 
depression. Ratings on part II of the "Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale" 
(UPDRS) describing "activities of daily living" correlated highly with the 
ratings of part III ("motor evaluation") and with another activity of daily 
living scale according to Schwab and England. The mean difference between time 
of diagnosis and start symptoms (the "diagnostic delay") was nearly 21 months. 
Initial symptoms did not show an impact on this difference. 68% of patients were 
presently treated by general physicians and were significantly older than those 
treated by neurologists. 59% were in-patients during the study and were more 
likely to carry a diagnosis of VPS or PDK. 75% of those patients who were ever 
in-patients during their illness had the disease for up to six years before they 
were first hospitalized. 77% of the patients had drug treatment; 88% of these 
took L-Dopa preparations. 23% of patients with drug treatment had 
L-Dopa-associated motor complications. 15% of patients lived alone, 66% with 
their family, and 19% in a nursing home. 24% of patients had assistance in their 
household by a professional caretaker. 16% of patients retired early from work. 
The long-term care of older Parkinsonian patients is a task for general medicine 
based on neurogeriatric expertise.

PMID: 7975817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Clin Investig. 1994 Jul;72(7):489-93. doi: 10.1007/BF00207475.

Secretion of growth hormone and thyroid-stimulating hormone in patients with 
dementia.

Gómez JM(1), Aguilar M, Navarro MA, Ortolá J, Soler J.

Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Laboratory Service, Ciudad Sanitaria y Universitaria de 
Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain.

We studied the growth hormone (GH) response to GH-releasing hormone (GHRH) and 
the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) response to thyrotropin-releasing hormone 
(TRH) in four groups of patients with dementia and examined whether GH and TSH 
secretion is altered in patients with Alzheimer's disease. The four groups 
included those with Alzheimer's disease (n = 28), parkinsonism with dementia (n 
= 10), progressive supranuclear palsy with dementia (n = 10), and dementia of 
vascular origin (n = 28). The results showed no differences among the four 
groups in GH response to GHRH (12.2 +/- 2, 10.7 +/- 2, 8.9 +/- 1.1, and 9.9 +/- 
1.9 micrograms/ml, respectively); there was no correlation between GH response 
to GHRH and sex, stage of the disease, or cerebral atrophy. The proportion of 
patients with exaggerated, normal, or lower GH response was similar in the four 
groups in terms of TSH response to TRH (9.2 +/- 0.9, 11.1 +/- 1, 11.1 +/- 1, and 
10.3 +/- 1 mU/ml, respectively), nor was there a correlation between TSH 
response to TRH and sex, stage of the disease, cerebral atrophy, or GH response 
to GHRH. The proportion of those with exaggerated, normal, or lower TSH response 
was similar in the four groups. Cerebrospinal somatostatin levels were similar 
in Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia patients. These findings indicate 
that neither GH response to GHRH nor TSH response to TRH provides a useful 
diagnostic adjunct in Alzheimer's disease patients.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00207475
PMID: 7981574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Arch Neurol. 1994 Jul;51(7):676-81. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1994.00540190056015.

Extrapyramidal signs and psychiatric symptoms predict faster cognitive decline 
in Alzheimer's disease.

Chui HC(1), Lyness SA, Sobel E, Schneider LS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Southern California School of 
Medicine, Los Angeles.

OBJECTIVE: To identify clinical predictors of cognitive decline in Alzheimer's 
disease.
DESIGN: A cohort of patients was followed up longitudinally and the likelihood 
of arriving at two cognitive end points was assessed using the Cox proportional 
hazards model and eight explanatory variables.
SETTING: Subjects were chosen from patients examined for memory loss at two 
medical centers affiliated with the University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles.
PATIENTS: The sample included 135 patients who met National Institute for 
Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke-Alzheimer's Disease and 
Related Disorders Association criteria for probable or definite Alzheimer's 
disease, had initial Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) scores of 14 or 
greater, and had been seen on at least two occasions.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The time to reach either of two end points, ie, MMSE 
score of 8 and a decline of six points on the MMSE, was assessed.
RESULTS: After controlling for initial severity of dementia (eg, by dividing the 
sample into mild and moderate dementia subgroups or by using the individually 
defined end point of a six-point decline on the MMSE), the presence at baseline 
of extrapyramidal signs (risk-hazard ratio, 10.34; 95% confidence interval, 2.76 
to 38.68; P = .0005), agitation (risk-hazard ratio, 2.98; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.35 to 6.61; P = .007), and hallucinations (risk-hazard ratio, 3.85; 
95% confidence interval, 1.35 to 11; P = .01) predicted a shorter time to reach 
an end point.
CONCLUSIONS: After controlling for initial severity of dementia, the presence of 
extrapyramidal signs and behavioral symptoms (agitation and hallucinations) 
significantly predict faster cognitive decline. These findings may reflect the 
effects of neuroleptic medication, the presence of underlying diffuse Lewy body 
disease, or alterations in biogenic amine systems.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1994.00540190056015
PMID: 8018040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Neurology. 1994 Jul;44(7):1253-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.7.1253.

The Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD). Part VI. 
Family history assessment: a multicenter study of first-degree relatives of 
Alzheimer's disease probands and nondemented spouse controls.

Silverman JM(1), Raiford K, Edland S, Fillenbaum G, Morris JC, Clark CM, Kukull 
W, Heyman A.

Author information:
(1)Mt. Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY.

Although familial factors in Alzheimer's disease (AD) are well established, 
uniform family-history assessment in genetic and epidemiologic studies of AD is 
needed to reconcile the divergent estimates of the cumulative risk of this 
illness among relatives of AD probands. To answer the need, the Consortium to 
Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) has developed a 
standardized Family History Assessment of AD to identify the presence of AD, 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and Down's syndrome (DS) in family members. This paper 
describes the use of this new assessment instrument in 118 patients with AD 
(estimated mean age at onset [+/- SD] = 64.5 +/- 7.7 years) and their 
nondemented spouses who were enrolled in 11 different CERAD sites in the U.S. 
The first-degree relatives of the probands with AD had a significantly greater 
cumulative risk (p < 0.005) of AD or primary progressive dementia (24.8%) than 
did the relatives of spouse controls (15.2%). Furthermore, the cumulative risk 
for this disorder among female relatives of probands was significantly greater 
than that among male relatives. There were no differences between the families 
of probands and controls for the numbers of affected first-degree relatives with 
PD or DS. This is the first reported multicenter family-history study of AD, and 
it supports earlier reports of familial factors in AD and indicates a higher 
risk to female relatives of AD probands. The CERAD Family History Assessment 
instrument may be useful for further multicenter and epidemiologic studies 
designed to delineate familial factors associated with AD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.44.7.1253
PMID: 8035925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Neuroimaging. 1994 Jul;4(3):146-58. doi: 10.1111/jon199443146.

Magnetic resonance imaging of neurodegenerative diseases.

Hauser RA(1), Olanow CW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of South Florida, Tampa.

Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has become an important diagnostic tool in the 
evaluation of neurodegenerative diseases. Although MRI currently does not yield 
sufficient predictive power to provide a diagnosis in most individual cases, 
important features have been identified in population studies that help support 
or exclude a clinical diagnosis under consideration. In parkinsonian patients, 
putamenal signal hypointensity is commonly observed in patients with atypical 
parkinsonism. In demented patients, hippocampal atrophy and prolonged T2 
relaxation may help identify individuals with Alzheimer's disease. Caudate and 
putamenal atrophy are seen in Huntington's disease and may serve as markers of 
disease progression.

DOI: 10.1111/jon199443146
PMID: 8061383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Neurosci Lett. 1994 Jul 18;176(1):45-6. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(94)90867-2.

Apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele frequency in patients with Lewy body dementia, 
Alzheimer's disease and age-matched controls.

St Clair D(1), Norrman J, Perry R, Yates C, Wilcock G, Brookes A.

Author information:
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh, UK.

Genotypes of apolipoprotein E (ApoE) were determined by polymerase-chain 
reaction (PCR) amplification and restriction-sizing of brain DNA from 39 cases 
of Lewy body dementia (LBD), 68 senile Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and 47 
neuropathologically validated non-demented controls. There was a 3-fold increase 
in the epsilon 4 allele frequency in both LBD and AD groups compared with 
controls. These results indicate that LBD and AD share the epsilon 4 allele of 
ApoE as a major risk factor for the development of disease and suggest a 
similarity in disease aetiology.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(94)90867-2
PMID: 7970234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Baillieres Clin Neurol. 1994 Aug;3(2):259-79.

Inherited movement disorders.

Harding AE(1).

Author information:
(1)University Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute of Neurology, London, 
UK.

A high proportion of neurological diseases characterized by movement disorders 
are caused by single genes; in others, such as Parkinson's disease, there 
appears to be a genetic component. Gene mapping studies have made substantial 
progress in unravelling the aetiology of dystonias and Huntington's disease, and 
are underway in other disorders such as essential tremor and Gilles de la 
Tourette syndrome. These advances are already applicable to clinical practice, 
particularly in Huntington's disease where identification of the disease 
mutation has led to the possibility of improved diagnosis and more widespread 
availability of predictive testing for asymptomatic family members.

PMID: 7952847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Neurology. 1994 Aug;44(8):1391-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.8.1391.

Epidemiology of vascular and Alzheimer's dementia among African Americans in 
Chicago, IL: baseline frequency and comparison of risk factors.

Gorelick PB(1), Freels S, Harris Y, Dollear T, Billingsley M, Brown N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Science, Rush Medical College, Chicago, IL.

We compared demographic, medical, and other epidemiologic factors among 113 
African-American Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients and 79 African-American 
vascular dementia (VaD) patients. The typical background profile of our AD and 
VaD patients who entered into the study was that of women who were born and 
raised on farms in the southeastern United States, currently lived in an 
apartment or home in Chicago with other family members, and were retired, 
widowed, and had some form of medical insurance. The following distinct patient 
profiles emerged: (1) African-American AD patients were generally older than 
their VaD counterparts, more likely to have a family history of AD, Parkinson's 
disease and dementia, a history of head injury with loss of consciousness and 
hip fracture, and more severe cognitive impairment and difficulty with 
instrumental activities of daily living. (2) African-American VaD patients had a 
higher frequency of cardiovascular disease risk factors and focal neurologic 
findings, more difficulty with activities of daily living, and a higher 
frequency of medication use. Differences in risk-factor profile may help explain 
differential susceptibility by dementia subtype. Since ethnic minorities will 
constitute a higher proportion of the United States population in the future, 
targeted epidemiologic research to better understand etiology and risk factors 
for the dementias of middle and later life among minorities is needed.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.44.8.1391
PMID: 8058135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Br J Psychiatry. 1994 Sep;165(3):324-32. doi: 10.1192/bjp.165.3.324.

The clinical diagnosis and misdiagnosis of senile dementia of Lewy body type 
(SDLT).

McKeith IG(1), Fairbairn AF, Perry RH, Thompson P.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Brighton Clinic, Newcastle Mental Health 
(NHS) Trust.

BACKGROUND: Current clinical classifications do not contain specific diagnostic 
categories for patients with senile dementia of the Lewy body type (SDLT), 
recently proposed as the second commonest neuropathological cause of dementia in 
the elderly. This study determines how existing clinical diagnosis systems label 
SDLT patients and suggests how such patients may be identified.
METHOD: A range of clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia were applied to 
case notes of autopsy-confirmed SDLT (n = 20), dementia of Alzheimer type (DAT; 
n = 21) and multi-infarct dementia (MID; n = 9) patients who had received 
psychogeriatric assessment. The predictive validity of each set of clinical 
criteria was calculated against the external criterion of neuropathological 
diagnosis.
RESULTS: Many SDLT patients erroneously met criteria for MID (35% with Hachinski 
scores > or = 7) or for DAT (15% by NINCDS 'probable AD', 35% by DSM-III-R DAT 
and 50% by NINCDS 'possible AD'). Up to 85% of SDLT cases could be correctly 
identified using recently published specific criteria.
CONCLUSIONS: SDLT usually has a discernible clinical syndrome and existing 
clinical classifications may need revision to diagnose correctly such patients.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.165.3.324
PMID: 7994501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Arch Neurol. 1994 Sep;51(9):888-95. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1994.00540210060013.

Clinical-neuropathological correlations in Alzheimer's disease and related 
dementias.

Galasko D(1), Hansen LA, Katzman R, Wiederholt W, Masliah E, Terry R, Hill LR, 
Lessin P, Thal LJ.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of California-San Diego.

OBJECTIVE: To compare neurologists' initial clinical diagnoses made according to 
National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and 
Stroke-Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS-ADRDA) and 
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Revised Third Edition 
guidelines with neuropathological diagnoses of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
related dementias.
DESIGN: Consecutive autopsies in a prospective cohort study.
SETTING: Community-dwelling patients with dementia referred to neurologists at 
an Alzheimer's Disease Research Center and satellite clinics (n = 151) and 
patients initially evaluated when institutionalized (n = 19).
PATIENTS: Of 204 elderly patients who had an autopsy performed, 170 had received 
a complete dementia evaluation according to NINCDS-ADRDA guidelines.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Percentage agreement between neurologists' initial 
clinical diagnoses and pathological findings.
RESULTS: Of 137 patients clinically diagnosed as having probable or possible AD, 
123 (90%) had AD neuropathological findings; this included 29 with AD 
accompanied by Lewy bodies, and 14 with AD and one or more infarcts. Cases of 
vascular and mixed dementia (AD and infarct[s]) had lower rates of agreement 
with pathological findings. Possible AD cases were more likely than probable AD 
cases to show pathological features other than AD. Clinicians predicted the 
presence or absence of AD pathological findings significantly better than 
chance. In patients with AD pathological lesions, older age of onset and male 
gender were significantly associated with shorter duration from disease onset to 
death.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinicians accurately predicted AD pathological findings or their 
absence in most cases. Attributing other degenerative dementias to AD, 
misdiagnosing patients with combined AD and Lewy bodies and misjudging the 
vascular contribution to dementia were the major areas of inaccuracy. Formal 
criteria for dementia associated with non-AD lesions, Lewy bodies, and infarcts 
need to be developed and tested.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1994.00540210060013
PMID: 8080388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


259. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1994 Oct-Dec;7(4):206-8. doi: 
10.1177/089198879400700402.

Clinical characteristics of chronic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease.

Mendez MF(1), Selwood A, Frey WH 2nd.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Paul-Ramsey Medical Center, St. Paul Minnesota 
55101.

Chronic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, presenting in later life, may be difficult to 
distinguish from other dementing illnesses. Patients with this disease may lack 
the characteristic myoclonus and electroencephalographic complexes. We report 
four patients with a slowly progressive dementia who were misdiagnosed during 
life and had a spongiform encephalopathy at autopsy. All four patients had early 
extrapyramidal rigidity, primitive reflexes, and other neurologic signs. The 
presence of these neurologic findings early in the course of a dementia suggests 
that clinicians should consider chronic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, evaluate the 
patient with electroencephalographic studies, and emphasize universal tissue 
precautions.

DOI: 10.1177/089198879400700402
PMID: 7826487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1994 Oct-Dec;7(4):251-3. doi: 
10.1177/089198879400700411.

Early detection of neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism in elderly patients with 
dementia.

Sweet RA(1), Pollock BG, Rosen J, Mulsant BH, Altieri LP, Perel JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pennsylvania.

The recently promulgated Health Care Finance Administration guidelines regarding 
the use of neuroleptic medications for nursing home residents do not offer 
criteria for the frequency or nature of the required assessments of 
neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism (NIP). NIP has been poorly characterized in the 
elderly and empirical evidence on which to base guidelines for monitoring NIP is 
sparse. We examined the onset of NIP in 12 closely monitored, elderly 
psychiatric inpatients diagnosed with dementia being treated with perphenazine. 
Significant increases in the Simpson Extrapyramidal Side Effect Scale total 
score were detected by day 4 of treatment with perphenazine at a mean dose of 
8.0 mg. This increase was highly correlated with the final NIP severity. This is 
the first report to demonstrate that routine screening of elderly patients can 
detect NIP within days of the initiation of neuroleptic treatment. Early 
detection of NIP may allow for effective intervention to reduce the ultimate 
severity and associated morbidity of NIP.

DOI: 10.1177/089198879400700411
PMID: 7826496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Neurology. 1994 Oct;44(10):1872-7. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.10.1872.

Familial aggregation of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, dementia, and Parkinson's 
disease: evidence of shared genetic susceptibility.

Majoor-Krakauer D(1), Ottman R, Johnson WG, Rowland LP.

Author information:
(1)G.H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032.

Clinicians have long suspected an association of classic amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) with Parkinson's disease (PD), dementia, or both. If proven, 
this would raise the possibility of a shared genetic susceptibility to the three 
disorders. To investigate this hypothesis, we compared 151 newly diagnosed ALS 
patients (seven familial) with 140 controls in terms of cumulative incidence of 
ALS, PD, and dementia in parents, siblings, and grandparents. We used Cox 
proportional hazards analysis to compute rate ratios (RRs) for ALS, dementia, 
and PD in relatives of ALS patients versus relatives of controls. The risk for 
dementia was significantly higher in relatives of ALS patients than in those of 
controls (RR = 1.9; 95% CI 1.1-3.1) and was similar for relatives of patients 
with sporadic and familial ALS. The risk of PD was higher in relatives of 
patients with familial ALS (RR = 5.6; 95% CI 0.6-50.3) than in relatives of 
patients with sporadic ALS (RR = 1.8; 95% CI 0.5-6.0), but these differences 
were not statistically significant, probably due to insufficient statistical 
power with the available sample size. These findings indicate that ALS and 
dementia, and perhaps also PD, co-occur within families more often than expected 
by chance, suggesting that there may be a shared genetic susceptibility to these 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.44.10.1872
PMID: 7936240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Neurology. 1994 Oct;44(10):1878-84. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.10.1878.

Clinical characteristics of a family with chromosome 17-linked 
disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy complex.

Lynch T(1), Sano M, Marder KS, Bell KL, Foster NL, Defendini RF, Sima AA, 
Keohane C, Nygaard TG, Fahn S, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center, New York, NY.

Comment in
    Neurology. 1994 Oct;44(10):1980.

We studied the clinical features, pathology, and molecular genetics of a family 
(Mo) with an autosomal dominant disinhibition, frontal lobe dementia, 
parkinsonism, and amyotrophy. We examined seven affected members and gathered 
clinical information on another six. The mean onset was at age 45 years. 
Personality and behavioral changes (disinhibition, withdrawal, alcoholism, 
hyperphagia) were the first symptoms in twelve. There was early memory loss, 
anomia, and poor construction with preservation until late of orientation, 
speech, and calculations. All affected members examined had rigidity, 
bradykinesia, and postural instability. Mean duration to death was 13 years. We 
studied the neuropathology of six individuals, five of whom had been examined in 
life. There was atrophy and spongiform change in the frontotemporal cortex, and 
neuronal loss and gliosis in the substantia nigra and amygdala. Two individuals, 
including one with fasciculations and muscle wasting, had anterior horn cell 
loss. There were no Lewy bodies, neurofibrillary tangles, or amyloid plaques. We 
call this disorder the "disinhibition-dementia-parkinsonism-amyotrophy complex" 
(DDPAC), based on the clinical syndrome found in this family and linkage to 
chromosome 17.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.44.10.1878
PMID: 7936241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Neurology. 1994 Oct;44(10):1950-1. doi: 10.1212/wnl.44.10.1950.

The apolipoprotein E allele epsilon 4 is overrepresented in patients with the 
Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's disease.

Galasko D(1), Saitoh T, Xia Y, Thal LJ, Katzman R, Hill LR, Hansen L.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Diego, CA 92161.

We determined apolipoprotein E (ApoE) genotypes in 122 autopsied demented 
patients. The frequency of the ApoE epsilon 4 allele was 39.6% in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), 29.0% in the Lewy body variant of AD (LBV), and 6.25% in diffuse 
Lewy body disease. For AD and LBV patients, the epsilon 4 frequency was 
significantly higher than that reported in nondemented controls (10 to 15%). 
Therefore, LBV and AD share ApoE epsilon 4 as a genetic risk factor, providing 
further evidence that these conditions overlap.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.44.10.1950
PMID: 7936253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Nuklearmedizin. 1994 Oct;33(5):184-8.

[Comparison of D2 receptor scintigraphy (123I-IBZM) with cerebral perfusion 
(99m-Tc-HMPAO) in extrapyramidal disorders].

[Article in German]

Saur HB(1), Bartenstein P, Schober O, Oberwittler C, Lerch H, Masur H.

Author information:
(1)Kliniken und Polikliniken für Nuklearmedizin, Westfälische 
Wilhelms-Universität, Münster, FRG.

The aim of this SPECT study was to determine whether there is a correlation 
between rCBF (99mTc-HMPAO) and D2 receptor binding (123I-IBZM) in disorders of 
the extrapyramidal system and in which situation the 99mTc-HMPAO scan could 
predict the outcome of the 123I-IBZM study. 13 patients with Parkinson's 
syndrome and 13 patients with hyperkinetic extrapyramidal disorders were 
studied. In all patients the two SPECT studies were performed within 2-7 days. 
ROIs were placed over the basal ganglia (BG), the frontal cortex (FC) and the 
cerebellum (CE). The ratios BG/FC and BG/CE were calculated. In both groups the 
scatter was lower when the frontal cortex was used as reference region. Among 
the patients with hyperkinetic extrapyramidal disorders the two patients with 
Huntington's chorea had lower rCBF and D2 receptor binding compared to other 
hyperkinetic extrapyramidal disorders. There was no correlation between D2 
receptor binding and rCBF in the basal ganglia. The 99mTc-HMPAO studies did not 
provide clinically useful information, except in Huntington's chorea.

PMID: 7997375 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Neuroreport. 1994 Oct 3;5(15):1893-6. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199410000-00013.

Apo E allele frequencies in Alzheimer's disease, Lewy body dementia, Alzheimer's 
disease with cerebrovascular disease and vascular dementia.

Bétard C(1), Robitaille Y, Gee M, Tiberghien D, Larrivée D, Roy P, Mortimer JA, 
Gauvreau D.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche, Centre hospitalier Côte-des-Neiges, University of 
Montreal, Québec, Canada.

Apolipoprotein (Apo E) was genotyped using a fluorescent PCR-RFLP assay in 187 
patients with a probable or possible clinical diagnosis of sporadic Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) and in 166 autopsied patients with dementia (21 presenile AD, 70 
senile AD, 18 Lewy body dementia (LBD), 38 AD with cerebrovascular disease 
(AD-CVD), 19 vascular dementia). The relative epsilon 4 allele frequency was 
0.472 in LBD, 0.513 in AD-CVD, 0.405 in presenile AD, 0.364 in senile AD, and 
0.079 in vascular dementia. The relative epsilon 2 allele frequency was 0.211 in 
vascular dementia, 0.083 in LBD, 0.047 in presenile AD, 0.100 in senile AD and 
0.039 in AD with CVD. We infer that apo E is a major risk factor for structural 
phenotypes of dementia involving AD, alone or in conjunction with another 
pathology. In addition, the epsilon 2 allele is likely to represent a risk 
factor for vascular morbidity, as the relative epsilon 2 allele frequency was 
0.211 in patients with vascular dementia compared with 0.144 in elderly 
controls.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199410000-00013
PMID: 7841371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Ital J Neurol Sci. 1994 Nov;15(8):407-11. doi: 10.1007/BF02339904.

Differing patterns of psychiatric impairment in Alzheimer and demented 
parkinsonian patients.

Soliveri P(1), Zappacosta MB, Austoni L, Caffarra P, Scaglioni A, Testa D, 
Palazzini E, Caraceni T, Girotti F.

Author information:
(1)Istituto Nazionale Neurologico C. Besta, Milano.

Psychiatric symptoms were investigated and compared in 95 patients with 
Alzheimer type dementia (DAT) and in 39 patients with Parkinson's disease with 
dementia (PD-D). The diagnosis of the dementia and psychiatric disorders was 
based on DSM III R criteria; dementia stage was assessed using the Clinical 
Dementia Rating Scale (CDR). PD-D were significantly older than DAT patients. 
Delirium was more frequent in the advanced stages of both PD-D and DAT, being 
mainly of the hypoactive type in PD-D and the hyperactive type in DAT. Delusions 
and hallucinations predominated in the early CDR stages of both illnesses and 
did not differ between groups; the same was true for depression. The results 
revealed different psychopathological profiles in DAT and PD-D patients.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02339904
PMID: 7875958 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


267. J Neurochem. 1994 Nov;63(5):1802-11. doi: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1994.63051802.x.

Membrane lipids of adult human brain: lipid composition of frontal and temporal 
lobe in subjects of age 20 to 100 years.

Svennerholm L(1), Boström K, Jungbjer B, Olsson L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Göteborg University, Sweden.

The membrane lipid composition of human frontal and temporal cortices and white 
matter has been studied in 118 subjects, age 20-100 years. The brain specimens 
were selected from subjects who lived a normal social life and died suddenly and 
unexpectedly with no history of neurologic or psychiatric disease. Macroscopic 
and microscopic examinations ruled out any signs of organic brain disorder. The 
sudden death eliminated all risk of changes over a long agonal stage. The data 
for total solids and major lipids are summarized in graphic form. Total solids, 
phospholipids, and cholesterol diminished linearly from 20 years of age in 
frontal and temporal cortices, whereas total solids phospholipids, cholesterol, 
cerebroside, and sulfatide showed a curvilinear diminution in frontal and 
temporal white matter. Gangliosides differed from the other lipids, showing an 
almost constant concentration between 20 and 70 years of age with a slight peak 
around 50 years of age. The ganglioside pattern showed continuous change with 
aging, with decreasing proportions of GM1 and GD1a and increasing proportions of 
GD1b, GM3, and GD3. Equations are given that can be used to calculate the lipid 
composition of normal human frontal and temporal cortices and white matter at 
any age between 20 and 100 years of age. These data can be used where data by 
direct analysis are not available for comparison with values for various 
pathological states.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1471-4159.1994.63051802.x
PMID: 7931336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Theor Biol. 1994 Nov 7;171(1):7-12. doi: 10.1006/jtbi.1994.1206.

The will of the brain: cerebral correlates of willful acts.

Ingvar DH(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Current imaging techniques can depict physiological events in the brain which 
accompany sensory perception and motor activity, as well as cognition and 
speech. "Pure" mental events unaccompanied by sensory input or motor/behavioral 
output also induces cerebral functional changes which apparently are related to 
inner representations of thoughts, ideas, visions, inner speech and so forth. 
Cerebral events during cognition, mental effort, imagined volitional acts, 
augment the activity in the prefrontal cortex. An augmentation in the cerebellum 
is also recorded. It is known that temporally organized (sequential) neuronal 
activity takes place in these structures. The prefrontal activation accompanying 
volitional acts most likely corresponds to a willful mobilization of inner 
representations of future events. These representations serve as action programs 
for the achievement of the goal. Phylogenetically older parts of the cerebral 
cortex close to the midline (the cingulate gyrus) participate in willful acts. 
They are possibly involved in emotional/motivational ("value") aspects of 
volition. Abnormal volition ("sick will") is encountered in organic dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, depression, and schizophrenia. Such disorders are 
characterized by inactivity, lack of ambitions, and a reduced motor and verbal 
output. Patients in these groups often show a decreased activity in prefrontal 
regions. Individuals with supraorbital and mesial frontal lesions may develop a 
so-called psychopathic behavior including abnormalities of volition with lack of 
impulse control, boredom susceptibility, sensation-seeking behavior, and 
abnormal risk taking. Knowledge about cerebral events coupled to willful acts 
may shed some light on the "collective will" expressed by groups of individuals 
and organizations.

DOI: 10.1006/jtbi.1994.1206
PMID: 7844996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1994 Nov 17;738:214-21. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb21806.x.

Antioxidant mechanism and protection of nigral neurons against MPP+ toxicity by 
deprenyl (selegiline).

Wu RM(1), Mohanakumar KP, Murphy DL, Chiueh CC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Science, National Institute of Mental Health, National 
Institutes of Health Clinical Center 10/3D-41, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The current research has demonstrated that MPP+ can induce lipid peroxidation in 
the nigrostriatal system of rat in vivo. Antioxidant agent U-78517F and .OH 
scavenger DMSO may protect against MPP+ toxicity through the inhibition of .OH 
radical-mediated oxidative injury in the substantia nigra. These findings 
indicate that the cytotoxic hydroxyl radical generated from dopamine oxidation 
in the iron-rich basal ganglia may contribute to the mechanism underlying the 
selective A9 melanized nigral degeneration in MPTP-Parkinsonism and possibly in 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease. In addition, the present studies also clearly 
demonstrate that deprenyl can substantially protect dopaminergic neurons against 
MPP+ toxicity in the substantia nigra zona compacta in vivo. The neuroprotective 
effect provided by deprenyl may not be the consequence of its inhibition of 
MAO-B activity or prevention of the uptake of MPP+ by dopaminergic neurons. A 
unique antioxidant property of deprenyl by suppressing .OH formation and 
associated oxidative injury induced by MPP+ may contribute to the apparent 
neuroprotective action. In perspective, this putative antioxidant effect of 
deprenyl may provide another mechanism to its overt neuroprotective effects 
against oxygen radical-mediated oxidative injury in some neurotoxic chemicals, 
such as 6-OHDA and DSP-4, and probably in Alzheimer's disease and senescent 
changes. Finally, based on the present data, a possible neuroprotective 
therapeutic window of deprenyl in the treatment of early Parkinson's disease has 
been proposed. It is suggested that deprenyl should be introduced as early as 
possible in de novo Parkinsonian patients to achieve its full neuroprotective 
effect on nigral degeneration. Moreover, a combination of early detection of 
individuals at risk of developing Parkinson's disease and early intervention of 
deprenyl and/or other centrally active antioxidants to these patients may 
provide a new preventive therapeutic strategy in the future, in addition to the 
current conventional levodopa treatment of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1994.tb21806.x
PMID: 7832430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Aging (Milano). 1994 Dec;6(6):464-73. doi: 10.1007/BF03324279.

The Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging (ILSA): design and methods.

Maggi S(1), Zucchetto M, Grigoletto F, Baldereschi M, Candelise L, Scarpini E, 
Scarlato G, Amaducci L.

Author information:
(1)CNR (National Research Council), Targeted Project on Aging, Firenze, Italy.

The Italian Longitudinal Study on Aging (ILSA) is a population-based, 
longitudinal study of the health status of Italians aged 65-84 years. The main 
objectives of ILSA are the study of the prevalence and incidence rates of common 
chronic conditions in the older population, and the identification of their risk 
and protective factors. ILSA is also designed to assess age-associated physical 
and mental functional changes. A random sample of 5632 individuals, stratified 
by age and gender using the equal allocation strategy, was identified on the 
demographic lists of the registry office of eight municipalities: Genova, 
Segrate (Milano), Selvazzano-Rubano (Padova), Impruneta (Firenze), Fermo (Ascoli 
Piceno), Napoli, Casamassima (Bari), and Catania. An extensive investigation, 
including interviews, physical exams, and laboratory tests, was conducted at 
baseline to identify the presence of cardiovascular disease (ischemic heart 
disease, hypertension, congestive heart failure, arrhythmia, intermittent 
claudication), diabetes, impaired glucose tolerance, thyroid dysfunction, 
dementia, parkinsonism, stroke, and peripheral neuropathy, as well as assess 
physical and mental functional status. The baseline examination was carried out 
between March 1992 and June 1993; a second comprehensive examination will begin 
in March 1995. An interim hospital discharge data survey and a mortality survey 
are currently ongoing to assess the hospitalization rate and the cause-specific 
mortality rate in this study cohort.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03324279
PMID: 7748921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


271. J Neurol. 1994 Dec;242(1):1-13. doi: 10.1007/BF00920568.

Ethical guidelines for the use of human embryonic or fetal tissue for 
experimental and clinical neurotransplantation and research. Network of European 
CNS Transplantation and Restoration (NECTAR).

Boer GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Graduate School Neurosciences Amsterdam, Netherlands Institute for Brain 
Research.

Recently a Network of European CNS Transplantation And Restoration (NECTAR) has 
been founded, aimed at a concerted effort to develop efficient, reliable, safe 
and ethically acceptable transplantation therapies for neurodegenerative 
diseases, in particular Parkinson's and Huntington's disease. Owing to the use 
of human fetal brain tissue in such studies, usually obtained from elective 
abortions, ethical concerns have been focused on the relationship between 
abortion and transplantation activities. There is no uniform code on the 
retrieval and use of human embryonal or fetal material for experimental and 
clinical research or application in Europe. NECTAR has therefore formulated 
self-restraining ethical guidelines for its European member groups. These 
guidelines consist of a series of restrictions intended to prevent the use of 
grafts from encouraging induced abortions and to maintain high standards of 
respect for life and human dignity. In order to support applications for human 
embryonal or fetal neurotransplantation studies of NECTAR member groups to local 
or national medico-ethical committees, and to stimulate the goal of obtaining 
European legislation on this issue, the guidelines are here presented. They are 
followed by extensive explanatory notes. Only in this public manner can the 
lines of thought behind these NECTAR guidelines be addressed critically by those 
working in the fields of biomedical ethics and legislation as well by 
politicians and the general public.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00920568
PMID: 7897446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Life Sci. 1995;56(14):1151-71. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(95)00055-b.

Bioenergetic and oxidative stress in neurodegenerative diseases.

Bowling AC(1), Beal MF.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemistry Laboratory, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston 02114, USA.

Aging is a major risk factor for several common neurodegenerative diseases, 
including Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), and Huntington's disease (HD). Recent studies have 
implicated mitochondrial dysfunction and oxidative stress in the aging process 
and also in the pathogenesis of neurodegenerative diseases. In brain and other 
tissues, aging is associated with progressive impairment of mitochondrial 
function and increased oxidative damage. In PD, several studies have 
demonstrated decreased complex I activity, increased oxidative damage, and 
altered activities of antioxidant defense systems. Some cases of familial ALS 
are associated with mutations in the gene for Cu, Zn superoxide dismutase (Cu, 
Zn SOD) and decreased Cu, Zn SOD activity, while in sporadic ALS oxidative 
damage may be increased. Defects in energy metabolism and increased cortical 
lactate levels have been detected in HD patients. Studies of AD patients have 
identified decreased complex IV activity, and some patients with AD and PD have 
mitochondrial DNA mutations. The age-related onset and progressive course of 
these neurodegenerative diseases may be due to a cycling process between 
impaired energy metabolism and oxidative stress.

DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(95)00055-b
PMID: 7475893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Medicina (B Aires). 1995;55(1):59-68.

[Dolichoectatic intracranial arteries. Advances in images and therapeutics].

[Article in Spanish]

Casas Parera I(1), Abruzzi M, Lehkuniec E, Schuster G, Muchnik S.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Instituto de Investigaciones Médicas Alfredo Lanari, 
Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Dolichoectasia of intracranial arteries is an infrequent disease with an 
incidence less than 0.05% in general population. It represents 7% of all 
intracranial aneurysms. Commonly seen in middle age patients with severe 
atherosclerosis and hypertension, the affected arteries include the basilar 
artery, supraclinoid segment of the internal carotid artery, middle, anterior 
and posterior cerebral arteries; males are more frequently affected. The 
clinical features of these fusiform aneurysms are divided in three categories: 
ische-mic, cranial nerve compression and signs from mass effect. Hemorrhage may 
also occur. Nine patients with symptomatic cerebral blood vessel dolichoectasias 
are presented. Six of them were males with moderate or severe hypertension. 
Lesions were confined to the basilar artery in 3 cases, carotid arteries and the 
middle cerebral artery in 1 case, and both systems were affected in 4 patients. 
Middle cerebral arteries were affected in 5 cases and the anterior cerebral 
artery in one. An isolated fusiform aneurysm of the posterior cerebral artery is 
also presented (case 8) (Table 3). Motor or sensory deficits, ataxia, dementia, 
hemifacial spasm and parkinsonism were observed. One patient died from 
cerebro-meningeal hemorrhage (Table 2). All patients were studied with 
computerized axial tomography of the brain, 5 cases with four vessel cerebral 
angiography, 4 cases with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and case 5 with MRI 
angiography. Clinical symptoms depend on the affected vascular territory, size 
of the aneurysm and compression of adjacent structures. The histopathologic 
findings are atheromatous lesions, disruption of the internal elastic membrane 
and fibrosis of the muscular wall. The resultant is a diffuse deficiency of the 
muscular wall and the internal elastic membrane. Recent advances in neuroimaging 
such as better resolution of CT scan, magnetic resonance images (MRI) and MRI 
angiography increased the diagnosis of this pathology showing clearly the 
affected vessels. This avoids the use of conventional or digital subtraction 
angiography, reserved only for diagnosing suspected saccular aneurysm, evidence 
of subarachnoid hemorrhage or planning surgical treatment. The treatment of this 
entity may be medical or surgical. There is evidence suggesting a more favorable 
outcome with anticoagulation therapy, although antiaggregation is a reasonable 
alternative. In our experience no difference in clinical outcome was evident. 
Surgical treatment of this type of aneurysm includes intra- or extracranial 
occlusion of parent artery, clipping or aneurysm trapping, tourniquet occlusion, 
and circumferential wrapping with clip reinforcement. Endovascular occlusion has 
been accomplished with detachable balloon technique or coils. No surgical 
attempt was done in our cases. The prognosis is variable depending on the 
patients age, vessels involved and clinical complications.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
400 WORDS)

PMID: 7565039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1995 Spring;9(1):6-16. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199505000-00004.

FDG PET and differential diagnosis of dementia.

Herholz K(1).

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Universitätsklinik und Max-Planck-Institut für neurologische 
Forschung, Cologne, Germany.

Positron emission tomography (PET) with 18F-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) 
demonstrates a typical pattern of impairment of regional metabolic rates of 
glucose (rCMRGlu) in most patients with a clinical diagnosis of probable 
Alzheimer's disease (AD): reduction of rCMRGlu in temporo-parietal association 
cortex, more variably also in prefontal cortex, but relative preservation of 
primary visual and sensoriomotor cortex, striatum, and cerebellum. Apart from 
early stages, both hemispheres are affected, but pronounced asymmetries may be 
present. With the exception of Parkinson's disease with dementia, the complete 
pattern is rarely seen in other dementing conditions, which usually lead to more 
global, frontal or multifocal metabolic impairment. Severity of dementia is 
mainly correlated with temporo-parietal rCMRGlu reduction, probably irrespective 
of the cause of dementia, and the neuropsychological profile is related to the 
asymmetry of metabolic alterations. Procedures are available for assessment of 
the typical pattern that yield comparable results in different laboratories, and 
have a high accuracy for discrimination between normals and probable AD. 
Diagnostic accuracy is better for presenile than for senile dementia of 
Alzheimer type, and for moderate to severe cases than for mild dementia. A 
definitive judgment of the diagnostic value of FDG PET in AD is hindered by the 
lack of sufficient data with diagnosis confirmed at autopsy.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199505000-00004
PMID: 7605624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1995 Summer;9(2):61-7. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199509020-00001.

Substantia nigra lesions in Alzheimer disease and normal aging.

Kazee AM(1), Cox C, Richfield EK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine (Neuropathology Unit), 
University of Rochester School of Medicine and Dentistry, New York 14642, USA.

Clinical and pathological overlap between Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease (PD) has been well described; however, the mechanisms of overlap between 
these two disorders remain unknown. We retrospectively examined clinical and 
neuropathological features from 66 individuals participating in the Rochester 
Alzheimer Disease Center to determine the association of AD with substantia 
nigra (SN) pathology. SN pathology, identified by a loss of pigmented neurons 
and the presence of gliosis, pigment-laden macrophages, and Lewy bodies, was 
blindly scored in 48 AD cases and 18 normal elderly controls. We found moderate 
or severe pathology in the SN in 2 control brains (11%) and 29 AD brains (60%). 
The numbers of neocortical and hippocampal neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and 
senile plaques (SPs) were not associated with nigral pathology. There was also 
no significant association of SN pathology with NFTs or SPs in the striatum, the 
site to which these neurons project. There was no significant association of 
increasing SN pathology with aging among AD patients, nor with increasing 
severity and duration of AD. The signs and symptoms of an extrapyramidal 
movement disorder were, however, associated with increasing SN pathology. We 
confirm that pathological lesions in the SN are a common feature of AD and an 
uncommon feature in normal aging. AD is a significant risk factor for SN lesions 
and PD, but the pathologic severity of AD, as measured by NFTs and SPs, was not 
associated with SN lesions.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199509020-00001
PMID: 7662324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Neuroscience. 1995 Jan;64(2):385-95. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(94)00410-7.

Alteration in nicotine binding sites in Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia 
and Alzheimer's disease: possible index of early neuropathology.

Perry EK(1), Morris CM, Court JA, Cheng A, Fairbairn AF, McKeith IG, Irving D, 
Brown A, Perry RH.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon 
Tyne, U.K.

High-affinity nicotine binding, considered to primarily reflect the presence of 
CNS alpha 4 beta 2 nicotinic receptor subunits, was examined 
autoradiographically in brain regions most severely affected by Alzheimer and 
Parkinson types of pathology. In the midbrain, the high density of binding 
associated with the pars compacta of the substantia nigra was extensively 
reduced (65-75%, particularly in the lateral portion) in both Lewy body dementia 
and Parkinson's disease. Since loss of dopaminergic neurons in Lewy body 
dementia was only moderate (40%), loss or down-regulation of the nicotinic 
receptor may precede degeneration of dopaminergic neurons in this region. In the 
dorsolateral tegmentum, where diffuse cholinergic perikarya are located, 
nicotine binding was highly significantly decreased in both Lewy body dementia 
and Parkinson's disease with almost no overlap between the normal and disease 
groups, indicative of a major pathological involvement in or around the 
pedunculopontine cholinergic neurons. In the hippocampus, binding was decreased 
around the granular layer in Lewy body dementia and Alzheimer's disease, 
although unchanged in the stratum lacunosum moleculare, where binding was 
relatively higher. Dense bands of receptor binding in the presubiculum and 
parahippocampal gyrus--areas of highest binding in human cortex--were diminished 
in Alzheimer's disease but not Lewy body dementia. In temporal neocortex there 
were reductions in Alzheimer's disease throughout the cortical layers but in 
Lewy body dementia only in lower layers, in which Lewy bodies are concentrated. 
Abnormalities of the nicotinic receptor in the diseases examined appear to be 
closely associated with primary histopathological changes: dopaminergic cell 
loss in Parkinson's disease and Lewy body dementia, amyloid plaques and tangles 
in subicular and entorhinal areas in Alzheimer's disease. Loss or 
down-regulation of the receptor may precede neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(94)00410-7
PMID: 7700528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Acta Neuropathol. 1995;89(2):126-38. doi: 10.1007/BF00296356.

Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive deposits in brain following kainic 
acid-induced seizures: relationships to fos induction, neuronal necrosis, 
reactive gliosis, and blood-brain barrier breakdown.

Bennett SA(1), Stevenson B, Staines WA, Roberts DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.

Periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive deposits have been demonstrated in the 
central nervous system (CNS) of patients suffering from a wide variety of 
neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer's disease, presenile dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, diabetes mellitus, myoclonic epilepsy, and cerebral palsy. 
The etiology of these deposits and their relationship to mechanisms of 
progressive neurodegeneration is unknown. In the present study, we demonstrate 
that the kainic acid model of limbic status epilepticus provides a useful system 
for the study of PAS-positive staining. The relationship between PAS-positive 
deposition, induction of fos-like immunoreactivity (FLI), neuronal necrosis, 
reactive gliosis, and blood-brain barrier breakdown following the kainic acid 
induction of status epilepticus was investigated. Epileptiform activity was 
elicited in rats by intraperitoneal administration of 10 mg/kg kainic acid and 
brains were examined 3, 5, 12, 24, 72, and 168 h after drug injection. Four 
distinct types of PAS-positive staining in rat brain were observed: type 1, 
extracellular matrix (ECM) or blood vessel associated-material; type 2, granular 
deposits; type 3, glial labelling; and type 4, neuronal labelling. Results 
demonstrated that the four types of PAS-positive staining were differentially 
associated with specific markers of neuropathology: (1) type 1 ECM staining and 
type 3 glia were preferentially localized to edematous tissue; (2) the majority 
of type 3 glia were identified as reactive astrocytes, while a minority of 
appeared to be proliferating microglia; (3) type 1 blood vessels labelled 
hemorrhaging vasculature; (4) early deposition of type 2 granules was predictive 
of subsequent cell loss; (5) chronic type 2 granular deposits and type 4 
neuronal labelling not associated with cell death could be predicted by early 
changes in FLI; and (6) chronic deposition of all four forms of PAS-positive 
material was correlated with earlier, transient blood-brain barrier compromise. 
The results support the growing literature that local carbohydrate metabolism 
may be one of a constellation of parameters important to the development of 
progressive neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00296356
PMID: 7732785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Ann Neurol. 1995 Jan;37(1):110-2. doi: 10.1002/ana.410370120.

The CYP2D6B mutant allele is overrepresented in the Lewy body variant of 
Alzheimer's disease.

Saitoh T(1), Xia Y, Chen X, Masliah E, Galasko D, Shults C, Thal LJ, Hansen LA, 
Katzman R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine, UCSD, La Jolla 92093-0624.

Approximately one-fourth of neuropathologically confirmed cases of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) also have brainstem and neocortical Lewy bodies, constituting a 
Lewy body variant of AD. Because Lewy bodies are a pathologic hallmark of 
Parkinson's disease (PD), this subpopulation of AD subjects may have the same 
risk factors as PD subjects. Analyses of the cytochrome P450 CYP2D6-debrisoquine 
4-hydroxylase mutant B allele, a susceptibility gene for PD, revealed a higher 
representation of this allele in the Lewy body variant of AD than in pure AD or 
non-AD without Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410370120
PMID: 7818242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Acta Neuropathol. 1995;90(3):239-43. doi: 10.1007/BF00296506.

Association of apolipoprotein epsilon 4 allele and neuropathologic findings in 
patients with dementia.

Martinoli MG(1), Trojanowski JQ, Schmidt ML, Arnold SE, Fujiwara TM, Lee VM, 
Hurtig H, Julien JP, Clark C.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Research in Neuroscience, Montréal General Hospital, McGill 
University, Canada.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is a lipoprotein expressed in liver and brain as one of 
three isoforms (APOE 2, APOE 3 and APOE 4). Recent findings suggest that the 
presence of APOE 4 is associated with an increased risk for both familial 
Alzheimer's disease and late-onset Alzheimer's disease. We extended these 
observations by determining the frequency of APOE alleles in patients with 
pathologically confirmed Alzheimer's Disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD), 
diffuse Lewy Body disease (DLBD), AD with concomitant PD pathology, demented PD 
patients without or with concomitant AD pathology and in schizophrenics with a 
progressive dementia (SCHIZ+DEM). The APOE genotype was determined by 
restriction digestion of polymerase chain reaction-amplified DNA isolated from 
frozen brain samples. The frequency of the APOE epsilon 4 allele was highest 
among sporadic AD and DLBD patients (0.30 and 0.38, respectively) and lowest in 
the SCHIZ+DEM and non-demented PD patients (0.06 and 0.1, respectively). Thus, 
the APOE epsilon 4 allele is over-represented selectively in patients with 
dementias associated with plaques and tangles and/or cortical Lewy bodies, but 
not in demented schizophrenics or non-demented PD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00296506
PMID: 8525796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Neural Transm Park Dis Dement Sect. 1995;9(2-3):189-96. doi: 
10.1007/BF02259660.

CSF somatostatin increase in patients with early parkinsonian syndrome.

Espino A(1), Calopa M, Ambrosio S, Ortolà J, Peres J, Navarro MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital Prínceps d'Espanya, Spain.

Somatostatin-like immunoreactivity levels (SLI) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
were determined in twenty-three patients with untreated parkinsonian syndrome 
(15 with Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) and 8 with other forms of 
parkinsonism) at the moment of clinical diagnosis (mean duration of disease 1.1 
+/- 0.2 years), and in 26 subjects without neurological symptoms. None of the 
IPD patients had a diagnosis of dementia at the moment of inclusion in the 
study. CSF-SLI content was found to be significantly higher in patients with 
parkinsonian syndrome (107.9 +/- 9.8 pg/ml) than in control subjects (73.5 +/- 
8.4 pg/ml). The increase was also significant when controls were compared with 
IPD patients. In addition, a positive correlation between SLI and homovanillic 
acid was found in CSF of all patients. A test of learning memory was used to 
evaluate the mental state of patients and a significant increase in 
CSF-somatostatin levels was observed in patients with Idiopathic Parkinson's 
disease and severe affectation of memory. These results indicate that in the 
early steps of untreated parkinsonian syndrome, somatostatin concentration in 
cerebrospinal fluid may increase, probably due to the neurodegenerative 
depletion of somatostatin from striatal or cortical neurons.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02259660
PMID: 8527003 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1995;9 Suppl 2:3-5. doi: 
10.1097/00002093-199501002-00002.

Nicotinic receptors and neurodegenerative dementing diseases: basic research and 
clinical implications.

Whitehouse PJ(1), Kalaria RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106-4938, USA.

Nicotinic cholinergic agonists represent a relatively newly developing area for 
therapeutic intervention in Alzheimer disease (AD) and related neurodegenerative 
dementias. Loss of cholinergic receptors has been reported not only in AD but 
also in Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia, and progressive supranuclear 
palsy. Clinical studies suggest that compounds that act to stimulate nicotinic 
receptors may improve learning and memory in a variety of models of cognitive 
impairment in animals. Early clinical studies have suggested positive effects on 
cognition of nicotine in human beings with and without AD. Finally, nicotinic 
compounds might show the progression of AD, as suggested by preclinical models 
of cell death as well as epidemiological evidence of a protective effect of 
smoking in AD and Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1097/00002093-199501002-00002
PMID: 8534421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Seishin Shinkeigaku Zasshi. 1995;97(10):825-46.

[A study on the difference between clinical and neuropathological diagnoses of 
age-related dementing illnesses; correlations with Hachinski's ischemic score].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine.

In this study, clinical diagnosis and results of neuropathological examination 
were analyzed on 55 demented patients serially autopsied in a geriatric 
hospital. Based on clinical observations including Hachinski's ischemic score 
and CT scan, 30 cases were diagnosed as vascular dementia (VD), 16 cases as 
Alzheimer-type dementia (ATD), 6 as mixed-type dementia (MD), and 5 as other 
types of dementias. On the results of neuropathological examination, 25 cases 
were diagnosed as ATD, 19 cases as VD, 5 as diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), 4 
as MD, and 2 as other types of dementias. The accuracy of the clinical diagnosis 
for ATD was 78.6%, and that for VD was 53.3%. Thus, misdiagnosis was more 
frequent on VD. Clinically, VD cases were rarely misdiagnosed as ATD, while ATD 
or MD cases were more frequently misdiagnosed as VD. Therefore, it is suggested 
that VD is overdiagnosed. One of the reasons is that risk factors of 
cerebrovascular disorders increase and Hachinski's ischemic score also becomes 
higher with the age of the patients. ATD is clinically diagnosed only after 
excluding other dementing illnesses. More detailed analysis of clinical features 
including cognitive function and brain images is required for more accurate 
clinical diagnosis of age-related dementing illnesses. Also in our series, DLBD 
was the second most frequent degenerative dementia following ATD, although all 
DLBD cases were clinically misdiagnosed as ATD or VD.

PMID: 8552726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Int J Psychiatry Med. 1995;25(3):249-62. doi: 10.2190/CUMK-THT1-X98M-WB4C.

The neuropsychiatric aspects of boxing.

Mendez MF(1).

Author information:
(1)UCLA School of Medicine, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To review the neuropsychiatry of boxing.
METHOD: This update considers the clinical, neuropsychological, diagnostic, 
neurobiological, and management aspects of boxing-related brain injury.
RESULTS: Professional boxers with multiple bouts and repeated head blows are 
prone to chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE). Repeated head blows produce 
rotational acceleration of the brain, diffuse axonal injury, and other 
neuropathological features. CTE includes motor changes such as tremor, 
dysarthria, and parkinsonism; cognitive changes such as mental slowing and 
memory deficits; and psychiatric changes such as explosive behavior, morbid 
jealousy, pathological intoxication, and paranoia. Screening with 
neuropsychological tests and neuroimaging may help predict those boxers at risk 
for CTE.
CONCLUSIONS: Boxing results in a spectrum of CTE ranging from mild, 
nonprogressive motor changes to dementia pugilistica. Recent emphasis on safety 
in the ring, rehabilitation techniques, and other interventions do not eliminate 
the risk for CTE. For this reason, there is an active movement to ban boxing.

DOI: 10.2190/CUMK-THT1-X98M-WB4C
PMID: 8567192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Behav Neurol. 1995;8(1):23-30. doi: 10.3233/BEN-1995-8103.

Differential classification of dementia.

Mohr E(1), Brouwers P(1), Claus JJ(1), Purdon SE(1), Gagnon M(1), Chase TN(1).

Author information:
(1)SCO Hospitals, Elisabeth Bruyere Health Center, Rm 298-20, 75 Bruyere St, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada K1N 5C8.

In the absence of biological markers, dementia classification remains complex 
both in terms of characterization as well as early detection of the presence or 
absence of dementing symptoms, particularly in diseases with possible secondary 
dementia. An empirical, statistical approach using neuropsychological measures 
was therefore developed to distinguish demented from non-demented patients and 
to identify differential patterns of cognitive dysfunction in neurodegenerative 
disease. Age-scaled neurobehavioral test results (Wechsler Adult Intelligence 
Scale-Revised and Wechsler Memory Scale) from Alzheimer's (AD) and Huntington's 
(HD) patients, matched for intellectual disability, as well as normal controls 
were used to derive a classification formula. Stepwise discriminant analysis 
accurately (99% correct) distinguished controls from demented patients, and 
separated the two patient groups (79% correct). Variables discriminating between 
HD and AD patient groups consisted of complex psychomotor tasks, visuospatial 
function, attention and memory. The reliability of the classification formula 
was demonstrated with a new, independent sample of AD and HD patients which 
yielded virtually identical results (classification accuracy for dementia: 96%; 
AD versus HD: 78%). To validate the formula, the discriminant function was 
applied to Parkinson's (PD) patients, 38% of whom were classified as demented. 
The validity of the classification was demonstrated by significant PD subgroup 
differences on measures of dementia not included in the discriminant function. 
Moreover, a majority of demented PD patients (65%) were classified as having an 
HD-like pattern of cognitive deficits, in line with previous reports of the 
subcortical nature of PD dementia. This approach may thus be useful in 
classifying presence or absence of dementia and in discriminating between 
dementia subtypes in cases of secondary or coincidental dementia.

DOI: 10.3233/BEN-1995-8103
PMID: 24487399


285. Alcohol Health Res World. 1995;19(4):279-286.

Imaging Studies of Aging, Neurodegenerative Disease, and Alcoholism.

Eberling JL(1), Jagust WJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Jamie L. Eberling, Ph.D., is a staff scientist at the Center for Functional 
Imaging, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California. William J. 
Jagust, M.D., is head of the Neuroscience Group at the Center for Functional 
Imaging, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, and a professor in the 
Department of Neurology, University of California, Davis, California.

Neurodegenerative diseases such as Alzheimer's disease, disorders such as 
alcoholism, and the aging process can lead to impaired cognitive function and 
dementia. Researchers and clinicians have used noninvasive imaging techniques to 
determine the structural and physiological alterations in the brain that are 
associated with these conditions. Analyses of the brain's structure have found 
that shrinkage (atrophy) of the brain tissue is characteristic for all 
conditions associated with dementia, but that the specific locations of 
atrophied brain structures vary among different neurodegenerative diseases and 
alcohol-induced disorders. Similarly, studies analyzing the metabolism in 
various brain structures have found that, depending on whether dementia was 
induced by neurodegenerative diseases, alcoholism, or aging, the affected brain 
structures vary slightly. Based on such studies, researchers and clinicians now 
can more accurately define different types of dementia and predict their 
clinical course.

PMCID: PMC6875739
PMID: 31798061


286. Ann Neurol. 1995 Feb;37(2):242-5. doi: 10.1002/ana.410370215.

Apolipoprotein E genotypes in Parkinson's disease with and without dementia.

Koller WC(1), Glatt SL, Hubble JP, Paolo A, Tröster AI, Handler MS, Horvat RT, 
Martin C, Schmidt K, Karst A, et al.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 
66160-7314.

The apolipoprotein E gene (Apo E) type 4 allele is a genetic risk factor 
influencing the development and age of onset of Alzheimer's disease. Because 
Parkinson's disease shares many characteristics of Alzheimer's disease, we 
studied the frequencies of Apo E genotypes in a cohort of 52 Parkinson's disease 
patients with dementia and 61 patients without dementia. Dementia was determined 
per National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke 
criteria and Mattis Dementia Rating Scale (DRS) < 126. Normal cognition was 
defined as DRS > 132. Apo E genotype and allele frequencies did not differ 
between demented and nondemented parkinsonian patients. Neither group's genotype 
and allele frequencies differed from that of a nondemented population of 78 
controls. We conclude that the Apo E epsilon 4 allele influences neither the 
development of Parkinson's disease nor the dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410370215
PMID: 7847865 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Rev Neurol. 1995 Mar-Apr;23(120):334-50.

[Neurological diseases and driving].

[Article in Spanish]

Mola S(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Interna, Hospital del SVS Vega Baja.

Traffic accidents (TA) are, after heart disease, cancer and stroke, the fourth 
death cause among the general population. Although the number of AT caused by 
diseases-excluding alcoholism- seems to be reduced, interaction between organic 
pathology and functional ability increases the importance of this problem. This 
paper revises the literature on the relation between AT and specific 
neurological diseases: epilepsy, obstructive sleep apnea syndrome (SAS), stroke, 
dementia and Parkinson disease. Also, the problems and the role of the 
neurologist in assessing driving ability in patients with brain damage is 
analyzed, with special reference to the legal condition in Spain. The 
insufficiency of diagnostic labels as predictors of driving ability is stressed; 
the group of patients affected by these pathologies does not present greater TA 
risk than young drivers twice that of the general population. In the cases of 
epilepsy, SAS and ECV, which can cause episodic driving inability, defining 
recurrence probabilities and finding regulation formulas is the task of clinical 
epidemiologists and the regulative authorities. In the case of dementia, 
Parkinson disease and ECV, causing psychomotor performance deterioration, the 
basic problem, complicated by the presence of comorbility in these patients, is 
the development of valid clinical scales for driving ability assessment. The 
regulative authorities need simple measures which are often difficult to 
develop. Meanwhile, it is the task of the neurologist, as part of the 
therapeutic intervention during the medical encounter, to discuss driving risks 
with each patient.

PMID: 7497190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Soc Sci Med. 1995 Mar;40(6):847-58. doi: 10.1016/0277-9536(94)00138-j.

Neurodegenerative diseases and risk factors: a literature review.

Emard JF(1), Thouez JP, Gauvreau D.

Author information:
(1)Projet IMAGE, Centre Hospitalier Côte-des-Neiges, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Degenerative diseases of the central nervous system are significant causes of 
mortality among elderly people in industrialized countries. For the most part, 
the causes of these diseases are unknown. It is also very difficult to diagnose 
this type of disease quickly and accurately. This article reviews the 
epidemiological research on the principal neurodegenerative disorders, focusing 
on geographical, hereditary and viral and toxicological exposure correlates. We 
look in particular at the effect of exposure to toxins as well as the effect 
that deficiencies of elements such as calcium and selenium could have on the 
development of these neurological diseases. We also consider the possible 
protectionist effect of some variables on the development of certain 
neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/0277-9536(94)00138-j
PMID: 7747220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Arzneimittelforschung. 1995 Mar;45(3A):386-9.

Parkinson's disease: epidemiology, (differential) diagnosis, therapy, relation 
to dementia.

Oertel WH(1).

Author information:
(1)Klinikum Grosshadern, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität, Munich, Fed. Rep. of 
Germany.

Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative progressive disorder with a 
prevalence of 1% in the population above 65 years of age. Thus, Parkinson's 
disease (PD) is 5 times less common than senile dementia of the Alzheimer type 
(SDAT). This article summarizes an epidemoliogical door to door survey on the 
prevalence of Parkinson syndromes in two German villages. It reviews the present 
possibilities to diagnose Parkinson's disease clinically and with 
pharmacological and imaging techniques. As 10-30% of Parkinson's disease 
patients become demented in the course of the disease, the question is 
addressed, how Parkinson's disease relates to SDAT. In addition, it is 
discussed, whether a global or focal deficit of cognitive function is present in 
Parkinson's disease. Finally, a new imaging technique based on the visualisation 
of dopamine uptake sites in the striatum by single photon computed emission 
tomography is presented. This technique may allow to diagnose Parkinson's 
disease in the very early clinical and may be even preclinical phase.

PMID: 7763330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Arzneimittelforschung. 1995 Mar;45(3A):443-6.

Free radical mechanisms in dementia of Alzheimer type and the potential for 
antioxidative treatment.

Frölich L(1), Riederer P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry I, University of Frankfurt am Main, Fed. Rep. of 
Germany.

Neurodegenerative diseases, e.g. dementia of Alzheimer type and Parkinson's 
disease, are characterized neurochemically by a transmitter-specific loss of 
neurons, which progresses and extends to several neuronal systems over the 
course of the disease. At present, no single specific pathomechanism may explain 
the heterogeneous disorder of familial and sporadic dementia of Alzheimer type, 
both with early and late onset of the disease. The hypothesis has been proposed 
that cellular events involving "oxidative stress" may be one basic pathway 
leading to neurodegeneration in e.g. dementia of Alzheimer type and Parkinson's 
disease. There are indications for an increased activity or impaired defense 
mechanisms of free oxygen radicals in dementia of Alzheimer type, although less 
clear than in Parkinson's disease. Primary and secondary factors interact and 
may result in a self-propagating cascade of neurodegenerative events. Since 
these mechanisms of neuronal death involve different areas of cell metabolism, 
therapeutic strategies for "neuroprotection" also have to encompass different 
approaches. Since a specificity of oxygen radical toxicity in dementia of 
Alzheimer type has not been proven, "partial" neuroprotective drugs might be 
more beneficial in clinical practice than specific drugs affecting only one 
selective pathomechanism.

PMID: 7763342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1995 Apr;43(4):378-83. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.1995.tb05811.x.

ADL dependence and medical conditions in Chinese older persons: a 
population-based survey in Shanghai, China.

Chen P(1), Yu ES, Zhang M, Liu WT, Hill R, Katzman R.

Author information:
(1)Shanghai Medical University.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the prevalence of activities of daily living (ADL) 
dependence and medical conditions and the relationship between illnesses and ADL 
performance in the older population of Shanghai, China.
DESIGN: Probability sample survey of community residents.
SETTING: The Jing An district of Shanghai, China. The interviews were carried 
out at the homes of the older persons.
PARTICIPANTS: There were 3763 noninstitutionalized elders screened, 3745 of whom 
completed the interview.
MEASUREMENTS: The dependent variables were the five basic ADL items: eating, 
dressing, transferring, toileting, and bathing. The independent variables were 
dementia and 19 self-reported medical conditions, along with age, gender and 
education level.
MAIN RESULTS: Of those in Shanghai aged 65 and older, 8.28% (6.52% of males, 
9.17% of females) were functionally dependent in one or more ADLs. The most 
prevalent self-reported illness was cardiovascular disease, including 
hypertension (29.12%) and heart disease (26.65%). ADL performance was associated 
with dementia and a number of medical conditions in univariate analysis. The 
best predictors of functional dependence in both age groups (65-74 years; 75 
years and older), based on the multiple logistic regression analysis and after 
controlling for age, gender, and education, were stroke, dementia, Parkinson's 
disease, diabetes, and emphysema.
CONCLUSIONS: The authors have successfully applied five ADL items selected and 
culturally adapted from Older Americans Resources and Services to the study of 
older Chinese. A consistent and reliable estimate of functional dependence among 
older persons is obtained. The prevalence of dementia and many self-reported 
illness, as well as the ADL status by medical condition, are reported. The 
findings reveal certain patterns of relationship between illness conditions and 
ADL performance.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1995.tb05811.x
PMID: 7706627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


292. BMJ. 1995 Apr 15;310(6985):970-3. doi: 10.1136/bmj.310.6985.970.

Prevalence of Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia: association with 
education. The Rotterdam study.

Ott A(1), Breteler MM, van Harskamp F, Claus JJ, van der Cammen TJ, Grobbee DE, 
Hofman A.

Author information:
(1)Erasmus University Medical School, Rotterdam, Netherlands.

Comment in
    BMJ. 1995 Jul 8;311(6997):125-6.
    BMJ. 1995 Jul 8;311(6997):126.
    BMJ. 1995 Apr 15;310(6985):951-2.

OBJECTIVE: To estimate the prevalence of dementia and its subtypes in the 
general population and examine the relation of the disease to education.
DESIGN: Population based cross sectional study.
SETTING: Ommoord, a suburb of Rotterdam.
SUBJECTS: 7528 participants of the Rotterdam study aged 55-106 years.
RESULTS: 474 cases of dementia were detected, giving an overall prevalence of 
6.3%. Prevalence ranged from 0.4% (5/1181 subjects) at age 55-59 years to 43.2% 
(19/44) at 95 years and over. Alzheimer's disease was the main subdiagnosis (339 
cases; 72%); it was also the main cause of the pronounced increase in dementia 
with age. The relative proportion of vascular dementia (76 cases; 16%), 
Parkinson's disease dementia (30; 6%), and other dementias (24; 5%) decreased 
with age. A substantially higher prevalence of dementia was found in subjects 
with a low level of education. The association with education was not due to 
confounding by cardiovascular disease.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of dementia increases exponentially with age. About 
one third of the population aged 85 and over has dementia. Three quarters of all 
dementia is due to Alzheimer's disease. In this study an inverse dose-response 
relation was found between education and dementia--in particular, Alzheimer's 
disease.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.310.6985.970
PMCID: PMC2549358
PMID: 7728032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 1995 Apr 20;115(10):1233-5.

[Dementia--where are we today?].

[Article in Norwegian]

Fossan G(1).

Author information:
(1)Seksjon for Geriatri Institutt for samfunnmedisinske fag, Universitetet i 
Bergen, Ulriksdal.

A review for the non-specialist. The proportion of dementia of different types 
varies in different investigations, illustrating the difficulty of 
classification. Recently genetic variants of amyloid precursor protein and 
apolipoprotein E have been found in some of the families with familial 
Alzheimer's disease. Cortical Lewy body disease and frontotemporal dementia have 
been described recently, indicating that Alzheimer's disease comprises more 
diseases. When diagnosing dementia, it is important to identify confusions, 
depressions, the vascular dementias and the potentially reversible ones. The 
treatment may include reducing drug therapy, prophylactic treatment of 
thromboembolic or hypertensive disease, care, information to the family and 
carers, and sometimes drug treatment for psychiatric symptoms. In the near 
future effective treatment of some of the primary degenerative dementias may 
become possible. It will then be necessary to make a more specified diagnosis at 
an early stage.

PMID: 7754492 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Psychiatr Pol. 1995 May-Jun;29(3):307-17.

[Dementia in diffuse Lewy body disease].

[Article in Polish]

Krzymiński S(1).

Author information:
(1)Wojewódzkiego Szpitala Specjalistycznego.

The article presents diagnostic criteria for dementia associated with diffuse 
Lewy body disease (DLBD) elaborated by the group of investigators from 
Nottingham (Byrne et al. 1991). These criteria allow to make the diagnosis of 
"probable" or "possible" dementia associated with DLBD. With certainty this form 
of dementia can only be diagnosed by neuropathological examination which reveals 
diffuse cortical Lewy bodies. At present there is no agreement whether DLBD is a 
variant of Alzheimer's disease or a separate nosological entity--the second 
commonest cause of dementia. The main clinical feature of DLBD is coexistence of 
dementia and symptoms of parkinsonian syndrome. The other important feature 
which differentiates between DLBD and other forms of dementia is a very 
considerable early fluctuation of cognitive state. Psychotic symptoms in the 
course of DLBD--visual and auditory hallucinations, delusions and 
depression--are common. At present treatment of DLBD is unknown. Treatment of 
psychotic symptoms is difficult because of the presence of parkinsonism.

PMID: 7652084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


295. No To Shinkei. 1995 Jun;47(6):603-12.

[A 51-year-old man with early onset parkinsonism].

[Article in Japanese]

Kondo T(1), Mochizuki H, Ueda G, Mori H, Shirai T, Imai H, Mizuno Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Iuntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

We report of 51-year-old man with early onset parkinsonism. The patient was well 
until 38 years of age, when he noted a difficulty in the use of his right leg; 
this difficulty improved after he received a medicine from his physician. He did 
not take medicine regularly, and he noted difficulty in standing up from a chair 
and in rolling over at age 40. Tremor was not a feature, but he noted slowness 
in his movements at age 42; at age 49, he noted diurnal fluctuation in his 
symptoms and at times he experienced hallucination. He was admitted to our 
hospital in September of 1992 for the first time when he was 50-year-old. At 
that time, neurologic examination revealed an alert and somewhat bradyphrenic 
man; Hasegawa dementia rating scale was 20/30. Cranial nerves were intact except 
for masked face and small voice. He showed stooped posture and small step gait 
cogwheel rigidity was noted in the four limbs more on the left; tremor was 
absent. Deep reflexes were within normal range and the sensation was intact. As 
he showed diurnal fluctuation in his symptoms, his medication was switched to 
levodopa 3,000 mg/day without a peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor. He was 
discharged for out patient follow up. But he did not take drugs regularly, and 
his neurologic condition deteriorated; he was admitted to another hospital. 
Neurologic examination at that time was essentially similar to that of his first 
admission to our hospital, except that he showed more severe rigidity and 
akinesia; again tremor was not detected. His cranial CT scan showed a mild 
ventricular dilatation without cortical or brain stem atrophy. During his 
hospital stay, he developed episodes of oculogyric crisis during peak dose of 
levodopa, and orthostatic hypotension. He developed pneumonia and expired on 
October 28, 1993. He was discussed in a neurological CPC, and the chief 
discussion arrived at the conclusion that the patient had early onset 
Parkinson's disease of Lewy body type. As differential diagnoses, early onset 
parkinsonism without Lewy body, pure form of diffuse Lewy body disease, 
pallidoluysian atrophy, and other conditions were considered; however, all of 
those possibilities were excluded. Early onset parkinsonism without Lewy body 
would have much earlier onset than this patient, and diffuse Lewy body disease 
would show more profound dementia 13 years after the onset. Pallidoluysian 
atrophy would be complicated with some dystonic features. Post-mortem 
examination showed marked discoloration and degeneration of the substantia 
nigra. The degeneration was most prominent in the ventrolateral tier of the 
substantia nigra.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

PMID: 7605692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Dementia. 1995 Jul-Aug;6(4):191-4. doi: 10.1159/000106945.

Familial Alzheimer's disease and cortical Lewy bodies: is there a genetic 
susceptibility factor?

Lippa CF(1), Smith TW, Nee L, Robitaille Y, Crain B, Dickson D, Pulaski-Salo D, 
Pollen DA.

Author information:
(1)University of Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester 01655, USA.

The reason for the occurrence of Lewy body disease (LBD) in Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) patients is unknown. If brains from etiologically different AD groups 
differ in their tendency to develop cortical Lewy bodies, the concurrence of LBD 
in AD patients may be a manifestation of the AD process in specific AD subsets. 
To address this issue, we counted cortical Lewy bodies in AD patients with 
genetic abnormalities on chromosome 14 (n = 19), and chromosome 21 (n = 3), 
sporadic AD (n = 27), Down's syndrome (n = 1) and control (n = 26) patients. 
Cortical Lewy bodies were occasionally present in AD patients with long-duration 
disease in most of the above AD subgroups, but were not present in any of our 
age-matched control cases. We suggest that cortical Lewy body formation may be 
an intrinsic part of the late pathologic changes of AD regardless of etiology 
and that it is not specific to any of the AD subtypes studied.

DOI: 10.1159/000106945
PMID: 7550597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Med Genet. 1995 Jul;32(7):516-8. doi: 10.1136/jmg.32.7.516.

Emotional and functional impact of DNA testing on patients with symptoms of 
Huntington's disease.

Jankovic J(1), Beach J, Ashizawa T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Parkinson's Disease Center and Movement Disorders 
Clinic, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

The potential impact of DNA testing on asymptomatic subjects at risk for 
Huntington's disease (HD) has been addressed by numerous studies, but the effect 
of revealing the genetic results to patients with a clinically established 
diagnosis of HD has not been previously evaluated. We studied 36 patients, with 
equal distribution of men and women, mean age 53.9 (SD 12.3) years (range 25-76) 
and mean duration of symptoms of 11.2 (SD 7.7) years (range 2-33), whose 
clinical diagnosis of HD was confirmed by expanded CAG repeats (> 40). Coping 
strategies and depression levels were assessed before the results of DNA testing 
were imparted. The assessments were repeated two weeks and three months after 
the results were explained to the patients and their relatives and were compared 
to the baseline assessments. This group of HD patients was compared with 10 
patients who had similar symptoms but the diagnosis of HD was excluded by normal 
CAG repeats (< 30). Although some patients with HD expressed a subjective 
reaction to the positive result (four were "surprised", one was "frustrated", 
and one "devastated"), there were no differences in any psychological scores 
including Beck Depression Inventory, functional capacity, symptom interference, 
independence scale, and other measures of mood and behaviour two weeks and three 
months later. Similarly, no change was noted in any of these measures in the 
non-HD group. These results suggest that mood and coping strategies are 
unaffected by DNA confirmation of diagnosis in symptomatic patients with HD.

DOI: 10.1136/jmg.32.7.516
PMCID: PMC1050542
PMID: 7562962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Mov Disord. 1995 Jul;10(4):450-4. doi: 10.1002/mds.870100408.

Binswanger's disease presenting as levodopa-responsive parkinsonism: 
clinicopathologic study of three cases.

Mark MH(1), Sage JI, Walters AS, Duvoisin RC, Miller DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New 
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, New Brunswick 08903, USA.

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 1996 Jul;11(4):461-2.

We report three cases of autopsy-proven Binswanger's disease (subcortical 
arteriosclerotic encephalopathy) with unusual clinical features. Two patients 
had supranuclear gaze disturbances, early gait dysfunction, and speech disorders 
suggestive of progressive supranuclear palsy. One of these patients was not 
demented at the time of death. The third patient had features typical of 
Parkinson's disease. All three patients were responsive to treatment with 
levodopa. The clinical spectrum of Binswanger's disease should be expanded to 
include levodopa-responsive parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870100408
PMID: 7565825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Arch Neurol. 1995 Jul;52(7):695-701. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1995.00540310069018.

The frequency and associated risk factors for dementia in patients with 
Parkinson's disease.

Marder K(1), Tang MX, Cote L, Stern Y, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Department of Neurology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, New York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To estimate the frequency and determine the risk factors for 
incident dementia in community-dwelling patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) 
and in control subjects.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study. During a 3.5-year period, 140 patients with 
idiopathic PD without evidence of dementia and 572 nondemented control subjects 
were identified in the community of Washington Heights-Inwood in New York, NY. 
All subjects underwent neurological and neuropsychological evaluations and 
follow-up examinations.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven patients with PD (19.2%) became demented throughout 2 
years, as compared with 87 (15.2%) of the control subjects. The relative risk 
(RR) for the development of dementia with PD was 1.7 (95% confidence interval 
[CI], 1.1 to 2.7) after adjusting for age, education, and gender. Predictive 
features of incident dementia were an extrapyramidal score greater than 25 (RR, 
3.56; 95% CI, 1.4 to 8.9) and a Hamilton Depression Rating Scale score greater 
than 10 (RR, 3.55; 95% CI, 1.6 to 7.9).
CONCLUSION: Patients with PD, especially those with severe extrapyramidal signs, 
have almost twice the risk for the development of dementia than do 
community-dwelling control subjects.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1995.00540310069018
PMID: 7619026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Neurosci Lett. 1995 Jul 14;194(1-2):145-7. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)11743-g.

Apolipoprotein E and B alleles in Parkinson's patients.

Poduslo SE(1), Riggs D, Rolan T, Schwankhaus J.

Author information:
(1)Texas Tech University Health Sciences Center, Department of Neurology, 
Lubbock 79430, USA.

Parkinson's patients were genotyped for the apolipoprotein E alleles as well as 
polymorphisms at the apolipoprotein B loci to determine whether they were at 
risk for late onset Alzheimer's disease or coronary disease. The Parkinson's 
patients were at no greater risk for either disease than were the control 
spouses. The frequency for the APOE4 allele was 11% compared with the spouses, 
10%. Interestingly, 20% of the patients had the 2/3 genotype which may have a 
protective effect from late onset Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)11743-g
PMID: 7478201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]