1201. J Neurol. 2004 Nov;251(11):1383-92. doi: 10.1007/s00415-004-0549-2.

Cognitive and SPECT characteristics predict progression of Parkinson's disease 
in newly diagnosed patients.

Dujardin K(1), Defebvre L, Duhamel A, Lecouffe P, Rogelet P, Steinling M, Destée 
A.

Author information:
(1)Neurologie et Pathologie du Mouvement Neurologie A, Hôpital Salengro Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire, 59037, Lille Cedex, France. dujardin@univ-lille3.fr

OBJECTIVE: To identify features in cognitive functioning and regional cerebral 
blood flow (rCBF) in newly diagnosed Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and to 
determine whether these factors are able to predict the progression of the 
disease in general and the development of cognitive decline in particular.
METHODS: 50 previously treatment-naive PD patients participated in the study. 
Cognitive assessment and SPECT were performed twice: at the time of diagnosis 
and then 3 years later. Six patients died or refused to continue. The Mattis 
dementia rating scale, the WAIS-R digit span test, a word list learning/recall 
test, a word fluency task and the Stroop word-colour test were used to assess 
cognitive function. rCBF was measured in 10 pairs of regions of interest. 
Principal component analysis of the data from the final examination was used to 
determine which variables allowed the formation of patient subgroups. 
Thereafter, factorial discriminant analysis (FDA) was performed in order to 
obtain a predictive model of these final classes.
RESULTS: A stepwise procedure enabled the identification of 3 clusters (26, 16 
and 2 patients). As the patients in the smallest cluster met the criteria for 
dementia at the final examination, they were discarded from further analyses. 
All the cognitive variables contributed to the constitution of the two other 
clusters. Age, educational level and all the rCBF parameters also contributed 
but to a lesser extent. Comparison of these groups showed reduced overall 
cognitive efficiency and an exacerbated subcorticofrontal syndrome in the 
16-patient cluster. FDA showed that the best predictive model for the final 
classes was based on 7 variables: educational level, semantic and alternating 
word fluency, Stroop interference index and the right medial frontal, left 
parietal and left lenticular nucleus rCBF findings.
CONCLUSION: Even though both cognitive and rCBF parameters help predict the 
progression of newly diagnosed PD patients and bearing in mind the limitations 
of the SPECT method used here, it appears that the contribution of cognitive 
assessment is greater than that of rCBF measurement.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-004-0549-2
PMID: 15592735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1202. Arch Neurol. 2004 Dec;61(12):1906-11. doi: 10.1001/archneur.61.12.1906.

The rate of cognitive decline in Parkinson disease.

Aarsland D(1), Andersen K, Larsen JP, Perry R, Wentzel-Larsen T, Lolk A, 
Kragh-Sørensen P.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatric Psychiatry, Central Hospital of Rogaland, Stavanger, 
N-4095 Hillevåg, Norway. daa@sir.no

OBJECTIVES: To measure the rate and predictors of change on the Mini-Mental 
State Examination in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and to compare that 
change with the Mini-Mental State Examination changes of patients with Alzheimer 
disease and nondemented subjects.
PATIENTS: Patients with PD were drawn from a community-based cohort in Rogaland 
County, Norway. Those who were without cognitive impairment at disease onset and 
participated in 1 or more assessments after visit 1 were included and examined 
after 4 years (visit 2) and 8 years (visit 3). Motor, cognitive, and psychiatric 
symptoms were rated using standardized scales at visit 1. Two population-based 
cohorts of patients with Alzheimer disease and nondemented control subjects were 
included for comparison. Data were analyzed using a mixed-effects model.
RESULTS: One hundred twenty-nine PD patients (57% women) were included. The mean 
(SD) Mini-Mental State Examination score at visit 1 was 27.3 (5.7). The mean 
annual decline in score from visit 1 to visit 3 was 1.1 (95% confidence 
interval, 0.8 to 1.3; 3.9% change from visit 1). Patients with PD and dementia 
(n = 49) had an annual decline from visit 1 to visit 2 of 2.3 (95% confidence 
interval, 2.1 to 2.5; 9.1% change from visit 1), compared with 2.6 (95% 
confidence interval, 2.3 to 2.8; 10.6% change from visit 1) in the patients with 
Alzheimer disease (n = 34) (mean annual decline among patients with PD and 
dementia vs patients with Alzheimer disease, not significant). The change in 
score for nondemented PD patients (n = 80) was small and similar to that for 
nondemented control subjects (n = 1621). Old age, hallucinations, and more 
severe motor symptoms (rigidity and motor scores mediated by nondopaminergic 
lesions) at visit 1 were significantly associated with a more rapid cognitive 
decline in patients with PD.
CONCLUSIONS: The mean annual decline on the Mini-Mental State Examination for PD 
patients was 1 point. However, a marked variation was found. In patients with PD 
and dementia, the mean annual decline was 2.3, which was similar to the decline 
observed in patients with Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.61.12.1906
PMID: 15596611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1203. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2005 Jan;76(1):106-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2003.035022.

Disturbance of sensory filtering in dementia with Lewy bodies: comparison with 
Parkinson's disease dementia and Alzheimer's disease.

Perriol MP(1), Dujardin K, Derambure P, Marcq A, Bourriez JL, Laureau E, 
Pasquier F, Defebvre L, Destée A.

Author information:
(1)Neurophysiologie clinique, Hôpital Salengro, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire, F-59037 Lille Cedex, France. mperriol@yahoo.fr

INTRODUCTION: Prepulse inhibition (PPI) is considered to mirror an organism's 
ability to filter out irrelevant sensory or cognitive information. The 
disruption of PPI has never been studied in individuals suffering from dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB). As attention deficits largely contribute to cognitive 
impairment in DLB, an investigation with a PPI paradigm is useful for 
differential diagnosis of DLB versus Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's 
disease dementia (PDD).
OBJECTIVE AND METHODS: PPI of the N1/P2 component of auditory evoked potentials 
was used to investigate the early stages of attention selectivity in 10 DLB, 10 
AD, and 10 PDD patients, as well as in 10 healthy controls. The PPI paradigm 
consisted of the presentation of sound pulses (40 ms, 115 dB) preceded by a 
prepulse (40 ms, 80 dB). Sound stimuli were presented in a total of 80 trials in 
a pseudo-random order.
RESULTS: Non-parametric analyses of variance revealed a significant group effect 
on the 120 ms lead interval. Retrospective analyses revealed that PPI was 
significantly reduced in DLB compared to healthy controls and AD. In the PDD 
group, the disturbance was of intermediate intensity.
CONCLUSION: The present study revealed a severe disturbance of PPI in DLB 
patients. The DLB patients displayed a specific disruption profile in terms of 
magnitude as well as time course.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2003.035022
PMCID: PMC1739321
PMID: 15608006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1204. Scanning. 2004 Nov-Dec;26(6):319. doi: 10.1002/sca.4950260610.

Proteomics and the early identification of disease.

McGuinness PE.

DOI: 10.1002/sca.4950260610
PMID: 15612208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1205. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Jan 3;1739(2-3):240-50. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.08.007.

Mutations causing neurodegenerative tauopathies.

Goedert M(1), Jakes R.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge CB2 2QH, UK. 
mg@mrc-lmb.ac.uk

Tau is the major component of the intracellular filamentous deposits that define 
a number of neurodegenerative diseases. They include the largely sporadic 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), progressive supranuclear palsy, corticobasal 
degeneration, Pick's disease and argyrophilic grain disease, as well as the 
inherited frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17). For a long time, it was unclear whether the dysfunction of tau 
protein follows disease or whether disease follows tau dysfunction. This was 
resolved when mutations in Tau were found to cause FTDP-17. Currently, 32 
different mutations have been identified in over 100 families. About half of the 
known mutations have their primary effect at the protein level. They reduce the 
ability of tau protein to interact with microtubules and increase its propensity 
to assemble into abnormal filaments. The other mutations have their primary 
effect at the RNA level and perturb the normal ratio of three-repeat to 
four-repeat tau isoforms. Where studied, this resulted in a relative 
overproduction of tau protein with four microtubule-binding domains in the 
brain. Individual Tau mutations give rise to diseases that resemble progressive 
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal degeneration or Pick's disease. Moreover, the 
H1 haplotype of Tau has been identified as a significant risk factor for 
progressive supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration. At a practical 
level, the new work is leading to the production of experimental animal models 
that reproduce the essential molecular and cellular features of the human 
tauopathies, including the formation of abundant filaments made of 
hyperphosphorylated tau protein and nerve cell degeneration.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2004.08.007
PMID: 15615642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1206. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jan 3;579(1):1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.018.

Proteasome inhibition and Tau proteolysis: an unexpected regulation.

Delobel P(1), Leroy O, Hamdane M, Sambo AV, Delacourte A, Buée L.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U422, Institut de Médecine Prédictive et Recherche Thérapeutique, 
Place de Verdun, 59045, Lille, France. delobel@mrc-lmb.cam.ac.uk

Increasing evidence suggests that an inhibition of the proteasome, as 
demonstrated in Parkinson's disease, might be involved in Alzheimer's disease. 
In this disease and other Tauopathies, Tau proteins are hyperphosphorylated and 
aggregated within degenerating neurons. In this state, Tau is also 
ubiquitinated, suggesting that the proteasome might be involved in Tau 
proteolysis. Thus, to investigate if proteasome inhibition leads to 
accumulation, hyperphosphorylation and aggregation of Tau, we used neuroblastoma 
cells overexpressing Tau proteins. Surprisingly, we showed that the inhibition 
of the proteasome led to a bidirectional degradation of Tau. Following this 
result, the cellular mechanisms that may degrade Tau were investigated.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2004.11.018
PMCID: PMC7130380
PMID: 15620682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1207. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2005 Sep;112(9):1249-54. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-004-0263-3. Epub 2004 Dec 29.

The role of alpha-synuclein gene multiplications in early-onset Parkinson's 
disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Hofer A(1), Berg D, Asmus F, Niwar M, Ransmayr G, Riemenschneider M, Bonelli SB, 
Steffelbauer M, Ceballos-Baumann A, Haussermann P, Behnke S, Krüger R, Prestel 
J, Sharma M, Zimprich A, Riess O, Gasser T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Hertie-Institute for Clinical Brain 
Research, University of Tübingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: A triplication of the alpha-synuclein gene was found to cause 
autosomal dominant Lewy body disease in two distinct families.
METHOD: We searched for alterations of alpha-synuclein gene dosage and analysed 
the entire coding region for point mutations in 54 dementia with Lewy body 
disease (DLB) and in 103 young onset Parkinson's disease (PD) patients from 
Central Europe.
RESULTS: We could not detect any quantitative alterations in the gene dosage of 
alpha-synuclein. Mutational screening of the entire coding region of 
alpha-synuclein revealed only one silent mutation V3V (adenine9guanine) in one 
case.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, this phenomenon appears not to be a major cause in the 
pathogenesis of sporadic DLB and young onset PD in this European population.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-004-0263-3
PMID: 15622440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1208. Eur Neurol. 2005;53(1):15-21. doi: 10.1159/000082956. Epub 2004 Dec 27.

The tau gene haplotype h1 confers a susceptibility to Parkinson's disease.

Zhang J(1), Song Y, Chen H, Fan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the Third Hospital of Beijing University, Beijing, 
China. who626@163.com

BACKGROUND: Polymorphisms in the tau gene may be associated with increased risk 
for idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD); however, most of previous association 
studies have been underpowered to detect a potentially modest contribution of 
the tau variants to PD risk.
OBJECTIVE: To clarify the relationship between genetic variation in tau gene and 
PD risk, we conducted a meta-analysis of all published association studies. We 
identified 14 independent case-control studies including 2,093 PD cases and 
2,258 controls. After excluding two studies contributing to most of 
between-study heterogeneity, the pooled odds ratios (OR) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CI) of PD were 1.42 (95% CI, 1.23-1.65) for those with H1/H1 genotype 
compared with all others and 1.52 (95% CI, 1.12-2.04) for all individuals 
carrying H1 haplotype versus all others. Based on the data available, the 
results were not significantly different according to sex, family history of PD, 
age at onset and dementia status.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results support the notion that tau gene H1 haplotype may be an 
important risk factor of PD.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000082956
PMID: 15627775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1209. Exp Neurol. 2005 Feb;191 Suppl 1:S95-S103. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2004.06.017.

Differentiation of Alzheimer's disease from dementia with Lewy bodies utilizing 
positron emission tomography with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose and neuropsychological 
testing.

Gilman S(1), Koeppe RA, Little R, An H, Junck L, Giordani B, Persad C, Heumann 
M, Wernette K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0489, 
USA. sgilman@umich.edu

We compared the relative utility of neuropsychological testing and positron 
emission tomography (PET) with [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose ([18F]FDG) in 
differentiating Alzheimer's disease (AD) from dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
We studied 25 patients with AD, 20 with DLB, and 19 normal elderly controls. 
There was no difference between patient groups for MMSE, confrontational naming, 
or verbal learning. The DLB group was significantly more impaired than the AD 
group for verbal fluency, and the AD group was significantly more impaired than 
the DLB group for verbal delayed recall. The DLB group had greater difficulty 
than the AD group on a visual discrimination task that does not require motor 
functioning, but the difference did not reach significance. Family ratings of 
motor functioning suggested significantly greater impairment in DLB patients 
than in AD patients. PET studies revealed significantly lower local cerebral 
metabolic rates for glucose (lCMRglc) for visual cortex (Brodmann areas 17, 18, 
and 19) in the DLB than the AD group, but no differences for other regions 
commonly affected in AD, including posterior cingulate, superior parietal lobe, 
lateral temporal lobe, and the prefrontal region. Motor ratings were 
significantly correlated with lCMRglc in all areas of cerebral cortex, including 
Brodmann areas 17, 18, and 19. The results demonstrate a similar profile of 
cerebral hypometabolism in the two patient groups except in the visual cortex, 
where the DLB group shows markedly lower lCMRglc than the AD group. 
Neuropsychological testing also differentiates the groups, and family ratings of 
motor functioning are as robust as PET in these later stages of the disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2004.06.017
PMID: 15629765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1210. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2005;19(2-3):164-70. doi: 10.1159/000083178. Epub 
2005 Jan 5.

Tau protein, Abeta42 and S-100B protein in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Mollenhauer B(1), Cepek L, Bibl M, Wiltfang J, Schulz-Schaeffer WJ, Ciesielczyk 
B, Neumann M, Steinacker P, Kretzschmar HA, Poser S, Trenkwalder C, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Georg August University Göttingen, Göttingen, 
Germany. bmollenhauer@med.uni-goettingen.de

The intra vitam diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is still based on 
clinical grounds. So far no technical investigations have been available to 
support this diagnosis. As for tau protein and beta-amyloid(1-42) (Abeta42), 
promising results for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) have been 
reported; we evaluated these markers and S-100B protein in cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF), using a set of commercially available assays, of 71 patients with DLB, 67 
patients with AD and 41 nondemented controls (NDC) for their differential 
diagnostic relevance. Patients with DLB showed significantly lower tau protein 
values compared to AD but with a high overlap of values. More prominent 
differences were observed in the comparison of DLB patients with all three 
clinical core features and AD patients. Abeta42 levels were decreased in the DLB 
and AD groups versus NDC, without significant subgroup differences. S-100B 
levels were not significantly different between the groups. Tau protein levels 
in CSF may contribute to the clinical distinction between DLB and AD, but the 
value of the markers is still limited especially due to mixed pathology. We 
conclude that more specific markers have to be established for the 
differentiation of these diseases.

DOI: 10.1159/000083178
PMID: 15637452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1211. Mov Disord. 2005 Apr;20(4):479-484. doi: 10.1002/mds.20335.

Parkin disease in a Brazilian kindred: Manifesting heterozygotes and clinical 
follow-up over 10 years.

Khan NL(1), Horta W(2), Eunson L(1), Graham E(1), Johnson JO(3), Chang S(3), 
Davis M(1), Singleton A(3), Wood NW(1), Lees AJ(1)(4).

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Institute of Neurology, Queen Square, 
London, United Kingdom.
(2)Hospital Universitario Walter Cantidio, Neurology Service and Movement 
Disorders Department, Federal University of Ceara, Fortaleza, Ceara, Brazil.
(3)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
(4)Reta Lila Weston Unit of Neurological Studies, Royal Free Hospital and 
University College Medical School, London, United Kingdom.

We report on a large Brazilian kindred with young-onset parkinsonism due to 
either a homozygous or heterozygous mutation in parkin. A total of 6 members 
were affected: 5 were homozygous and 1 heterozygous for a deletion in exon 4. 
Two other heterozygotes also had extrapyramidal signs. All affected subjects 
showed characteristic features of parkin disease with foot dystonia and an 
excellent response to levodopa complicated by motor fluctuations and dyskinesia 
within 3 years of therapy. Careful clinical follow-up over 10 years showed the 
phenotype was similar in all the homozygotes with asymmetrical limb bradykinesia 
and early walking difficulties. Some acceleration of disability was observed in 
some of the cases as they entered the third decade of illness, but dementia was 
absent.

Copyright 2005 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20335
PMID: 15641013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1212. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2004 Nov;44(11):897-9.

[Measurement of brain function by positron emission tomography--clinical 
application of PET to neurological disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Momose T(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, University of Tokyo.

Positron emission tomography has enabled us to measure various fundamental 
parameters of human brain physiology and chemistry, such as cerebral blood flow, 
metabolism and synaptic function. Blood flow and oxygen metabolism is important 
for the understanding of cerebrovascular Disease. Glucose metabolism is useful 
for the determination of epileptic foci and for the evaluation of tumor 
malignancy. Measurement of pre- and post-synaptic function is applicable to the 
differential diagnosis of parkinsonism. Imaging analysis of functional 
neuroanatomy of these parameters are very promising for the early diagnosis of 
dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease. Developmennt of new radiotracers is 
expected for detection of early specific pathological changes and more previous 
changes underlying the deterioration of neurochemistry, such as genetic 
abnormalities.

PMID: 15651325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1213. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 8;280(14):13520-8. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M413490200. Epub 2005 
Jan 25.

Three- and four-repeat tau regulate the dynamic instability of two distinct 
microtubule subpopulations in qualitatively different manners. Implications for 
neurodegeneration.

Levy SF(1), Leboeuf AC, Massie MR, Jordan MA, Wilson L, Feinstein SC.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute and Department of Molecular, Cellular, and 
Developmental Biology, University of California, Santa Barbara, California 
93106, USA.

The microtubule-associated protein tau is implicated in the pathogenesis of many 
neurodegenerative diseases, including fronto-temporal dementia and parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), in which both RNA splicing and amino acid 
substitution mutations in tau cause dominantly inherited early onset dementia. 
RNA-splicing FTDP-17 mutations alter the wild-type approximately 50:50 3-repeat 
(3R) to 4-repeat (4R) tau isoform ratio, usually resulting in an excess of 4R 
tau. To examine further how splicing mutations might cause dysfunction by 
misregulation of microtubule dynamics, we used video microscopy to determine the 
in vitro behavior of individual microtubules stabilized by varying amounts of 
human 4R and 3R tau. At low tau:tubulin ratios (1:55 and 1:45), all 3R isoforms 
reduced microtubule growth rates relative to the no-tau control, whereas all 4R 
isoforms increased them; however, at a high tau:tubulin ratio (1:20), both 4R 
and 3R tau increased the growth rates. Further analysis revealed two distinct 
subpopulations of growing microtubules in the absence of tau. Increasing 
concentrations of both 4R and 3R tau resulted in an increase in the size of the 
faster growing subpopulation of microtubules; however, 4R tau caused a 
redistribution to the faster growing subpopulation at lower tau:tubulin ratios 
than 3R tau. This modulation of discrete growth rate subpopulations by tau 
suggests that tau causes a conformational shift in the microtubule resulting in 
altered dynamics. Quantitative and qualitative differences observed between 4R 
and 3R tau are consistent with a "microtubule misregulation" model in which 
abnormal tau isoform expression results in the inability to properly regulate 
microtubule dynamics, leading to neuronal death and dementia.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M413490200
PMID: 15671021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1214. Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2004 Dec;2(4):257-69.

[Attention and aging].

[Article in French]

Siéroff E(1), Piquard A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de psychologie expérimentale, Université Paris V / CNRS. 
eric.sieroff@univ-paris5.fr

Due to progress in the cognitive theories in the last twenty years, the 
description of attentional deficits associated with normal or pathological aging 
has substantially improved. In this article, attentional deficits are presented 
according to Posner theory, which describes three sub-systems in a global 
network of attention: vigilance, selective attention, command. This theory not 
only characterizes the functions of these subsystems, but gives precise 
indications about their anatomical and neurochemical substrates. Several 
clinical tests can be described for each of these different subsystems. The main 
attentional deficits are presented in the second part of this paper: if some 
decline of the attentional command occurs in normal aging, a real deficit in 
this subsystem is found in most degenerative processes (frontotemporal dementia, 
Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases). Alzheimer disease is also frequently 
associated with a deficit of selective spatial attention, early in the evolution 
of the disease.

PMID: 15683981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1215. Neurobiol Aging. 2005 May;26(5):587-95. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2004.10.002.

Searching for the role and the most suitable biomarkers of oxidative stress in 
Alzheimer's disease and in other neurodegenerative diseases.

Migliore L(1), Fontana I, Colognato R, Coppede F, Siciliano G, Murri L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Environmental Sciences, University of Pisa, Via S. 
Giuseppe 22, 56126 Pisa, Italy. I.migliore@geog.unipi.it

Comment on
    Neurobiol Aging. 2005 May;26(5):575-8.
    Neurobiol Aging. 2005 May;26(5):579-80.
    Neurobiol Aging. 2005 May;26(5):581-3.
    Neurobiol Aging. 2005 May;26(5):585-6.

The contribution of oxidative stress to neurodegeneration is not peculiar of a 
specific neurodegenerative disease, oxidative stress has been found implicated 
in a number of neurodegenerative disorders among which Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Even increasing 
are studies dealing with the search for peripheral biomarkers of oxidative 
stress in biological fluids or even in peripheral tissues themselves such as 
fibroblasts or blood cells. The application of the modified version of the comet 
assay for the detection of oxidised purines and pyrimidines in peripheral blood 
leukocytes results particularly useful if the study requires repeated blood 
drawn from the same individual, for instance if a clinical trial is performed 
with a preventive therapy. Likely damage occurs to every category of biological 
macromolecules and we consider, in the context of neurodegenerative diseases, 
particularly critical the proteic level. The identification of subjects at risk 
to develop AD or with pre-pathogenic conditions, the possibility to use "a 
battery of assays" for the detection of oxidative damage at peripheral level, 
together with recent advances in brain imaging, will allow to better address 
studies aimed not only to therapeutic purposes but also mainly to primary 
prevention.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2004.10.002
PMID: 15708433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1216. Arch Neurol. 2005 Feb;62(2):297-302. doi: 10.1001/archneur.62.2.297.

Functional correlates and prevalence of mild parkinsonian signs in a community 
population of older people.

Louis ED(1), Tang MX, Schupf N, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)The Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease and the Aging Brain, and Department of Neurology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) are associated with incident dementia 
and an increased risk of mortality. To our knowledge, the functional correlates 
of MPS have not been studied.
OBJECTIVES: To study the functional correlates of MPS, including self-reported 
and performance-based measures of function, and to determine the prevalence of 
MPS in a cohort of community-dwelling older people (aged >or=65 years).
DESIGN: Participants (N = 1866) in the Washington Heights-Inwood Columbia Aging 
Project underwent a neurological assessment that included a modified motor 
portion of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, which yielded a 
parkinsonian sign score (range, 0-40) and parkinsonian sign subscores (axial 
function, rigidity, and tremor). A functional assessment included 3 
self-reported measures of function and 2 performance-based tests. Participants 
with Parkinson disease were excluded.
RESULTS: Mild parkinsonian signs were present in 469 (25.1%) of the 1866 
participants. The parkinsonian sign score was correlated with functional and 
performance-based test scores (r = 0.24-0.32, P<.001). The axial function and 
rigidity subscores correlated to a greater extent with functional and 
performance-based test scores than did the tremor subscore. In analysis of 
covariance models, excluding participants with dementia and adjusting for age, 
sex, ethnicity, education, depressive symptoms, and medical illnesses (eg, 
arthritis), the parkinsonian sign score and age were strongly and independently 
associated with functional scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Mild parkinsonian signs, and particularly axial dysfunction, were 
associated with functional disability, including self-reported and 
performance-based measures of functional difficulty. Given the high prevalence 
of these signs in elderly persons, MPS may be a significant indicator of 
disability in elderly persons.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.62.2.297
PMID: 15710859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1217. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2005 Jan;45(1):1-5.

[Psychoses in patients with Parkinson's disease; their frequency, phenomenology, 
and clinical correlates].

[Article in Japanese]

Kashihara K(1), Ohno M, Katsu Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Okayama Kyokuto Hospital.

The frequency, phenomenology, and risk factors of hallucinations and delusions 
were investigated in 64 consecutive inpatients with Parkinson's disease. Fifty 
patients were admitted to our hospital with symptoms related to Parkinson's 
disease: psychiatric problems 27 (psychosis 22; anxiety 2; depression 2; mania 
1): motor symptoms, 20 (wearing-off 5; akinesia 4; freezing 4; postural 
instability 4; dyskinesia 2; tremor 2; dystonia 1), and sensory symptoms, 3. 
Fourteen patients were admitted with other medical problems (pneumonia 4; 
cerebral infarction 3; bone fracture 3; lumbago 2; seizure 1; cat bite 1). 
Totally 49 patients had psychiatric problems. Psychosis was present in 43 
patients, dementia in 10, depression in 8, mania in 1, anxiety in 10, agitation 
in 6, stereotypy in 2, and hypersexuality in 2. Of the 43 patients with 
psychoses, 40 presented with visual hallucinations, 18 with auditory 
hallucinations, and 23 with delusions. To determine what the clinical correlates 
with the severity of psychosis were, we divided the patients into 3 groups: the 
severe group, 22 patients admitted because of psychotic symptoms; the mild 
group, 21 patients admitted because of problems other than psychosis but 
presenting psychotic symptoms; and the control group, 21 patients who had no 
psychotic symptoms. Incidences of auditory hallucinations and delusions were 
higher in the severe group as compared to the mild group. Patients in the severe 
group had higher Hoehn-Yahr stages, lower Mini-Mental State Examination scores, 
decreased H/M ratios of cardiac 123I-MIBG uptake, and lower frequencies of 
background activity on electroencephalograms. There were no differences in age 
at admission, age at onset of Parkinson's disease, duration of illness, amounts 
of levodopa and dopamine agonists received, Hamilton's depression rating scores, 
and brain MR findings, including atrophy and ischemic changes. Emergence of 
psychotic symptoms in parkinsonian patients appears to be clearly associated 
with impaired cognitive function. Therefore, it may be associated with the 
disease process itself. Terms such as dopaminomimetic or levodopa-induced 
psychosis may not be appropriate when describing psychosis in Parkinson's 
disease.

PMID: 15714992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1218. NeuroRx. 2004 Jan;1(1):111-6. doi: 10.1602/neurorx.1.1.111.

Prophylactic activation of neuroprotective stress response pathways by dietary 
and behavioral manipulations.

Mattson MP(1), Duan W, Wan R, Guo Z.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences, National Institute on Aging Gerontology Research 
Center, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA. mattsonm@grc.nia.nih.gov

It is well established that when most types of cells, including neurons, are 
exposed to a mild stress they increase their ability to resist more severe 
stress. This "preconditioning" phenomenon involves up-regulation of genes that 
encode cytoprotective proteins such as heat-shock proteins and growth factors. 
We found that a similar beneficial cellular stress response can be induced in 
neurons throughout the brain by a "meal-skipping" dietary restriction (DR) 
regimen in rats and mice. DR is effective in protecting neurons and improving 
functional outcome in models of stroke, Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and 
Huntington's diseases. DR induces an increase in the levels of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and heat-shock proteins in neurons. DR also 
stimulates neurogenesis in the hippocampus, and BDNF plays a role in this effect 
of DR. Physical exercise and environmental enrichment are two other 
manipulations that have been shown to induce BDNF expression in the brain, 
presumably because it is a mild cellular stress. When taken together with 
epidemiological and clinical studies in humans, the data from animal studies 
suggest that it may be possible to reduce the risk for age-related 
neurodegenerative disorders through dietary and behavioral modifications that 
act by promoting neuronal plasticity and survival.

DOI: 10.1602/neurorx.1.1.111
PMCID: PMC534916
PMID: 15717011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1219. NeuroRx. 2004 Apr;1(2):213-25. doi: 10.1602/neurorx.1.2.213.

Cerebrospinal fluid protein biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.

Blennow K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Section of Experimental Neuroscience, 
The Sahlgrenska Academy at Göteborg University, SE-43180 Göteborg, Sweden. 
kaj.blennow@neuro.gu.se

The introduction of acetylcholine esterase (AChE) inhibitors as a symptomatic 
treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD) has made patients seek medical advice at 
an earlier stage of the disease. This has highlighted the importance of 
diagnostic markers for early AD. However, there is no clinical method to 
determine which of the patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) will 
progress to AD with dementia, and which have a benign form of MCI without 
progression. In this paper, the performance of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) protein 
biomarkers for AD is reviewed. The diagnostic performance of the three 
biomarkers, total tau, phospho-tau, and the 42 amino acid form of beta-amyloid 
have been evaluated in numerous studies and their ability to identify incipient 
AD in MCI cases has also been studied. Some candidate AD biomarkers including 
ubiquitin, neurofilament proteins, growth-associated protein 43 (neuromodulin), 
and neuronal thread protein (AD7c) show interesting results but have been less 
extensively studied. It is concluded that CSF biomarkers may have clinical 
utility in the differentiation between AD and several important differential 
diagnoses, including normal aging, depression, alcohol dementia, and Parkinson's 
disease, and also in the identification of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in cases 
with rapidly progressive dementia. Early diagnosis of AD is not only of 
importance to be able to initiate symptomatic treatment with AChE inhibitors, 
but will be the basis for initiation of treatment with drugs aimed at slowing 
down or arresting the degenerative process, such as gamma-secretase inhibitors, 
if these prove to affect AD pathology and to have a clinical effect.

DOI: 10.1602/neurorx.1.2.213
PMCID: PMC534929
PMID: 15717022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1220. Nucl Med Commun. 2005 Mar;26(3):189-96. doi: 10.1097/00006231-200503000-00003.

Emission tomography in dementia.

Pakrasi S(1), O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Health and Ageing, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 6BE, UK. sanjeet.pakrasi@ncl.ac.uk

Dementia is a chronic brain syndrome with enormous impact on health care 
provision. Emission tomography (single photon emission computed tomography 
(SPECT) and positron emission tomography (PET)) provides a unique tool to 
investigate functional and neurochemical changes, both in those with established 
dementia and in those at risk of subsequent cognitive decline. Alzheimer's 
disease is characterized by bilateral temporoparietal hypoperfusion on SPECT and 
hypometabolism on PET, which may precede the onset of dementia as similar 
changes can be demonstrated in those with mild cognitive impairment and in those 
genetically at risk of developing Alzheimer's disease. In dementia with Lewy 
bodies medial parietal and occipital perfusion deficits are seen together with 
pre-synaptic and post-synaptic dopaminergic changes, most particularly a 
reduction in the striatal pre-synaptic dopamine transporter which can be 
visualized using appropriate ligands (e.g., (123)I-FP-CIT). Vascular dementia is 
associated with multiple, asymmetric, perfusion deficits in multi-infarct 
dementia. In contrast, subcortical vascular dementia is associated with reduced 
perfusion but preserved oxygen extraction fraction on PET. Fronto-temporal 
dementia is characterized by both hypometabolism and hypoperfusion in 
fronto-temporal lobes, though hypometabolism appears more extensive, affecting 
large areas of the cerebral hemispheres. Longitudinal studies of treatment 
response in Alzheimer's disease with cholinergic drugs have found changes in 
regional blood flow and nicotinic and muscarinic receptor function in those 
patients who respond to treatment. Currently, emission tomography is widely used 
for assisting with clinical differential diagnosis. Future developments will 
entail the development and application of more specific neurochemical ligands 
and those which bear a closer relationship to the underlying disease processes, 
including markers of tau, amyloid and synuclein pathology.

DOI: 10.1097/00006231-200503000-00003
PMID: 15722899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1221. Osteoporos Int. 2005 Oct;16(10):1239-46. doi: 10.1007/s00198-005-1835-2. Epub 
2005 Feb 24.

Assessment of risk factors for second hip fractures in Japanese elderly.

Yamanashi A(1), Yamazaki K, Kanamori M, Mochizuki K, Okamoto S, Koide Y, Kin K, 
Nagano A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
1-20-1 Handayama, 431-3192 Hamamatsu, Japan. yamanasi@tm.hama-med.ac.jp

In an attempt to identify a cohort with a high risk of suffering a fracture of 
the contralateral hip (second hip fracture), we assessed patients who had 
suffered hip fracture. A total of 714 patients (130 men and 584 women) were 
prospectively followed to determine those who suffered a second hip fracture. 
Pathologic hip fractures and fractures that emerged from high-energy trauma were 
excluded from the analysis. Age, gender, Singh Index (SI), fracture type, 
cognitive impairment, and comorbid medical conditions were investigated as 
medical predictors. The 714 patients were observed for 1,579.5 person-years 
(mean: 2.4+/-1.4 years per patient). During the observation period, 45 second 
hip fractures were identified (bilateral group), giving an overall incidence of 
0.029 per person-year. The annual incidence rate declined linearly from the 
occasion of the initial fracture. Furthermore, the second hip fracture tended to 
occur increasingly within 8 months after the initial hip fracture. The second 
hip fracture was of the same type (trochanteric or cervical) in 79% of the 
trochanteric and 71% of the cervical fractures. There was no significant 
difference in the incidence of second hip fracture by gender or age. In 
addition, there was no significant difference in the distribution of SI grades 
of the unfractured hip at the initial hip fracture between the 669 patients who 
had not suffered a second hip fracture (unilateral group) and the bilateral 
group. Cox proportional hazard regression analysis revealed that increased risk 
of a second hip fracture was associated with senile dementia and Parkinson's 
disease. We concluded that careful follow-up of hip fracture patients associated 
with senile dementia and Parkinson's disease might effectively prevent the 
incidence of a second hip fracture.

DOI: 10.1007/s00198-005-1835-2
PMID: 15729479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1222. Ann Neurol. 2005 Mar;57(3):429-34. doi: 10.1002/ana.20393.

A mutant PSEN1 causes dementia with Lewy bodies and variant Alzheimer's disease.

Ishikawa A(1), Piao YS, Miyashita A, Kuwano R, Onodera O, Ohtake H, Suzuki M, 
Nishizawa M, Takahashi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nishi-Ojiya National Hospital, Ojiya, Japan. 
ishikawa@agano.ne.jp

We report early-onset parkinsonism and dementia of 18 years' duration in a 
52-year-old man whose grandfather and father had suffered from a similar 
neurological disease. In this patient, we found neuronal loss in various brain 
regions including the substantia nigra and cerebral cortex, Lewy bodies, cotton 
wool plaques, corticospinal tract degeneration, cerebral amyloid angiopathy, and 
a novel three-base pair deletion in exon 12 of the presenilin-1 (PSEN1) gene. We 
considered that the mutant PSEN1 might play an important role in the 
pathogenetic process of both aggregation of alpha-synuclein into Lewy bodies and 
deposition of beta-amyloid into cotton wool plaques.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20393
PMID: 15732120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1223. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2005 Jan;42(1):21-4. doi: 10.3143/geriatrics.42.21.

[Iatrogenic neurological disorders in old people: a review].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University School of Medicine.

Aged people are frequently the victims of iatrogenic diseases, especially 
adverse effects of drugs since they are affected by many age-related diseases 
and are given many drugs. Geriatric medicine in Japan has a bitter history of 
having produced many victims by adverse effects of cerebral vasodilators and 
cerebral stimulants; they included parkinsonism and depression induced by 
flunarizine and cinnarizine, and Reye-like encephalopathy induced by calcium 
hopantenate. Parkinsonism induced by sulpiride, tiapride, metoclopramide or 
atypical anti-psychotics, dyskinesia induced by anti-parkinsonian drugs or 
anti-psychotics, and psychotic symptoms induced by anti-parkinsonian drugs, 
anti-cholinergic drugs, anti-depressants or histamine H2 antagonists are still 
very common. Wernicke encephalopathy caused by intravenous glucose infusion 
without thiamine, central pontine myelinolysis by too rapid correction of 
hyponatremia are important though infrequent. Iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease by dura grafts is a warning against the easy use of medical materials 
produced with human organs or blood. Iatrogenic diseases are preventable, and 
geriatricians have to pay attention to the information on adverse effects of 
drugs and medical materials and carefully observe the early signs of iatrogenic 
diseases.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.42.21
PMID: 15732350 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1224. Pharmacol Ther. 2005 Mar;105(3):311-31. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2004.10.010. 
Epub 2004 Dec 8.

The role of alpha-synuclein in neurodegenerative diseases.

Bennett MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Blanchette Rockefeller Neurosciences Institute, Rockville, MD, USA. 
cbennett@brni-jhu.org

Alpha-synuclein is a 140 amino acid neuronal protein that has been associated 
with several neurodegenerative diseases. A point mutation in the gene coding for 
the alpha-synuclein protein was the first discovery linking this protein to a 
rare familial form of Parkinson's disease (PD). Subsequently, other mutations in 
the alpha-synuclein gene have been identified in familial PD. The aggregated 
proteinaceous inclusions called Lewy bodies found in PD and cortical Lewy body 
dementia (LBD) were discovered to be predominantly alpha-synuclein. Aberrant 
aggregation of alpha-synuclein has been detected in an increasing number of 
neurodegenerative diseases, collectively known as synucleopathies. 
Alpha-synuclein exists physiologically in both soluble and membrane-bound 
states, in unstructured and alpha-helical conformations, respectively. The 
physiological function of alpha-synuclein appears to require its translocation 
between these subcellular compartments and interconversion between the 2 
conformations. Abnormal processing of alpha-synuclein is predicted to lead to 
pathological changes in its binding properties and function. In this review, 
genetic and environmental risk factors for alpha-synuclein pathology are 
described. Various mechanisms for in vitro and in vivo alpha-synuclein 
aggregation and neurotoxicity are summarized, and their relevance to 
neuropathology is explored.

DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2004.10.010
PMID: 15737408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1225. Rev Esp Med Nucl. 2005 Mar-Apr;24(2):93-100. doi: 10.1157/13071684.

[Early alteration of adrenergic cardiac function in parkinsonisms with Lewy 
bodies].

[Article in Spanish]

Jiménez-Hoyuela García JM(1), Campos Arillo V, Rebollo Aguirre AC, Gómez Doblas 
JJ, Gutiérrez Hurtado A.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Medicina Nuclear, Hospital Universitario Virgen de la Victoria, 
Málaga. josem.jimenezhoyela.sspa@juntadeandalucia.es

BACKGROUND: 123I-metaiodobenzylguanidine (123I-MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy is 
clinically used to estimate myocardial sympathetic damage in some forms of heart 
disease, autonomic nerve disturbance in diabetic neuropathy, and disturbance of 
the autonomic nervous system in neurodegenerative disease. In the present study, 
examinations were performed to clarify the rate and characteristics of cardiac 
sympathetic disturbance in Parkinson's disease (PD) and usefulness of 123I-MIBG 
myocardial scintigraphy to differentiate PD from the Lewy Body Disease (LBD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 108 subjects were studied. There were 70 patients with PD, 
21 patients with LBD, and 17 age-matched normal subjects without neurological 
disease. The clinical parameters evaluated were severity of the process 
(measured by Hoehn and Yahr Scale), vegetative manifestations, development time 
and use of medication taken. Myocardial adrenergic function was analyzed by 
imaging with 123I-MIBG. Early (15 min) and delayed (4 h) images of the thorax in 
the anterior view were obtained after injection of 123I-MIBG (111 MBq). The 
qualitative and semiquantitative 123I-MIBG uptake was quantified by calculating 
a heart-to-mediastinum ratio (HMR) and analyzed in a blind manner.
RESULTS: The mean H/M ratio in patients with PD and LBD was significantly lower 
than in controls (p < 0.05). This is independent of development time, process 
severity, use of medication or vegetative manifestations. The HMR obtained in 
LBD patients is less clear than in PD.
CONCLUSION: 123I-MIBG myocardial scintigraphy might detect early disturbances of 
the sympathetic nervous system in PD and LBD.

DOI: 10.1157/13071684
PMID: 15745679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1226. N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar 3;352(9):884-94. doi: 10.1056/NEJMoa042765.

Family-based association between Alzheimer's disease and variants in UBQLN1.

Bertram L(1), Hiltunen M, Parkinson M, Ingelsson M, Lange C, Ramasamy K, Mullin 
K, Menon R, Sampson AJ, Hsiao MY, Elliott KJ, Velicelebi G, Moscarillo T, Hyman 
BT, Wagner SL, Becker KD, Blacker D, Tanzi RE.

Author information:
(1)Genetics and Aging Research Unit, MassGeneral Institute for Neurodegenerative 
Disease, Department of Neurology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Charlestown 
02129, USA.

Comment in
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Mar 3;352(9):862-4.
    N Engl J Med. 2005 Jun 30;352(26):2752-3; author reply 2752-3.

BACKGROUND: Recent analyses suggest that the known Alzheimer's disease genes 
account for less than half the genetic variance in this disease. The gene 
encoding ubiquilin 1 (UBQLN1) is one of several candidate genes for Alzheimer's 
disease located near a well-established linkage peak on chromosome 9q22.
METHODS: We evaluated 19 single-nucleotide polymorphisms in three genes within 
the chromosome 9q linkage region in 437 multiplex families with Alzheimer's 
disease from the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH) sample (1439 
subjects). We then tested the single-nucleotide polymorphisms showing a positive 
result in an independently identified set of 217 sibships discordant for 
Alzheimer's disease (Consortium on Alzheimer's Genetics [CAG] sample; 489 
subjects) and assessed the functional effect of an implicated single-nucleotide 
polymorphism in brain tissue from 25 patients with Alzheimer's disease and 17 
controls.
RESULTS: In the NIMH sample, we observed a significant association between 
Alzheimer's disease and various single-nucleotide polymorphisms in UBQLN1. We 
confirmed these associations in the CAG sample. The risk-conferring haplotype in 
both samples was defined by a single intronic single-nucleotide polymorphism 
located downstream of exon 8. The risk allele was associated with a 
dose-dependent increase in an alternatively spliced UBQLN1 (lacking exon 8) 
transcript in RNA extracted from brain samples of patients with Alzheimer's 
disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that genetic variants in UBQLN1 on chromosome 
9q22 substantially increase the risk of Alzheimer's disease, possibly by 
influencing alternative splicing of this gene in the brain.

Copyright 2005 Massachusetts Medical Society.

DOI: 10.1056/NEJMoa042765
PMID: 15745979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1227. J Alzheimers Dis. 2005 Feb;7(1):3-13. doi: 10.3233/jad-2005-7102.

Apoptotic effect of caspase-3 cleaved tau in hippocampal neurons and its 
potentiation by tau FTDP-mutation N279K.

Fasulo L(1), Ugolini G, Cattaneo A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory Molecular Neurobiology (LMN), International School for Advanced 
Studies (S.I.S.S.A.), Area Science Park, Padriciano 99, 34013 Trieste, Italy.

Pathological changes in the microtubule associated protein tau are a major 
hallmark of many human dementias collectively defined as tauopathies. In 
familiar frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17), several mutations in the tau gene have been identified showing that 
primary malfunction of tau can lead to neurodegeneration. In addition to 
mutation at genetic level, a number of post-translational modifications of tau 
occur in tauopathies, including abnormal phosphorylation and aberrant 
proteolysis described in Alzheimer's Disease (AD). The presence of cleaved tau 
in AD neurons is associated with expression of markers for neuronal death. 
According to our previous work, tau is a substrate for the apoptotic protease 
caspase-3 that turns tau itself into an effector of apoptosis (tau cleaved at 
D-421), generating a positive-feedback loop that is self-propagating. Cleavage 
of tau by caspase-3 was recently confirmed to occur in AD brain as an early 
event. Here we show the apoptotic properties of tau fragment tau151-421 in 
primary cultures of rat hippocampal neurons; such cellular model is of special 
interest considering the selective vulnerability of hippocampal neurones in AD. 
The apoptotic capacity of tau151-421 is markedly enhanced by both treatment with 
amyloid peptide Abeta25-35, and the FTDP-17 tau mutation N279K.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2005-7102
PMID: 15750210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1228. Neurology. 2005 Mar 8;64(5):780-6. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000152878.79429.00.

Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder: toward a better nosologic definition.

Fantini ML(1), Ferini-Strambi L, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'étude du sommeil et des rythmes biologiques, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur, 
Montréal, Canada.

REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia characterized by a lack of 
motor inhibition during REM sleep leading to potentially harmful dream-enacting 
behaviors. RBD affects mainly older men and its prevalence in the general 
population is estimated to be around 0.5%. RBD may be idiopathic or associated 
with other neurologic disorders. A strong association between RBD and 
alpha-synucleinopathies has been recently observed, with the parasomnia often 
heralding the clinical onset of the neurodegenerative disease. The idiopathic 
form accounts for up to 60% of the cases reported in the three largest series of 
patients with RBD. Small clinical follow-up studies revealed that a proportion 
of these patients will eventually develop a parkinsonian syndrome or a dementia 
of Lewy bodies type in the years following the RBD diagnosis, while some 
patients will never show other neurologic signs within several decades from the 
RBD onset. Recent studies have looked at neurophysiologic and neuropsychological 
functions in idiopathic RBD and have found evidences of CNS dysfunction during 
both wakefulness and sleep. An impairment of the cortical activity, specific 
neuropsychological deficits, and signs of autonomic dysfunction have been 
observed in a variable proportion of these patients, challenging the concept of 
idiopathic RBD. Identifying subjects with a high risk of developing a 
neurodegenerative process may be crucial in order to develop early intervention 
strategies.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000152878.79429.00
PMID: 15753409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1229. Neurology. 2005 Mar 8;64(5):861-5. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000153070.82309.D4.

Temporal lobe atrophy on MRI in Parkinson disease with dementia: a comparison 
with Alzheimer disease and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Tam CW(1), Burton EJ, McKeith IG, Burn DJ, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Tai Po Hospital, Hong Kong.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the extent of medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) on 
MRI in Parkinson disease (PD) with and without dementia compared with Alzheimer 
disease (AD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and to determine whether MTA 
correlates with cognitive impairment in PD and PD dementia (PDD).
METHODS: Coronal T1-weighted MRI scans were acquired from control subjects (n = 
39) and patients with PD (n = 33), PDD (n = 31), DLB (n = 25), and AD (n = 31), 
diagnosed according to standardized clinical diagnostic criteria. Cognitive 
function was assessed using the Cambridge Cognitive Examination (CAMCOG), and 
MTA was rated visually using a standardized (Scheltens) scale.
RESULTS: More severe MTA was seen in PDD (p = 0.007), DLB (p < 0.001), and AD (p 
< 0.001) vs control subjects. PD subjects had greater hippocampal atrophy than 
control subjects (p = 0.015) but less than subjects with DLB and AD, though not 
with PDD. MTA correlated with CAMCOG score and memory scores in the DLB group 
and with age in control, PDD, and AD groups. There were no correlations between 
MTA and cognitive impairment in PD, PDD, and AD. PDD and DLB had a similar 
profile of cognitive impairment and MTA.
CONCLUSIONS: Medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) was seen in cognitively intact 
older subjects with Parkinson disease (PD) and was not more pronounced in 
Parkinson disease dementia (PDD). Alzheimer disease (AD) and, to a lesser 
extent, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) showed more pronounced MTA. Results 
suggest early hippocampal involvement in PD and that when dementia develops in 
PD, anatomic structures apart from the hippocampus are predominantly implicated. 
Greater hippocampal involvement in AD vs PDD and DLB is consistent with 
clinical, cognitive, and pathologic differences between the disorders.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000153070.82309.D4
PMID: 15753423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1230. J Neurol Sci. 2005 Mar 15;229-230:121-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.11.012. Epub 
2004 Dec 15.

MRI identifies MCI subtypes: vascular versus neurodegenerative.

Meyer JS(1), Quach M, Thornby J, Chowdhury M, Huang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030, 
USA. jmeyer@bcm.tmc.edu

As life expectancy increases worldwide, pandemics of cognitive impairment and 
dementia are emerging as major public health problems. Mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI), prodromal for dementia, is a descriptive term used for those clinical 
states showing early and subtle cognitive decline among the elderly, preceding 
the dementias. Psychometric screening combining Mini-Mental Status (MMSE) and 
Cognitive Capacity Screening (CCSE) Examinations, when combined now called CMC 
with C standing for Combined, M for MMSE, and C for CCSE, confirms diagnosis of 
MCI. Individuals identified with MCI are at increased risk for dementia of 
Alzheimer's type (DAT), vascular dementia (VAD) and other rare neurodegenerative 
dementias, including Lewy body dementia (LBD), fronto-temporal dementia (FTD) 
and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). Depending on different clinical 
compositions of cohorts studied, and MCI criteria used, between 19% and 50% of 
MCI progress to dementia within 3-5 years, two thirds to Alzheimer's (DAT) and 
one third to vascular types (VAD) in the United States. Not all Parkinsonians 
become demented, but PDD develops in 20-30%, however, PDD subjects were excluded 
from the present study, as were LBD and FTD. The incidence of MCI in those over 
age 70, with confirmed cognitive declines when tested 2 years later, is around 
23%, but some spontaneously improve.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.11.012
PMID: 15760630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1231. Neurogenetics. 2005 May;6(2):91-5. doi: 10.1007/s10048-005-0210-y. Epub 2005 Mar 
12.

Novel G335V mutation in the tau gene associated with early onset familial 
frontotemporal dementia.

Neumann M(1), Diekmann S, Bertsch U, Vanmassenhove B, Bogerts B, Kretzschmar HA.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neuropathology and Prion Research, Ludwig Maximilians University, 
Munich, Germany.

Mutations in the tau gene cause familial frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. Here we describe a novel missense mutation 
in exon 12 of the tau gene, G335V, in a German family with frontotemporal 
dementia of early age at onset, in the third decade of life. Functional analysis 
of recombinant tau protein with the G335V mutation showed a dramatically reduced 
ability to promote microtubule assembly and a more rapid and accelerated tau 
filament formation, suggesting that the primary effect of the mutation might be 
the provision of a pool of unbound tau making it available for aberrant tau 
aggregation.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-005-0210-y
PMID: 15765246 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1232. Mol Psychiatry. 2005 Jun;10(6):522-4. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001646.

ACAT1 is not associated with Alzheimer's disease in two independent family-based 
samples.

Bertram L, Hsiao M, Mullin K, Parkinson M, Menon R, Moscarillo TJ, Blacker D, 
Tanzi RE.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4001646
PMID: 15768051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1233. Brain. 2005 Jun;128(Pt 6):1267-76. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh484. Epub 2005 Mar 17.

Saccadic eye movement changes in Parkinson's disease dementia and dementia with 
Lewy bodies.

Mosimann UP(1), Müri RM, Burn DJ, Felblinger J, O'Brien JT, McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Wolfson Research Centre, Newcastle General 
Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. u.p.mosimann@ncl.ac.uk

Neurodegeneration in Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) affect cortical and subcortical networks involved in saccade 
generation. We therefore expected impairments in saccade performance in both 
disorders. In order to improve the pathophysiological understanding and to 
investigate the usefulness of saccades for differential diagnosis, saccades were 
tested in age- and education-matched patients with PDD (n = 20) and DLB (n = 
20), Alzheimer's disease (n = 22) and Parkinson's disease (n = 24), and controls 
(n = 24). Reflexive (gap, overlap) and complex saccades (prediction, decision 
and antisaccade) were tested with electro-oculography. PDD and DLB patients had 
similar impairment in all tasks (P > 0.05, not significant). Compared with 
controls, they were impaired in both reflexive saccade execution (gap and 
overlap latencies, P < 0.0001; gains, P < 0.004) and complex saccade performance 
(target prediction, P < 0.0001; error decisions, P < 0.003; error antisaccades: 
P < 0.0001). Patients with Alzheimer's disease were only impaired in complex 
saccade performance (Alzheimer's disease versus controls, target prediction P < 
0.001, error decisions P < 0.0001, error antisaccades P < 0.0001), but not 
reflexive saccade execution (for all, P > 0.05). Patients with Parkinson's 
disease had, compared with controls, similar complex saccade performance (for 
all, P > 0.05) and only minimal impairment in reflexive tasks, i.e. hypometric 
gain in the gap task (P = 0.04). Impaired saccade execution in reflexive tasks 
allowed discrimination between DLB versus Alzheimer's disease (sensitivity > or 
=60%, specificity > or =77%) and between PDD versus Parkinson's disease 
(sensitivity > or =60%, specificity > or =88%) when +/-1.5 standard deviations 
was used for group discrimination. We conclude that impairments in reflexive 
saccades may be helpful for differential diagnosis and are minimal when either 
cortical (Alzheimer's disease) or nigrostriatal neurodegeneration (Parkinson's 
disease) exists solely; however, they become prominent with combined cortical 
and subcortical neurodegeneration in PDD and DLB. The similarities in saccade 
performance in PDD and DLB underline the overlap between these conditions and 
underscore differences from Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh484
PMID: 15774501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1234. Australas Psychiatry. 2005 Mar;13(1):54-9. doi: 
10.1080/j.1440-1665.2004.02150.x.

Diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies in clinical practice: a literature 
review.

Singh D(1).

Author information:
(1)Aged Person's Mental Health Service, Southern Health, Melbourne, Vic., 
Australia. dhiren.singh@southernhealth.org.au

OBJECTIVE: To review the research data about dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 
describe those clinical features and investigations that will enhance more 
accurate diagnosis in day-to-day practice.
METHODS: A literature search using MEDLINE, Psychlit, Psychinfo and Cochrane 
databases was performed.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of DLB is important now that treatment is available 
using cognitive enhancers and because of the risk to patients with DLB who are 
prescribed neuroleptics. The use of consensus criteria, despite their 
limitations, and judicious use of ancillary investigations, especially 
neuroimaging and neuropsychological tests, will enhance diagnostic accuracy.

DOI: 10.1080/j.1440-1665.2004.02150.x
PMID: 15777413 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1235. Ann Neurol. 2005 Apr;57(4):564-7. doi: 10.1002/ana.20417.

Mitochondrial DNA haplogroup cluster UKJT reduces the risk of PD.

Pyle A(1), Foltynie T, Tiangyou W, Lambert C, Keers SM, Allcock LM, Davison J, 
Lewis SJ, Perry RH, Barker R, Burn DJ, Chinnery PF.

Author information:
(1)Mitochondrial Research Group, The University of Newcastle upon Tyne, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.

There is increasing evidence that genetic variants of mitochondrial DNA have an 
important role in the cause of idiopathic Parkinson's disease. We determined the 
mitochondrial DNA haplogroup of 455 Parkinson's disease cases, 185 Alzheimer's 
disease cases, and 447 healthy English control subjects. The UKJT haplogroup 
cluster was associated with a 22% reduction in population-attributable risk for 
Parkinson's disease. There was no association between individual haplogroups or 
the UKJT cluster and Alzheimer's disease, confirming that the association with 
Parkinson's disease was disease specific and not a general effect seen in all 
neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.20417
PMID: 15786469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1236. Brain. 2005 Jun;128(Pt 6):1247-58. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh488. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Characteristics of two distinct clinical phenotypes in pathologically proven 
progressive supranuclear palsy: Richardson's syndrome and PSP-parkinsonism.

Williams DR(1), de Silva R, Paviour DC, Pittman A, Watt HC, Kilford L, Holton 
JL, Revesz T, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)The Queen Square Brain Bank for Neurological Disorders, University College 
London, UK.

Comment in
    Brain. 2005 Jun;128(Pt 6):1235-6.

The clinical diagnosis of progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) relies on the 
identification of characteristic signs and symptoms. A proportion of 
pathologically diagnosed cases do not develop these classic features, prove 
difficult to diagnose during life and are considered as atypical PSP. The aim of 
this study was to examine the apparent clinical dichotomy between typical and 
atypical PSP, and to compare the biochemical and genetic characteristics of 
these groups. In 103 consecutive cases of pathologically confirmed PSP, we have 
identified two clinical phenotypes by factor analysis which we have named 
Richardson's syndrome (RS) and PSP-parkinsonism (PSP-P). Cases of RS syndrome 
made up 54% of all cases, and were characterized by the early onset of postural 
instability and falls, supranuclear vertical gaze palsy and cognitive 
dysfunction. A second group of 33 (32%) were characterized by asymmetric onset, 
tremor, a moderate initial therapeutic response to levodopa and were frequently 
confused with Parkinson's disease (PSP-P). Fourteen cases (14%) could not be 
separated according to these criteria. In RS, two-thirds of cases were men, 
whereas the sex distribution in PSP-P was even. Disease duration in RS was 
significantly shorter (5.9 versus 9.1 years, P < 0.001) and age at death earlier 
(72.1 versus 75.5 years, P = 0.01) than in PSP-P. The isoform composition of 
insoluble tangle-tau isolated from the basal pons also differed significantly. 
In RS, the mean four-repeat:three-repeat tau ratio was 2.84 and in PSP-P it was 
1.63 (P < 0.003). The effect of the H1,H1 PSP susceptibility genotype appeared 
stronger in RS than in PSP-P (odds ratio 13.2 versus 4.5). The difference in 
genotype frequencies between the clinical subgroups was not significant. There 
were no differences in apolipoprotein E genotypes. The classic clinical 
description of PSP, which includes supranuclear gaze palsy, early falls and 
dementia, does not adequately describe one-third of cases in this series of 
pathologically confirmed cases. We propose that PSP-P represents a second 
discrete clinical phenotype that needs to be clinically distinguished from 
classical PSP (RS). The different tau isoform deposition in the basal pons 
suggests that this may ultimately prove to be a discrete nosological entity.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh488
PMID: 15788542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1237. J Neurol Sci. 2005 Apr 15;231(1-2):3-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.08.016. Epub 
2004 Dec 29.

Alzheimer's disease with and without cerebral infarcts.

Del Ser T(1), Hachinski V, Merskey H, Munoz DG.

Author information:
(1)Sección de Neurología, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Avda. Orellana s/n, Leganés, 
28911 Madrid, Spain. tdeserq@meditex.es

OBJECTIVE: To compare the clinical and pathological features of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) patients with and without associated cerebral infarcts (CI).
METHODS: The consecutive records of 57 prospectively studied demented patients 
fulfilling the CERAD criteria for the pathological diagnosis of AD were 
reviewed. Cases with cortical Lewy bodies were excluded. CI were found in 22 
cases (39%) (AD+CI group): large infarcts (5), lacunes (13) and/or hippocampal 
sclerosis (4), and were absent in 35 cases (AD group). Microscopic infarcts, 
cribiform change, amyloid angiopathy, and white matter rarefaction were not 
considered in this classification, but were quantified. Cortical atrophy, 
neurofibrillary tangle and senile plaque (diffuse and neuritic) load were also 
measured. Pathological evaluation was independent of clinical information. 
Clinical and pathological data were compared between both groups.
RESULTS: AD+CI cases were significantly older, more commonly female, less 
educated, and more often had blue collar occupations, sleep disturbances, 
frontal release signs, and EEG spikes than AD cases. Other differences found 
(acute/subacute onset, behavioral disturbances, and leukoaraiosis on CT scan) 
disappeared after controlling for age. The frequency of known vascular risk 
factors and focal motor and sensory signs did not differ between the groups, 
which showed remarkable clinical similarity overall. The only significant 
differences on pathological exam were hippocampal microinfarcts and white matter 
lesions, although there was a trend for lower neurodegenerative lesion load in 
the AD+CI group. The ischemic lesions were located in temporal lobe in 50% of 
AD+CI patients; these cases had a significantly lower neocortical 
neurodegenerative lesion load than those with CI in other sites.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of CI in AD increases significantly with age, but has 
scarce influence on the clinical features, and cannot be predicted from common 
vascular risk factors. In spite of a trend, there are no major differences in 
neurodegenerative lesion load between AD and AD+CI groups, except when CI are 
located in the temporal lobe (including hippocampus), suggesting that this 
location may be important in the physiopathology of mixed vascular and AD 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2004.08.016
PMID: 15792814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1238. J Clin Neurol. 2005 Apr;1(1):97-100. doi: 10.3988/jcn.2005.1.1.97. Epub 2005 Apr 
30.

A Case of Biopsy-proven Early-onset Alzheimer's Disease with Hemiparkinsonism.

Choi EJ(1), Bang H, Im JH, Chung SJ, Lee JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Korea University College of Medicine, Guro Hospital, 
Seoul, Korea.

Patients with dementia and concomitant parkinsonism are frequently encountered 
in the elderly population. When it comes to young adults, however, coexistence 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) is rare. We described a 
case of 47-year old man with presenile onset dementia associated with 
hemiparkinsonism involving the right extremities. Brain biopsy showed 
neurofibrillary tangles and neuritic plaques, compatible with Alzheimer's 
disease. Iodine-123 labelled 
N-(3-iodopropen-2-yl)-2beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-chlorophenyl) tropane 
([(123)I]IPT) SPECT, dopamine transporter imaging, revealed a decreased uptake 
in both basal ganglia, more severe on the left side, particularly the caudal 
putamen, which is consistent with the finding of idiopathic Parkinson's disease. 
This case is unique in that damage on the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system in a 
patient with Alzheimer's disease was demonstrated by a functional neuroimaging 
study and that early-onset AD and early-onset PD, two rare conditions, coexist 
in the same individual.

DOI: 10.3988/jcn.2005.1.1.97
PMCID: PMC2854937
PMID: 20396477


1239. Eur J Neurol. 2005 May;12(5):365-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2004.00973.x.

Hyperhomocysteinemia in L-dopa treated Parkinson's disease patients: effect of 
cobalamin and folate administration.

Lamberti P(1), Zoccolella S, Armenise E, Lamberti SV, Fraddosio A, de Mari M, 
Iliceto G, Livrea P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, University of Bari, Ospedale 
Policlinico, Bari, Italy. lamberti@neurol.uniba.it

Homocysteine (Hcy) is a risk factor for vascular diseases, cognitive impairment 
and dementia. L-dopa treatment may represent an acquired cause of 
hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy), as evidenced by studies in rats as well as in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. Folate and cobalamin status also seems to 
influence the effects of L-dopa on plasma Hcy levels; therefore B-vitamins 
supplementation has been proposed to reduce the HHcy in L-dopa treated PD 
patients. Plasma Hcy, folate, and cobalamin levels were evaluated in 20 PD 
patients treated with L-dopa in the baseline condition and following a 5-week 
period of treatment with cobalamin and folate; results were compared with 35 
controls. Analysis of data revealed that Hcy levels were higher in L-dopa 
treated PD patients when compared with age- and sex-matched controls and that 
supplementation of the diet with cobalamin and folate is effective in reducing 
Hcy concentrations; these findings may have important implications in the 
treatment of PD patients who are potentially at risk for vascular diseases and 
cognitive impairment or dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2004.00973.x
PMID: 15804266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1240. J Neurol. 2005 Oct;252(10):1186-93. doi: 10.1007/s00415-005-0830-z. Epub 2005 
Apr 13.

Olanzapine as a possible treatment of behavioral symptoms in vascular dementia: 
risks of cerebrovascular events. A controlled, open-label study.

Moretti R(1), Torre P, Antonello RM, Cattaruzza T, Cazzato G.

Author information:
(1)Dip. di Medicina Clinica e Neurologia, UCO di Neurologia, Università degli 
Studi di Trieste, Ospedale di Cattinara, 34149 Trieste, Italy. 
moretti@univ.trieste.it

Behavioral problems produce excess disability, potentially devastating in 
cognitively impaired patients. These behavioral symptoms can be a major cause of 
stress, anxiety and concern for caregivers. While psychotropic drugs are 
frequently used to control these symptoms, they have the potential for 
significant side effects, which include sedation, disinhibition, depression, 
falls, incontinence, parkinsonism and akathisia. We followed up (for 12 months) 
a group of 346 consecutive outpatients, with a diagnosis of subcortical vascular 
dementia or multi-infarctual dementia. Patients eligible for this open-label 
study were required to have behavioral problems (BPSD). Patients were divided 
into two groups, Group A received olanzapine 2.5-7.5 mg/day while Group B 
received typical antipsychotics. Patients in both groups were allowed to 
continue any previous therapy. Patients in both groups were significantly 
improved in their BPSD. Our patients had a host of medical conditions and 
received numerous concomitant medications. Given the potential complications 
associated with these therapeutic agents, these patients tolerated olanzapine 
quite well. On examination of consequences of adverse events, particularly 
somnolence, postural instability, and postural hypotension, it appeared that 
cerebrovascular events were not present. Moreover, no anticholinergic effect was 
recorded. These findings suggest that olanzapine could be a safe and effective 
treatment even for elderly population in suitable doses and receiving the 
adequate follow-up.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-005-0830-z
PMID: 15809822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1241. Fundam Clin Pharmacol. 2005 Apr;19(2):133-46. doi: 
10.1111/j.1472-8206.2005.00317.x.

Treatment of behavioural symptoms and dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Hanagasi HA(1), Emre M.

Author information:
(1)Behavioral Neurology and Movement Disorders Unit, Department of Neurology, 
Istanbul Faculty of Medicine, Istanbul University, 34390 Capa/Istanbul, Turkey. 
hasmet@yahoo.com

Behavioural symptoms such as anxiety, depression and psychosis are common in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and dementia occurs in about 90% of the patients. 
These symptoms can be more disabling than the motor dysfunction and they 
negatively impact quality of life, increase caregiver distress and are more 
frequently associated with nursing home placement. Depression can be treated 
with counselling and pharmacotherapy. Tricyclic antidepressants or selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors are widely used, but there is still need for 
controlled clinical trials. Management of psychosis in PD is complex and 
includes elimination of identifiable risk factors, reduction of polypharmacy and 
administration of atypical neuroleptics, which can alleviate psychotic symptoms 
without worsening motor functions. Clozapine is the best documented atypical 
neuroleptic shown to be effective against psychosis in PD patients. 
Cholinesterase inhibitors may prove additional benefit in psychotic PD patients. 
Recent evidence from small double-blind and open-label trials suggests that 
cholinesterase inhibitors may be effective in the treatment of dementia 
associated with PD.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1472-8206.2005.00317.x
PMID: 15810893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1242. Brain. 2005 Jul;128(Pt 7):1595-604. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh493. Epub 2005 Apr 7.

Brain tissue damage in dementia with Lewy bodies: an in vivo diffusion tensor 
MRI study.

Bozzali M(1), Falini A, Cercignani M, Baglio F, Farina E, Alberoni M, Vezzulli 
P, Olivotto F, Mantovani F, Shallice T, Scotti G, Canal N, Nemni R.

Author information:
(1)Don Carlo Gnocchi Foundation, Scientific Institute and University, IRCCS, 
Milan, Italy. m.bozzali@fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk

The aim of the present study was to apply diffusion tensor MRI (DT-MRI), a 
quantitative MRI measure which reflects tissue organization, to dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB). DT-MRI scans were obtained from 15 patients with probable DLB 
and 10 sex- and age-matched healthy controls. Abnormalities were found in the 
corpus callosum, pericallosal areas and the frontal, parietal, occipital and, 
less prominently, temporal white matter of patients compared with controls. 
Abnormalities were also found in the caudate nucleus and the putamen. The 
average grey matter volume was lower in patients than in controls. These 
findings of concomitant grey matter atrophy and white matter abnormalities (as 
detected by DT-MRI) in regions with a high prevalence of long connecting fibre 
tracts might suggest the presence of neurodegeneration involving associative 
cortices. The modest involvement of the temporal lobe fits with the relative 
preservation of global neuropsychological measures and memory tasks in the early 
stage of DLB. The selective involvement of parietal, frontal and occipital lobes 
might explain some of the clinical and neuropsychological features of DLB, 
providing a possible distinctive marker for this disease. The abnormalities 
found in the subcortical grey matter may indicate that DLB and Parkinson's 
disease share a similar nigrostriatal involvement caused by common 
pathophysiological mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh493
PMID: 15817515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1243. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2005 Apr;107(3):165-73. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2004.10.011.

CSF biomarkers for mild cognitive impairment and early Alzheimer's disease.

Andreasen N(1), Blennow K.

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of NEUROTEC, Section of Geriatric Medicine, 
M51, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, SE-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden. 
niels.andreasen@neurotec.ki.se

A correct clinical diagnosis, early in the course of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 
is of importance given the currently available symptomatic treatment with 
acetylcholine esterase inhibitors. The development of disease-modifying drugs 
like beta-sheet breakers or gamma- and beta-secretase inhibitors, emphasizes the 
need of improved diagnostic accuracy, especially in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) that have incipient AD. Therefore, diagnostic markers in the 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) have become a rapidly growing research field. Three 
cerebrospinal fluid biomarkers (the 42 amino acid form of beta-amyloid (A beta), 
total tau, and phospho tau) have been evaluated in numerous scientific papers. 
These CSF markers have high sensitivity to differentiate early and incipient AD 
from normal aging, depression, alcohol dementia and Parkinson's disease, but 
lower specificity against other dementias, such as frontotemporal and Lewy body 
dementia. If these biomarkers are used in combination with a careful medical 
history, clinical examination, standard laboratory tests and imaging techniques 
of the brain, the diagnostic accuracy may be appropriate for the clinical 
evaluation of MCI cases.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2004.10.011
PMID: 15823670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1244. Neurology. 2005 Apr 12;64(7):1157-61. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000156157.97411.5E.

Association between mild parkinsonian signs and mild cognitive impairment in a 
community.

Louis ED(1), Schupf N, Manly J, Marder K, Tang MX, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)The Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's 
Disease, New York, NY, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) are associated with prevalent and 
incident dementia but it is not known whether they are associated with mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI).
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether MPS and specific MPS (changes in axial function, 
rigidity, tremor) are associated with MCI in nondemented community-dwelling 
older people in northern Manhattan, NY.
METHODS: Participants underwent neurologic assessment, including a modified 
motor portion of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale. MCI was diagnosed 
in nondemented participants who had cognitive impairment based on 
neuropsychological testing and no functional impairment. Participants with MCI 
were classified as having MCI with memory impairment (MCI+M) vs MCI without 
memory impairment (MCI-M).
RESULTS: MCI was present in 608 (27.3%) of 2,230 participants, including 255 
participants with MCI+M and 353 with MCI-M; 1,622 participants did not have MCI. 
MPS were present in 369 (16.5%) of 2,230 participants. In a univariate logistic 
regression model, odds of MCI+M (vs no MCI) were 51% higher in participants with 
MPS compared to those with no MPS (OR = 1.51, 95% CI = 1.09 to 2.09, p = 0.01). 
Multivariate models yielded similar results (OR = 1.45, 95% CI = 1.03 to 2.05, p 
= 0.03). Rigidity was present in a higher proportion of participants with MCI+M 
compared to participants without MCI.
CONCLUSIONS: Mild parkinsonian signs, especially rigidity, are associated with 
amnestic mild cognitive impairment. Mild parkinsonian signs and mild cognitive 
impairment may share similar pathogeneses. Whether this involves Alzheimer-type 
pathology, Lewy bodies, or vascular changes in the basal ganglia or basal 
ganglia circuitry deserves further investigation in postmortem studies.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000156157.97411.5E
PMID: 15824340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1245. J Neurol. 2005 Oct;252(10):1223-8. doi: 10.1007/s00415-005-0840-x. Epub 2005 Apr 
18.

Factors associated with drug-induced visual hallucinations in Parkinson's 
disease.

Papapetropoulos S(1), Argyriou AA, Ellul J.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Neurology, University of Miami, School of Medicine, Room 4004, 1501 
NW 9th Avenue, Miami, FL 33136, USA. spapapetropoulos@med.miami.edu

AIMS: Visual hallucinations are common in medication-treated Parkinson's disease 
(PD) patients. Although their etiology is unknown several factors seem to be 
involved in their pathogenesis. The aim of this study was to identify possible 
risk factors and determine clinical characteristics associated with the 
development of visual hallucinations in PD.
METHODS: 166 consecutive patients fulfilling clinical criteria for PD were 
studied. During a semi-structured interview, demographic characteristics and 
clinical variables were recorded. Motor, cognitive and psychiatric status was 
also assessed. Patients with and without visual hallucinations were compared 
using non-parametric tests, and logistic regression was applied to significant 
data.
RESULTS: During the month before evaluation 20.4% of our patients experienced 
visual hallucinations (11.4% benign, 9% malignant). Logistic regression analysis 
identified three factors independently associated with visual hallucinations: 
long duration of Parkinson's disease, dementia, and disease severity as measured 
by the UPDRS total score.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that apart from well established risk factors 
such as cognitive impairment and disease duration, disease severity is also 
important for the development of visual hallucinations in PD. Furthermore, the 
presence of bradykinesia and instability, the absence of tremor and the severity 
of rigidity and bradykinesia (limb and axial) may act as cofactors.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-005-0840-x
PMID: 15834642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1246. Brain. 2005 Jul;128(Pt 7):1707-15. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh501. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

A multigenerational pedigree of late-onset Alzheimer's disease implies new 
genetic causes.

Jimenez-Escrig A(1), Gomez-Tortosa E, Baron M, Rabano A, Arcos-Burgos M, 
Palacios LG, Yusta A, Anta P, Perez I, Hierro M, Munoz DG, Barquero S.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Universidad de Alcala, Madrid, Spain. 
adriano.jimenez@hrc.es

We describe the clinical phenotype and pathology of a new autosomal dominant 
late-onset familial form of Alzheimer's disease in four extensive kindred 
originated in a genetically isolated population. Twelve affected and 16 
unaffected members of these kindred were examined clinically, and a brain 
post-mortem study was carried out in one case. The preliminary genetic 
assessment included complex segregation analysis, evaluation of the power to 
detect linkage, and exclusion of candidate genes. Dementia has been recorded for 
six generations in ancestors of examined cases. Review of death certificates 
allowed linking of all subjects in four extensive pedigrees. Affected 
individuals examined had progressive memory loss with onset between 57 and 74 
years of age, along with seizures, myoclonus and parkinsonism in advanced 
stages. The brain of the case examined post-mortem showed widespread neocortical 
neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles (stage VI of Braak), amyloid 
angiopathy, and Lewy bodies restricted to limbic areas. Sequencing exons 16 and 
17 of amyloid precursor protein, and exons 4-12 of presenilin 1 and presenilin 2 
genes did not disclose any mutations. Genotyping with markers D21S265, D14S71, 
D14S77, D1S2850 and D1S479 located 1-3 cM from the previously reported genes 
further excluded linkage to these genes. Seven out of 12 cases were 
apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon3/3, although the presence of an APOE epsilon4 
allele was associated with an increased risk of dementia (odd ratio 6.17; 95% 
confidence interval: 1.15-33.15), but not to an earlier age of onset. Complex 
segregation analysis showed that the best model fitting the data was that of a 
major gene (dominant) with a gene frequency close to 3% in this population. 
Simulation analysis predicted an average logarithm of odds (LOD) of 2.2 at = 
0.05. These four families, which seem to be part of a common extended pedigree 
originated by a founder arriving in this region in the 18th century, represent 
an autosomal dominant late-onset familial Alzheimer's disease not linked to 
previously known genetic loci. The simulation analysis suggests that it will be 
feasible to locate a novel responsible gene in these kindred.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh501
PMID: 15843424 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1247. Neurology. 2005 Apr 26;64(8):1404-10. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000158422.41380.82.

Cognitive status correlates with neuropathologic stage in Parkinson disease.

Braak H(1), Rüb U, Jansen Steur EN, Del Tredici K, de Vos RA.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Clinical Neuroanatomy, J.W. Goethe University, Frankfurt/Main, 
Germany. Braak@em.uni-frankfurt.de

OBJECTIVE: To study the association of cognitive status with the stages of a 
published neuropathologic staging procedure for sporadic Parkinson disease (PD) 
in a cohort of 88 patients with PD from a single neurologic unit. None had 
received the clinical diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: The authors assessed Lewy neurites/bodies (LNs/LBs) immunoreactive for 
alpha-synuclein semiquantitatively in sections from 18 brain regions. In 
silver-stained sections and sections immunostained for tau and beta-amyloid 
protein, the authors semiquantitatively evaluated comorbidities potentially 
contributing to cognitive decline, e.g., Alzheimer disease (AD), argyrophilic 
grain disease (AGD), and cerebral vascular disease. The authors analyzed four 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) subgroups ranging from marginally impaired 
cognition to severe dementia using nonparametric tests.
RESULTS: It was possible to assign all patients to one of the PD stages. MMSE 
scores correlated with neuropathologic stages (p < 0.005) and this association 
showed a linear trend (p < 0.025). Median MMSE test scores for women were lower 
than those for men. Cognitively impaired individuals displayed higher stages of 
AD-related neurofibrillary pathology (p < 0.05) and beta-amyloid deposition (p < 
0.05) than cognitively unimpaired persons. MMSE scores did not correlate 
significantly with AGD, disease duration, age at disease onset, or age at death. 
Hoehn and Yahr scores, however, correlated with PD stages (p < 0.0005) and MMSE 
scores (p < 0.0005).
CONCLUSIONS: The decrease in median Mini-Mental State Examination scores between 
PD stages 3 to 6 indicates that the risk of developing dementia increases with 
disease progression. In some individuals, however, cognitive decline can develop 
in the presence of mild Parkinson disease-related cortical pathology and, 
conversely, widespread cortical lesions do not necessarily lead to cognitive 
decline.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000158422.41380.82
PMID: 15851731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1248. Mov Disord. 2005 Aug;20(8):989-94. doi: 10.1002/mds.20481.

Apolipoprotein E epsilon4 and catechol-O-methyltransferase alleles in 
autopsy-proven Parkinson's disease: relationship to dementia and hallucinations.

Camicioli R(1), Rajput A, Rajput M, Reece C, Payami H, Hao C, Rajput A.

Author information:
(1)University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, Canada. rcamicio@ualberta.ca

We determined whether apolipoprotein E epsilon4 (ApoE4) or 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) genotypes were associated with dementia, 
hallucinations, Alzheimer's disease pathological findings (AP), or cortical Lewy 
bodies (CLBs) in autopsy-confirmed cases of Parkinson's disease (PD). Outcomes 
were obtained from medical records. Pathology reports identified AP and CLBs. 
Brain tissue was genotyped. A total of 47 subjects (33 men, 14 women) had PD 
onset at 62.4 +/- 8.7 years of age and died at 77.8 +/- 5.6 years of age. 
Demented and hallucinating patients did not differ in age at onset (AO) of PD or 
age at death, or the proportion ApoE4+, AP+, or CLB+ compared to nondemented 
patients or non-hallucinating patients. ApoE4 and COMT (low metabolizer [LH], 
intermediate metabolizer [HL], or high metabolizer [HH]) did not influence AO, 
death, or dementia- or hallucination-free survival, based on age or duration of 
treatment. All seven subjects with AP were demented and had hallucinations. CLBs 
were associated with dementia but not hallucinations. In Cox regression models 
adjusting for AO and duration of treatment, increased risk of dementia was 
associated with male sex but not significantly with ApoE4; inclusion of AP in 
the model did not affect the results; COMT was not a risk factor for dementia. 
Psychosis risk was not associated with ApoE4, COMT, or sex. The observation that 
males have increased dementia risk and the trend for ApoE4 requires confirmation 
in larger prospective autopsy studies.

Copyright 2005 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20481
PMID: 15852364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1249. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2005 May;20(5):418-22. doi: 10.1002/gps.1297.

Dementia in Parkinson's disease: a post-mortem study in a population of brain 
donors.

Papapetropoulos S(1), Gonzalez J, Lieberman A, Villar JM, Mash DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology University of Miami, School of Medicine, FL 33136, 
USA. spapapetropoulous@med.miami.edu

OBJECTIVE: To identify factors associated with dementia in a cohort of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) brain donors and determine whether its presence may 
influence the clinical phenotype of the disease.
METHODS: We included 67 consecutive patients with a clinical and pathological 
diagnosis of PD, who while alive, consented to donate their brains to the 
University of Miami Brain Endowment Bank(TM). Dementia and psychiatric 
complications of PD were diagnosed according to established criteria. Case 
histories were abstracted and reviewed and comparisons between PD patients with 
(PD-D, n = 34) and without (PD, n = 33) dementia were made.
RESULTS: Age at death, age at disease onset and disease duration did not differ 
significantly between PD-D and PD patients. Other symptoms were similar in both 
groups. Visual hallucinations and bilateral symptoms at diagnosis were 
significantly higher in PD-D patients. No association between dementia and 
overall survival duration was found. Although the frequency of depression and 
psychosis was higher in the PD patients with dementia no statistical 
significance was reached. The overall lifetime prevalence of dementia in our 
group was 50.7%.
CONCLUSIONS: Visual hallucinations and bilateral symptoms were associated with 
dementia in our cohort of PD brain donors. No association between dementia and 
survival duration was found. Understanding the influence of dementia on the 
clinical phenotype of the disease and predicting its development is essential 
for the successful management of PD.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1297
PMID: 15852454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1250. Neurosci Lett. 2005 May 20-27;380(1-2):166-9. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.01.088.

Differences in magnetization transfer ratios of the hippocampus between dementia 
with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Hanyu H(1), Shimizu S, Tanaka Y, Kanetaka H, Iwamoto T, Abe K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, 6-7-1 
Nishishinjuku Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 160-0023, Japan. hanyu@mb.kcom.ne.jp

We compared magnetization transfer ratios (MTRs) in the brains of patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) to determine 
whether regional differences in the brain structures between DLB and AD are 
detectable with magnetization transfer imaging. Seventeen patients with DLB, 31 
patients with AD and 18 elderly normal controls were included. Although no 
significant differences were found in MTRs in the frontal white matter between 
the three groups, MTRs in the hippocampus, parahippocampus, and posterior 
cingulate white matter in both patients with DLB and AD were significantly lower 
than those in age-matched control subjects. However, MTRs in the hippocampus of 
patients with DLB were significantly higher than those in patients with AD. 
Logistic regression analysis revealed that hippocampal MTR yielded a sensitivity 
of 76% and a specificity of 71% in discriminating DLB from AD. These results may 
reflect underlying histopathological differences with less severe neuronal 
degeneration in the hippocampus of DLB. MTR measurement of the hippocampus may 
contribute to the clinical differentiation between DLB and AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2005.01.088
PMID: 15854771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1251. Neuropathology. 2005 Jun;25(2):153-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2005.00595.x.

Miliary brain metastases presenting as rapidly progressive dementia.

Rivas E(1), Sanchez-Herrero J, Alonso M, Alvarez MJ, Teijeira S, Ballestín C, 
Tardio A, Navarro C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Neuropathology, Meixoeiro Hospital, Vigo, Spain.

We report the case of a 79-year-old woman who developed a rapidly progressive 
dementia (RPD) with severe memory impairment, early visual hallucinations and 
extrapyramidal signs. Symptoms started suddenly after hip replacement surgery 
following an accidental fall. Motor epileptic seizures appeared at the end of 
the illness. Dementia worsened gradually leading to akinetic mutism. She died 
five and a half months after the onset of symptoms. MRI showed cerebral atrophy 
but failed to detect any other lesion. Results of all laboratory tests performed 
were negative. After the most frequent treatable diseases were excluded, the 
diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies was initially considered. CJD was also 
suggested based on the rapid evolution of the disease and the positivity of 
14-3-3 protein in CSF. Neuropathological examination revealed an extensive 
miliary metastatic dissemination from an unknown primary adenocarcinoma. 
Pulmonary origin was suggested according to the immunohistochemical profile. 
Histopathological changes of Alzheimer's disease were also observed in the 
cerebral cortex and hippocampus. Neither Lewy bodies nor PrP deposits were 
found. The sudden onset of the dementia just after the hip replacement surgery 
raises the possibility of a pathological fracture with secondary tumoral 
microembolic dissemination. Despite its rarity, this entity should be included 
in the differential diagnosis of RPD. This case illustrates the definite 
importance of neuropathological post-mortem examination in order to elucidate 
the different types of dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2005.00595.x
PMID: 15875909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1252. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2005 Jun;11(4):205-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2005.01.003.

The effect of tau genotype on clinical features in FTDP-17.

Baba Y(1), Tsuboi Y, Baker MC, Uitti RJ, Hutton ML, Dickson DW, Farrer M, Putzke 
JD, Woodruff BK, Ghetti B, Murrell JR, Boeve BF, Petersen RC, Verpillat P, Brice 
A, Delisle MB, Rascol O, Arima K, Dysken MW, Yasuda M, Kobayashi T, Sunohara N, 
Komure O, Kuno S, Sperfeld AD, Stoppe G, Kohlhase J, Pickering-Brown S, Neary D, 
Bugiani O, Wszolek ZK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, 4500 San Pablo Road, Jacksonville, FL 
32224, USA.

The clinical phenotype of frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) varies. This variability is seen not only between 
kindreds with different mutations but also in families sharing the same 
mutation. Inheritance of tau haplotype (H1) and genotype (H1/H1) has been 
established as a risk factor for some neurodegenerative disorders with 
parkinsonism. We assessed the effect of tau polymorphism on the clinical 
features of FTDP-17 in 61 cases from 30 separately ascertained families with 
four different tau mutations, including P301L, +16, N279K, and P301S. There were 
no significant differences of age at symptomatic onset and disease duration 
between H1/H1 and H1/H2 genotypes. The comparison between tau genotype and type 
of initial clinical sign showed an association between the H1/H1 genotype and 
parkinsonian phenotype and between the H1/H2 genotype and frontotemporal 
dementia phenotype (OR=11.7; 95% confidence interval, 1.4-98.7; P=0.008). Our 
results suggest that tau genotype does not influence the disease course. 
However, it may predispose to a specific clinical sign in the early stage of 
FTDP-17.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2005.01.003
PMID: 15878580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1253. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2005 Jun;11(4):253-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2005.01.007. Epub 2005 Apr 20.

Reduced plasma homocysteine levels in levodopa/entacapone treated Parkinson 
patients.

Valkovic P(1), Benetin J, Blazícek P, Valkovicová L, Gmitterová K, Kukumberg P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Derer's University Hospital, Limbová 5, Bratislava 
83305, Slovak Republic. valkovicpeter@hotmail.com

Hyperhomocysteinemia is not only a major risk factor for atherothrombotic 
disease, but is also strongly associated with an increased risk of dementia and 
cognitive impairment, both of which are common in the course of Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Previous work has found that levodopa increases plasma 
homocysteine concentrations. Animal studies have indicated that the 
catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors can prevent levodopa-induced 
elevation of homocysteine concentrations by reducing the O-methylation of 
levodopa. The objective of our study was to assess the impact of entacapone, a 
COMT inhibitor, on plasma levels of homocysteine, serum folate, and vitamin B12 
in levodopa-treated PD patients. Nineteen PD patients receiving only levodopa 
and 21 PD patients on a combination of levodopa and entacapone participated in 
the cross-sectional study. The control group consisted of 17 subjects on 
dopamine agonists. The mean plasma homocysteine concentration in the subjects on 
only levodopa was higher than that in the subjects on a combination of levodopa 
and entacapone (P=0.001) or in the control group (P=0.0001). Concentrations of 
serum vitamin B12 and serum folate were on average normal in all groups, but 
levodopa-treated subjects (with or without entacapone therapy) were more prone 
to have hypovitaminosis B12 (45%) than controls on dopamine agonists (6%). We 
suggest that the COMT inhibition may play a promising role in successfully 
controlling levodopa-induced hyperhomocysteinemia and in reducing the risk of 
pathologies probably linked to it. These preliminary findings and postulated 
hypotheses must now be confirmed in prospective studies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2005.01.007
PMID: 15878587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1254. Neurology. 2005 May 10;64(9):1658-9. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000160328.17975.9C.

Screening for neurofilament inclusion disease using alpha-internexin 
immunohistochemistry.

Uchikado H(1), Shaw G, Wang DS, Dickson DW.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32224, USA.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000160328.17975.9C
PMID: 15883343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1255. Ideggyogy Sz. 2005 Jan 20;58(1-2):45-51.

[Clinical features of corticobasal degeneration].

[Article in Hungarian]

Farsang M(1), Takáts A, Szirmai I, Kovács T.

Author information:
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi Kar, Neurológiai Klinika, 
Budapest.

Corticobasal degeneration was described in 1968 by Rebeiz, Kolodny and 
Richardson, who characterized the disease as a syndrome of asymmetric akinesis 
and rigidity, dystonia of the upper limb, apraxia, myoclonus and dementia. 
Atrophy of the frontal and parietal lobe, neuronal loss, gliosis and achromatic 
neurones (and nowadays astrocytic plaques) are the characteristic pathological 
features of the disease. Corticobasal degeneration is a rare or a rarely 
recognized disease and it is frequently misdiagnosed as Parkinson's disease. 
According to the Lang's criteria, corticobasal degeneration can be diagnosed in 
the presence of rigidity and one cortical symptom (apraxia, cortical sensory 
loss, alien hand) or in a patient with rigidity, dystonia and focal reflex 
myoclonus. Exclusion criteria are early dementia (as in primary degenerative 
dementias), early vertical gaze problems (as in progressive supranuclear palsy), 
resting tremor and good, sustained therapeutic response to levodopa (as in 
Parkinson's disease), severe autonomic problems (as in multiple system atrophy) 
and any pathology on imaging studies which might explain the clinical symptoms. 
It should be mentioned, that recently early dementia is recognized as an initial 
symptom of corticobasal degeneration. The authors present a case and review the 
literature to call attention to this disorder.

PMID: 15884398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1256. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Jul 1;14(13):1753-62. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddi182. Epub 2005 May 
11.

Genomic architecture of human 17q21 linked to frontotemporal dementia uncovers a 
highly homologous family of low-copy repeats in the tau region.

Cruts M(1), Rademakers R, Gijselinck I, van der Zee J, Dermaut B, de Pooter T, 
de Rijk P, Del-Favero J, van Broeckhoven C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Flanders Interuniversity Institute for 
Biotechnology, University of Antwerp, Antwerpen, Belgium.

Familial frontotemporal dementia (FTD), characterized by tau-negative, 
ubiquitin-positive inclusions at autopsy, is linked to a chromosomal region at 
17q21 (FTDU-17), encompassing the gene encoding the microtubule associated 
protein tau, MAPT. Mutations in MAPT were previously identified in familial FTD 
with parkinsonism (FTDP-17); however, in FTDU-17 patients, no pathogenic 
mutations were found in exonic regions consistent with the lack of tauopathy in 
FTDU-17 brains. Here, we excluded mutations in MAPT by genomic sequencing of 
138.5 kb in FTDU-17 patients. Next, to facilitate the identification of the 
actual underlying genetic defect, we assembled the 6.5 Mb FTDU-17 sequence. 
Annotation demonstrated that MAPT is surrounded by three highly homologous 
low-copy repeats (LCRs) in a region of 1.7 Mb. Using evolutionary studies, short 
tandem repeat-based linkage disequilibrium (LD) and macro-restriction mapping, 
we demonstrated that these LCRs are at the basis of a series of rearrangements 
in the MAPT genomic region. One is an inversion that occurred 3 million years 
ago and resulted in a common polymorphism in humans to date. This inversion plus 
flanking LCRs spanned approximately 1.3 Mb and was shown to underlie the 
extended LD and haplotypes H1 and H2 across MAPT. However, in the FTDU-17 
families, we ascertained segregation analysis precluding a relationship between 
the FTDU-17 and the H1/H2 inversion. The presence of multiple homologous LCRs in 
the region predicts that other potentially more complex genomic rearrangements 
might be underlying FTDU-17.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddi182
PMID: 15888485 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1257. Sleep Med Rev. 2005 Jun;9(3):185-200. doi: 10.1016/j.smrv.2005.01.001. Epub 2005 
Apr 26.

Excessive daytime sleepiness in parkinsonism.

Arnulf I(1).

Author information:
(1)Fédération des Pathologies du Sommeil, Hôpital Pitié-Salpêtrière, 47-83 
Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris Cedex 13, France. 
isabelle.arnulf@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr

Excessive daytime sleepiness (EDS) can affect 20-50% of patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD), whereas sleep attacks (SA), which are sleep episodes 
without prodroma, seem infrequent. EDS is associated with more advanced disease, 
higher doses of levodopa-equivalent, and sometimes the use of dopamine agonists. 
Patients at risk for SA have higher Epworth sleepiness scores (ESS) (although an 
important subset of patients under-score on this scale) and a more frequent use 
of ergot or non-ergot dopamine agonists. Polysomnography is a valuable tool in 
patients with PD, because sleep apnea may occur in 20% of patients, whereas a 
specific narcolepsy-like phenotype, identified on multiple-sleep latency tests, 
occurs in patients with most severe EDS; this suggests a lesion in sleep-wake 
systems. Removal or replacement of a recently introduced dopamine agonist may 
offer some relief for EDS. If not, the adjunction of modafinil has a good 
benefit-risk ratio in patients with PD. EDS (and sometimes the narcolepsy-like 
phenotype) may also affect patients with atypical parkinsonism, such as dementia 
with Lewy bodies, multiple-system atrophy, and progressive supranuclear palsy.

DOI: 10.1016/j.smrv.2005.01.001
PMID: 15893249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1258. Neurobiol Aging. 2006 Feb;27(2):245-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.02.009.

Alteration of protein kinase C conformation in red blood cells: a potential 
marker for Alzheimer's disease but not for Parkinson's disease.

Janoshazi A(1), Sellal F, Marescaux C, Danion JM, Warter JM, de Barry J.

Author information:
(1)Neurotransmission et Sécretion Neuroendocrine UPR2356 CNRS, Strasbourg, 
France. agnesj@igbmc.-strasbg.fr

There is a growing evidence of early changes of blood cells in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). We have developed an original novel method for quantifying the 
alteration of protein kinase C (PKC) by its fluorescence spectrum: by using 
Fim-1, a specific fluorescent probe made for protein kinase C that detects the 
conformational changes of this. We show that the PKC conformation is altered in 
red blood cells (RBC) from AD patients as compared to RBC from healthy controls. 
This alteration is independent of the patient's age and of the stage of the 
disease. It is not observed in the RBC of non-demented patients suffering from 
Parkinson's disease (PD). If PKC alteration is proven to be specific to AD as 
compared with other dementia, this method could be for a simple, low cost 
screening test among patients suspected of having AD and may have a strong 
predictive value.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.02.009
PMID: 15893856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1259. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2005 May 7;149(19):1027-32.

[Guideline 'Delirium'].

[Article in Dutch]

van der Mast RC(1), Huyse FJ, Rosier PF.

Author information:
(1)Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Psychiatrie BIP, Postbus 96oo, 2300 
RC, Leiden. r.c.van-der-mast@lumc.nl

The Dutch Association of Psychiatry, together with the Dutch Association of 
Clinical Geriatrics and with methodological support from the Dutch Institute for 
Healthcare Improvement (CBO) has developed a guideline for the optimal 
diagnosis, treatment and prevention of delirium. Delirium is caused by somatic 
illness or the use of medication, drugs or alcohol. Delirium is common among the 
somatically ill admitted to a general hospital and is associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality. Important predisposing factors for delirium are: age > 
or =70 years, cognitive disturbances, sensory impairments, problems in daily 
activities, and the use of alcohol and opiates. Precipitating factors that may 
provoke delirium are: infection, fever, dehydration, serum electrolyte 
imbalance, polypharmacy, and the use of psychotropic medication, particularly 
anticholinergic drugs. Detection, diagnosis, and assessment of the severity of 
delirium are based on clinical examination, case history, observation, mental 
status examination including tests of cognitive function, and diagnosis of 
underlying somatic diseases. For daily practice, measurement tools are not 
necessary, nor are laboratory or imaging tests, such as electroencephalography. 
Haloperidol is the treatment of first choice for delirium due to somatic 
illness, except in patients with delirium due to drug use or medication, 
Parkinson's disease or Lewy body dementia. In cases of concurrent alcohol 
withdrawal syndrome, delirium may be treated with haloperidol and a 
benzodiazepine and B-vitamins. Medical and environmental interventions have been 
shown to reduce the incidence and duration of delirium.

PMID: 15909390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1260. Neurology. 2005 May 24;64(10):1712-5. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000161872.85903.8E.

Association between family history of dementia and hallucinations in Parkinson 
disease.

Paleacu D(1), Schechtman E, Inzelberg R.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service and Memory Clinic, Yehuda Abarbanel Mental Health Center 
and Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To identify familial risk factors for hallucinations in patients with 
Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: Two hundred seventy-six outpatients with PD participated in the study. 
The presence of hallucinations was determined using a validated questionnaire, 
including items regarding the occurrence of visual, auditory, or other types of 
hallucinations. Family history of PD and dementia was determined by a structured 
interview and examination of medical records and affected family members. 
Patients with young-onset PD (<50 years) who reported another PD patient among 
their siblings were tested for parkin mutations. Stepwise logistic regression 
was applied for the detection of risk factors. The regression model included a 
set of family history-related variables (family history of PD and of dementia) 
and a set of disease-related variables (age, age at onset of PD, stage, duration 
of PD and of l-dopa therapy, l-dopa dose, and number of antiparkinsonian drugs).
RESULTS: Hallucinations were present in 32% of the 276 patients. Risk factors 
for hallucinations included Mini-Mental State Examination score (p < 0.0001) and 
positive family history of dementia (p = 0.0005).
CONCLUSION: Family history of dementia and lower Mini-Mental State Examination 
scores are risk factors for hallucinations in Parkinson disease.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000161872.85903.8E
PMID: 15911796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1261. Neurology. 2005 May 24;64(10):1819-20. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000162030.60827.C2.

A link between ALS and short residence on Guam.

Majoor-Krakauer D(1), Mulder PG, Rowland LP, Ottman R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Center, Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands. majkrak@knmg.nl

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000162030.60827.C2
PMID: 15911829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1262. Neurobiol Aging. 2005 Aug-Sep;26(8):1161-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2004.11.001. Epub 2004 Dec 18.

Three SNPs in the GSTO1, GSTO2 and PRSS11 genes on chromosome 10 are not 
associated with age-at-onset of Alzheimer's disease.

Ozturk A(1), Desai PP, Minster RL, Dekosky ST, Kamboh MI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Linkage studies suggest the presence of putative risk and/or age-at-onset genes 
for Alzheimer's disease on Chromosome 10. Recently, a genomic converging 
approach using a combination of linkage, expression and association studies has 
reported significant associations of the glutathione S-transferase omega 1 and 2 
(GSTO1 and GSTO2) genes and possibly the protease serine 11 (PRSS11) gene on 
chromosome 10 with age-at-onset, but not risk, for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Parkinson disease. We investigated the association of the reported three 
polymorphisms in 990 sporadic late-onset AD cases (26% autopsy confirmed) and 
735 controls. In our sample, we found no association either with age-at-onset in 
AD cases or with disease risk in the case-control cohort. However, haplotype 
analysis revealed a modest association of one haplotype with AD risk (p = 0.04). 
Additional markers in these genes need to be screened to explore their role in 
the etiology of AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2004.11.001
PMID: 15917099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1263. Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr. 2005 Jun;36(3):130-136. doi: 10.1007/BF03074717.

Chronische pijn bij dementie en bij aandoeningen met een verhoogd risico op 
cognitieve achteruitgang.

[Article in Dutch]

Scherder EJ, Oosterman JM, Ooms ME, Ribbe MW, Swaab DF.

Chronic pain in dementia and in disorders with a high risk for cognitive 
impairment. Ageing increases the risk for the etiology of chronic pain ánd 
dementia. Hence, the increase in the number of elderly people implies that the 
number of elderly with dementia suffering from chronic pain will increase as 
well. A key question relates to if and how patients with dementia perceive pain. 
The inadequateness of pain assessment, particularly in a more advanced stage, is 
also reflected in a decreased use of analgesics by elderly people with dementia. 
Insight into possible changes in pain experience as have been observed in the 
few available clinical studies, could be enhanced by knowledge about the 
neuropathology which may differ per subtype of dementia. It is striking that 
pain has not been examined in degenerative diseases of the central nervous 
system with a high risk for cognitive impairment such as Parkinson's disease and 
multiple sclerosis. In these disorders, pain is a prominent clinical symptom and 
to date it is not known whether the experience of pain will change in a stage in 
which patients become cognitively impaired. Finally, a number of instruments 
which are most appropriate to assess pain in communicative and non-communicative 
patients are discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03074717
PMID: 23203490


1264. J Nucl Med. 2005 Jun;46(6):936-44.

11C-DTBZ and 18F-FDG PET measures in differentiating dementias.

Koeppe RA(1), Gilman S, Joshi A, Liu S, Little R, Junck L, Heumann M, Frey KA, 
Albin RL.

Author information:
(1)Division of Nuclear Medicine, Department of Radiology, University of Michigan 
School of Medicine, 3480 Kresge III, Box 0552, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. 
koeppe@umich.edu

Accurate, early differentiation of dementias will become increasingly important 
as new therapies are introduced. Differential diagnosis by standard clinical 
criteria has limited accuracy. PET offers the potential to increase diagnostic 
accuracy. (18)F-FDG studies detect metabolic abnormalities in demented patients, 
but with limited specificity. PET also offers the ability to quantify other 
biochemical markers that can yield additional useful diagnostic information. We 
demonstrate that (+)-(11)C-dihydrotetrabenazine ((11)C-DTBZ) studies, which 
provide an index of nigrostriatal terminal density (distribution volume; DV), 
also provide a measure of transport (K(1)) that produces information comparable 
to the metabolic measure of (18)F-FDG.
METHODS: Fifty-two patients and 19 control subjects underwent both (11)C-DTBZ 
and (18)F-FDG PET scans. Seven had the clinical diagnosis of frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD), 25 had Alzheimer's disease (AD), and 20 had dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB). DTBZ scans provided maps of K(1) and DV, whereas (18)F-FDG scans 
provided maps of glucose metabolism. Correlation analyses were performed between 
the different PET measures both within and across subjects. Discriminant 
analysis using logistic regression compared the performance of (11)C-DTBZ K(1) 
and (18)F-FDG in differentiating subject groups. Three experienced PET 
researchers participated in an interrater reliability study using both 
(11)C-DTBZ K(1) and (18)F-FDG images.
RESULTS: Within-subject correspondence between (11)C-DTBZ K(1) and (18)F-FDG 
measures was high, with correlations averaging 0.92. Correlations between the 
(11)C-DTBZ DV and either K(1) or (18)F-FDG were far lower, averaging 0.37 and 
0.31, respectively, indicating the much higher degree of similarity in 
information provided by K(1) and (18)F-FDG compared with the very different 
information provided by (11)C-DTBZ DV. Discriminant analysis demonstrated that 
(11)C-DTBZ K(1) and (18)F-FDG yielded similar levels of sensitivity and 
specificity for differentiating the subjects in this study. Including (11)C-DTBZ 
DV in addition to either K(1) or (18)F-FDG improved discrimination between 
groups. The raters classified PET scans nearly equivalently using K(1) and 
(18)F-FDG.
CONCLUSION: Multiple PET measures, whether 2 parameters from a single PET study 
such as (11)C-DTBZ K(1) and DV, or 2 parameters from different studies such as 
(18)F-FDG and (11)C-DTBZ DV, offer complementary information useful for 
diagnosing dementias. K(1) and DV images generated from a single (11)C-DTBZ scan 
provide as much diagnostic information as 2-scan studies using both (11)C-DTBZ 
and (18)F-FDG.

PMID: 15937303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1265. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2005 Jun;62(6):685-91. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.685.

Sex differences in the clinical manifestations of Alzheimer disease pathology.

Barnes LL(1), Wilson RS, Bienias JL, Schneider JA, Evans DA, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois 60612, USA. Lisa_L_Barnes@rush.edu

CONTEXT: Sex differences in risk of clinically diagnosed Alzheimer disease (AD) 
have been studied extensively, but little is known about the relation of the 
pathologic indices of AD to the clinical manifestations of the disease in men 
compared with women.
OBJECTIVE: To test whether the relation of AD pathology to the clinical 
manifestations of the disease differs in men and women.
DESIGN: Longitudinal, clinicopathologic cohort study.
PARTICIPANTS AND SETTING: Analyses were conducted on 141 older Catholic clergy 
members who underwent detailed annual clinical evaluations and brain autopsy at 
death. The number of neuritic plaques, diffuse plaques, and neurofibrillary 
tangles in a 1-mm2 area sampled from 4 cortical regions was counted, and a 
global measure of AD pathology (range, 0-2.98 U) and specific measures of each 
pathology were derived.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical diagnosis of probable AD and level of global 
cognitive function at the last evaluation before death.
RESULTS: Women had more global AD pathology than did men (P = .04), due 
primarily to more neurofibrillary tangles (P = .02). At the last evaluation 
before death, 57 persons met clinical criteria for probable AD (34 [60%] of them 
women). In logistic regression models, sex was not related to odds of clinical 
AD (odds ratio [OR], 1.35; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.56-3.25), but the 
relation of global AD pathology to clinical diagnosis differed for men and 
women. Each additional unit of AD pathology was associated with a nearly 3-fold 
increase in the odds of clinical AD in men (OR, 2.82; 95% CI, 1.03-7.65) 
compared with a more than 20-fold increase in the odds of clinical AD in women 
(OR, 22.67; 95% CI, 5.11-100.53). Results were unchanged after controlling for 
potential confounders or using level of cognition as the outcome.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that AD pathology is more likely to be clinically 
expressed as dementia in women than in men.

DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.62.6.685
PMID: 15939846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1266. Am J Ind Med. 2005 Jul;48(1):63-77. doi: 10.1002/ajim.20178.

Potential occupational risks for neurodegenerative diseases.

Park RM(1), Schulte PA, Bowman JD, Walker JT, Bondy SC, Yost MG, Touchstone JA, 
Dosemeci M.

Author information:
(1)Education and Information Division, National Institute for Occupational 
Safety and Health, MS C-15, 4676 Columbia Parkway, Cincinnati, OH 45226, USA. 
rhp9@cdc.gov

BACKGROUND: Associations between occupations and neurodegenerative diseases 
(NDD) may be discernable in death certificate data.
METHODS: Hypotheses generated from 1982 to 1991 study were tested in data from 
22 states for the years 1992-1998. Specific occupations and exposures to 
pesticides, solvents, oxidative stressors, magnetic fields, and welding fumes 
were evaluated.
RESULTS: About one third (26/87) of the occupations hypothesized with 
neurodegenerative associations had statistically significant elevated mortality 
odds ratios (MOR) for the same outcome. Occupations with the largest MORs were 
(a) for presenile dementia (PSD)-dentists, graders/sorters (non-agricultural), 
and clergy; (b) for Alzheimer's disease (AD)-bank tellers, clergy, aircraft 
mechanics, and hairdressers; (c) for Parkinson's disease (PD)-biological 
scientists, clergy, religious workers, and post-secondary teachers; and (d) for 
motor neuron disease (MND)-veterinarians, hairdressers, and graders and sorters 
(non-agricultural). Teachers had significantly elevated MORs for all four 
diseases, and hairdressers for three of the four. Non-horticultural farmers 
below age 65 had elevated PD (MOR = 2.23, 95% CI = 1.47-3.26), PSD (MOR = 2.22, 
95% CI = 1.10-4.05), and AD (MOR = 1.76, 95% CI = 1.04-2.81). Sixty hertz 
magnetic fields exhibited significant exposure-response for AD and, below age 
65, for PD (MOR = 1.87, 95% CI = 1.14-2.98) and MND (MOR = 1.63, 95% CI = 
1.10-2.39). Welding had elevated PD mortality below age 65 (MOR = 1.77, 95% CI = 
1.08-2.75).
CONCLUSIONS: Support was observed for hypothesized excess neurodegenerative 
disease associated with a variety of occupations, 60 Hz magnetic fields and 
welding.

Published 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/ajim.20178
PMID: 15940722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1267. Neurobiol Dis. 2005 Dec;20(3):685-93. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2005.05.001. Epub 2005 
Jun 8.

Impaired metabotropic glutamate receptor/phospholipase C signaling pathway in 
the cerebral cortex in Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies 
correlates with stage of Alzheimer's-disease-related changes.

Albasanz JL(1), Dalfó E, Ferrer I, Martín M.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Química Inorgánica, Orgánica y Bioquímica, Facultad de 
Ciencias Químicas, Area de Bioquímica, Centro Regional de Investigaciones 
Biomédicas, Universidad de Castilla-La Mancha, Avenida Camilo José Cela, 10, 
13071 Ciudad Real, Spain.

The aim of the present work was to analyze the status of metabotropic glutamate 
receptors (mGluRs) in the frontal cortex (area 8) from ten cases with common 
form DLB (cDLB) and eleven cases with pure AD in comparison with five 
age-matched controls. mGluRs, determined by radioligand binding assays, were 
significantly decreased in cerebral cortex in cDLB. This decrease was already 
present in cases with early AD changes not involving the frontal cortex, but 
dramatically correlated with AD neuropathological changes, at its greatest in 
isocortical stages, which was associated with a decrease in the expression 
levels of mGluR1 detected by Western blotting. Moreover, mGluRs analyzed in pure 
AD were lower than those obtained in cDLB and also correlated with progression 
of illness. On the other hand, the expression levels of phospholipase Cbeta1 
(PLCbeta1) isoform, which is the effector of group I mGluRs, was decreased in 
parallel in cDLB cases. Finally, the PLCbeta1 decrease was associated with 
reduced GTP- and l-glutamate-stimulated PLC activity in both cDLB and AD cases. 
These results show that group I mGluRs/PLC signaling are down-regulated and 
desensitized in the frontal cortex in cDLB and AD cases and that these 
modifications worsen with progression of AD changes in the cerebral neocortex. 
Therefore, group I mGluR dysfunction may be implicated in the pathogenesis of 
cognitive impairment and dementia in common form of DLB and pure AD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2005.05.001
PMID: 15949941 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1268. Rev Med Chil. 2005 Apr;133(4):477-82. doi: 10.4067/s0034-98872005000400013. Epub 
2005 Jun 8.

[Clinical variants of Alzheimer disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Donoso S A(1), Behrens P MI.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Neurología y Neurocirugía, Hospital Clínico, Universidad de 
Chile, Santiago, Chile. adonoso@redclinica.uchile.cl

The heterogeneity and variants of Alzheimer disease (AD) are reviewed. There are 
cases with a slow or fast evolution and with early or late onset. Most cases are 
sporadic but there are also hereditary forms. About 50% of patients show 
neuropsychiatric disorders (depression and psychoses). Some cases have a greater 
deficit of right or left hemispheric functions. Among the variants, there are 
forms that start as pure aphasias, predominantly prefrontal cases and posterior 
cortical forms. Occasionally AD may simulate other disorders such as 
supranuclear palsy, corticobasal ganglionar degeneration and Jacob-Creutzfeldt 
disease. Finally, there are mixed forms, in which AD is associated with 
cerebrovascular disease (very commonly) and with other diseases such as dementia 
with Lewy bodies. We conclude that AD is a heterogeneous disorder and, 
therefore, clinical diagnosis may be insufficient. Biological markers and 
specific imaging studies are needed for a correct clinical diagnosis.

DOI: 10.4067/s0034-98872005000400013
PMID: 15953957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1269. Mov Disord. 2005 Sep;20(9):1213-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.20571.

Heat-related morbidity in patients with orthostatic hypotension and primary 
autonomic failure.

Pathak A(1), Lapeyre-Mestre M, Montastruc JL, Senard JM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Pharmacologie Médicale et Clinique, Faculté de Médecine, 
Toulouse, France.

We investigated the effects of high-external-temperature exposure on neurogenic 
orthostatic hypotension (OH). Thirty-one patients with autonomic failure (AF) 
and pharmacologically treated OH related to probable multiple-system atrophy 
(n=7), Parkinson's disease (n=10), pure autonomic failure (n=7), and diffuse 
Lewy body disease (n=7) and 26 parkinsonians without AF were included. 
Prevalence and severity of clinical events were studied during the August 2003 
heat wave and the 2004 summer. The prevalence of OH-related events was 
significantly higher in 2003 [45.1 vs. 11.5%; P=0.0052; OR=6.31 (1.35--33.53)] 
and 2004 [42.3 vs. 12.0%; P=0.014; OR=5.40 (1.28--22.68)] in AF than in 
controls. The mean severity score for clinical events was significantly higher 
in AF than in controls during 2003 heat wave (1.2+/-1.4 vs. 0.2+/-0.5) but 
similar in summer 2004 (0.7+/-1.0 vs. 0.1+/-0.3). Severe events (unusual home 
care, assistance, or hospitalization) were only observed in AF patients. A 
nonstatistically significant higher prevalence of clinical events was observed 
in AF patients prescribed fludrocortisone (66.7%) by comparison to heptaminol 
(42.9%), midodrine (45.5%), or midodrine plus fludrocortisone (28.6%). This 
study shows that AF patients have a poor clinical outcome when exposed to high 
temperatures and that heat exposure is a risk factor for OH worsening.

(c) 2005 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20571
PMID: 15954131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1270. Mov Disord. 2005 Sep;20(9):1133-42. doi: 10.1002/mds.20513.

Clinical characteristics in early Parkinson's disease in a central California 
population-based study.

Kang GA(1), Bronstein JM, Masterman DL, Redelings M, Crum JA, Ritz B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los 
Angeles, CA 90095-1772, USA.

There is considerable variation in the phenotypic appearance of individuals with 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD), which may translate into differences in 
disease progression in addition to underlying disease etiology. In this 
publication, we report on the demographic and clinical characteristics of 162 
individuals diagnosed with clinically probable PD from January 1998 to June 2003 
who resided in predominantly rural communities in central California. The 
majority of the subjects were Caucasian, male, and between 60 and 79 years of 
age. The akinetic-rigid and tremor-dominant subtypes were more common than the 
mixed subtype. The majority of subjects displayed motor signs of rigidity 
(92.0%), bradykinesia (95.7%), and gait problems (87.0%), whereas less than half 
(43.3%) of the subjects displayed a tremor. Three fourths of patients received a 
Hoehn and Yahr Scale score of Stage 2 or higher. One third of the patients were 
treated with levodopa, and patients under 60 years of age were more likely to be 
treated with dopamine agonists. Within 3 years after first diagnosis, 13% of 
subjects showed some signs of depression and 17% of subjects met criteria for 
mild dementia. Among our subjects, 17.3% reported a family history of PD in 
first- or second-degree relatives,15.4% a family history of essential tremor, 
and 14.2% of Alzheimer's disease. This study represents the most extensive 
phenotypic description of rural U.S. residents in the initial stages of PD who 
were recruited in a population-based manner; future follow-up may provide 
valuable information regarding the prognostic indication of these symptoms/signs 
and improve our understanding of the underlying etiology of PD.

(c) 2005 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20513
PMCID: PMC3643967
PMID: 15954133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1271. Neurology. 2005 Jun 14;64(11):1955-7. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000164009.36740.4E.

Clinicogenetic study of PINK1 mutations in autosomal recessive early-onset 
parkinsonism.

Li Y(1), Tomiyama H, Sato K, Hatano Y, Yoshino H, Atsumi M, Kitaguchi M, Sasaki 
S, Kawaguchi S, Miyajima H, Toda T, Mizuno Y, Hattori N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, 
Bunkyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

The authors performed PINK1 mutation analysis of 51 families with autosomal 
recessive Parkinson disease (ARPD). They found two novel PINK1 mutations: one 
was a homozygous deletion (13516-18118del) and the other a homozygous missense 
mutation (C388R). Clinically, the patients with the deletion had dementia. Thus, 
early-onset PD with dementia may be considered PINK1-linked parkinsonism. 
Furthermore, patients with PINK1 mutations form 8.9% of parkin- and 
DJ-1-negative ARPD families.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000164009.36740.4E
PMID: 15955953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1272. Mol Ther. 2005 Sep;12(3):394-401. doi: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.04.003.

Intrabody applications in neurological disorders: progress and future prospects.

Miller TW(1), Messer A.

Author information:
(1)Wadsworth Center, New York State Department of Health, and Department of 
Biomedical Sciences, University at Albany, Albany, NY 12201, USA.

Single-chain Fv and single-domain antibodies retain the binding specificity of 
full-length antibodies, but they can be expressed as single genes in phage or 
yeast surface-display libraries, thus allowing efficient in vitro selection from 
a naive human repertoire. Selected genes can then be expressed intracellularly 
in mammalian cells as intrabodies, with the potential for alteration of the 
folding, interactions, modifications, or subcellular localization of their 
targets. These reagents have been developed as therapeutics against cancer and 
HIV. Since misfolded and accumulated intracellular proteins characterize a wide 
range of neurodegenerative disorders, they are also potentially useful intrabody 
targets. Here, we review the extension of intrabody technology to the nervous 
system, in which studies of Huntington's disease have been used to develop the 
approach, and anti-synuclein and -beta-amyloid strategies are in the early 
stages of development. Research on several other neurodegenerations, including 
Parkinson's, Alzheimer's, and prion diseases, provides support for the 
development of intrabodies directed against specific targets, or possibly 
against more common downstream targets, as novel therapeutics and as drug 
discovery tools.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymthe.2005.04.003
PMID: 15964243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1273. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2004 Feb;1(1):55-61. doi: 10.2174/1567205043480564.

Cross-cultural comparison of mild cognitive impairment between China and USA.

Xu G(1), Meyer JS, Huang Y, Chen G, Chowdhury M, Quach M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Nanjing General Hospital of PLA, Nanjing, PR China.

Individuals with mild cognitive impairment (MCI) are at increased risk for 
dementia of Alzheimer's type (DAT), vascular dementia (VaD), Lewy Body (LBD) and 
Fronto-temporal dementias (FTD). Risk factors and conversion rates of MCI to 
dementia have not been thoroughly investigated in developing countries. Chinese 
and English versions of Mini-Mental State Examination were administered serially 
among well-matched subjects from two clinics located in Xi'an, China and 
Houston, USA. Subtle cognitive impairments were weighed according to MCI 
criteria as defined previously. Subjects with MCI were followed for an 
additional 3 years after their identification. Diagnoses of VaD and DAT were 
made according to established criteria. During screening period, 73 American and 
65 Chinese individuals were identified with MCI. After 3 years of MCI follow-up, 
of the 73 American MCI subjects, 35 (47.9%) developed DAT and 15 (20.5%) 
developed VaD. Of the 65 Chinese MCI subjects, 12 (18.5%) developed DAT and 19 
(29.2%) developed VaD. According to Kaplan-Meier analysis, Chinese MCI subjects, 
despite their lower educational level, are 1.7 times less likely to progress to 
DAT and 2.3 times more likely to progress to VaD than American subjects within 3 
years of MCI being identified (p<0.01). Data suggest that progression rates of 
MCI vary considerably among subjects from two countries. American MCI subjects 
are more prone to DAT, while Chinese subjects are more prone to VaD. Differences 
in genetic factors, cultures, educational levels, and preventive treatments of 
vascular risk factors are proposed as responsible for this uneven geographic 
distribution for different types of dementia.

DOI: 10.2174/1567205043480564
PMID: 15975086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1274. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2005;20(2-3):89-94. doi: 10.1159/000086472. Epub 
2005 Jun 23.

The Alzheimer variant of lewy body disease: a pathologically confirmed 
case-control study.

Perneczky R(1), Mösch D, Neumann M, Kretzschmar H, Müller U, Busch R, Förstl H, 
Kurz A.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Psychiatrie und Psychotherapie der Technischen 
Universität München, München, Deutschland. robert.perneckzy@lrz.tum.de

The objective of the study was to identify clinical features that distinguish 
patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), who were classified as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) patients, from patients with AD. We examined a group of 
27 patients from our memory clinic, originally diagnosed with AD, of whom 6 were 
postmortem found to have DLB. For the present study, we compared cognitive, 
noncognitive and neurological symptoms between the two groups. We found that 
there were no differences on ratings of dementia and scales for activities of 
daily living. Patients with DLB performed better on the MMSE and the memory 
subtest of the CAMCOG, but there was no difference in any other cognitive 
domain. Furthermore, genetic risk factors, including family history of dementia 
or allele frequency of the apolipoprotein epsilon4, did not discriminate between 
the two groups, and there were no differences on CCT scans. Taken together, our 
findings suggest that Lewy body pathology may be present in patients who do not 
show the typical clinical features which distinguish DLB from AD.

Copyright (c) 2005 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000086472
PMID: 15976504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1275. MMW Fortschr Med. 2005 Jun 2;147(22):11.

[Depressive syndrome, psychoses, dementia: frequent manifestations in Parkinson 
disease].

[Article in German]

Wedekind S.

PMID: 15977623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1276. Methods Mol Biol. 2005;299:19-33. doi: 10.1385/1-59259-874-9:019.

In vitro preparation of prefibrillar intermediates of amyloid-beta and 
alpha-synuclein.

Lashuel HA(1), Grillo-Bosch D.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Department 
of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Elucidating the structural properties of early intermediates (protofibrils) on 
the fibril formation pathway of Abeta and alpha-synuclein, the structural 
relationship among the different intermediates and their relationship to the 
structure of the amyloid fibrils is critical for understanding the roles of 
amyloid fibril formation in the pathogenesis of Alzheimer's and Parkinson's 
diseases. In this chapter we discuss several methods, developed by different 
laboratories, that enable the preparation and stabilization of amyloid-beta and 
alpha-synuclein protofibrillar species of defined morphologies for biochemical, 
biophysical and toxicity studies.

DOI: 10.1385/1-59259-874-9:019
PMID: 15980593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1277. Neurobiol Aging. 2006 Aug;27(8):1087-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.05.013. Epub 2005 Jun 27.

Revealing the role of glutathione S-transferase omega in age-at-onset of 
Alzheimer and Parkinson diseases.

Li YJ(1), Scott WK, Zhang L, Lin PI, Oliveira SA, Skelly T, Doraiswamy MP, 
Welsh-Bohmer KA, Martin ER, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA, Vance JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine and Center for Human Genetics, Duke University Medical 
Center, Box 3445, Durham, NC 27710, USA. yiju.li@duke.edu

We previously reported a linkage region on chromosome 10q for age-at-onset (AAO) 
of Alzheimer (AD) and Parkinson (PD) diseases. Glutathione S-transferase, 
omega-1 (GSTO1) and the adjacent gene GSTO2, located in this linkage region, 
were then reported to associate with AAO of AD and PD. To examine whether GSTO1 
and GSTO2 (hereafter referred to as GSTO1h) are responsible for the linkage 
evidence, we identified 39 families in AD that lead to our previous linkage and 
association findings. The evidence of linkage and association was markedly 
diminished after removing these 39 families from the analyses, thus providing 
support that GSTO1h drives the original linkage results. The maximum average AAO 
delayed by GSTO1h SNP 7-1 (rs4825, A nucleotide) was 6.8 (+/-4.41) years for AD 
and 8.6(+/-5.71) for PD, respectively. This is comparable to the magnitude of 
AAO difference by APOE-4 in these same AD and PD families. These findings 
suggest the presence of genetic heterogeneity for GSTO1h's effect on AAO, and 
support GSTO1h's role in modifying AAO in these two disorders.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2005.05.013
PMCID: PMC1482739
PMID: 15985314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1278. Neurology. 2005 Jun 28;64(12):2040-5. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000166038.67153.9F.

Dietary fatty acids and the risk of Parkinson disease: the Rotterdam study.

de Lau LM(1), Bornebroek M, Witteman JC, Hofman A, Koudstaal PJ, Breteler MM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Erasmus Medical Center, 
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Unsaturated fatty acids are important constituents of neuronal cell 
membranes and have neuroprotective, antioxidant, and anti-inflammatory 
properties.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if a high intake of unsaturated fatty acids might be 
associated with a lower risk of Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: In the Rotterdam Study, a prospective population-based cohort study of 
people ages > or =55, the association between intake of unsaturated fatty acids 
and the risk of incident PD was evaluated among 5,289 subjects who were free of 
dementia and parkinsonism and underwent complete dietary assessment at baseline. 
PD was assessed through repeated in-person examination, and the cohort was 
continuously monitored by computer linkage to medical records. The data were 
analyzed using Cox proportional hazards regression models.
RESULTS: After a mean follow-up of 6.0 years, 51 participants with incident PD 
were identified. Intakes of total fat, monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), and 
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) were significantly associated with a lower 
risk of PD, with an adjusted hazard ratio per SD increase of energy-adjusted 
intake of 0.69 (95% CI 0.52 to 0.91) for total fat, of 0.68 (95% CI 0.50 to 
0.94) for MUFAs, and 0.66 (95% CI 0.46 to 0.96) for PUFAs. No associations were 
found for dietary saturated fat, cholesterol, or trans-fat.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that high intake of unsaturated fatty acids 
might protect against Parkinson disease.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000166038.67153.9F
PMID: 15985568 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1279. Neurology. 2005 Jun 28;64(12):2132-3. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000165977.38272.15.

"Applause sign" helps to discriminate PSP from FTD and PD.

Dubois B(1), Slachevsky A, Pillon B, Beato R, Villalponda JM, Litvan I.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U 610, Fédération de Neurologie, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, Paris, 
France. b.dubois@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr

The "applause sign" is a simple test of motor control that helps to 
differentiate PSP from frontal or striatofrontal degenerative diseases. It was 
found in 0/39 controls, 0 of 24 patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD), 0 
of 17 patients with Parkinson disease (PD), and 30/42 patients with progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP). It discriminated PSP from FTD (p < 0.001) and PD (p < 
0.00). The "three clap test" correctly identified 81.8% of the patients in the 
comparison PSP and FTD and 75% of the patients in the comparison of PSP and PD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000165977.38272.15
PMID: 15985587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1280. Acta Neuropathol. 2005 Aug;110(2):135-44. doi: 10.1007/s00401-005-1027-3. Epub 
2005 Jun 29.

Caspase-cleaved tau accumulation in neurodegenerative diseases associated with 
tau and alpha-synuclein pathology.

Newman J(1), Rissman RA, Sarsoza F, Kim RC, Dick M, Bennett DA, Cotman CW, Rohn 
TT, Head E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Boise State University, Boise, Idaho, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD), Pick's disease (PiD), progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP), corticobasal degeneration (CBD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are 
diseases associated with the accumulation of tau or alpha-synuclein. In AD, 
beta-amyloid (Abeta)-associated caspase activation and cleavage of tau at Asp421 
(DeltaTau) may be an early step in neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) formation. To 
examine whether DeltaTau accumulates in other diseases not characterized by 
extracellular Abeta accumulation, we examined PiD, PSP, and CBD cases in 
comparison to those without extensive tau accumulation including frontotemporal 
lobar degeneration without Pick bodies (FTLD) and control cases. Additionally, 
we studied DeltaTau accumulation in DLB cases associated with intracellular 
alpha-synuclein. DeltaTau was observed in all disease cases except non-PiD FTLD 
and controls. These results demonstrate that the accumulation of DeltaTau may 
represent a common pathway associated with abnormal accumulation of 
intracellular tau or alpha-synuclein and may be relatively less dependent on the 
extracellular accumulation of Abeta in non-AD dementias.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-005-1027-3
PMID: 15986225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1281. Expert Opin Ther Targets. 2001 Feb;5(1):125-32. doi: 10.1517/14728222.5.1.125.

The emerging utility of animal models of chronic neurodegenerative diseases.

Kahle PJ(1), Haass C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease Research, Department of 
Biochemistry, Ludwig Maximilians University, Schillerstrasse 44, D-80336 Munich, 
Germany. pkahle@pbm.med.uni-muenchen.de

The two most common neurodegenerative diseases are Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Parkinson's disease (PD). The symptoms are caused by the initially selective 
degeneration of neuronal subpopulations involved in memory (AD) or movement 
control (PD). The cause of both diseases is unknown, but ageing is an inevitable 
risk factor. The identification of disease-associated genes was a breakthrough 
for the understanding of molecular mechanisms of neurodegeneration and has 
provided the basis for the establishment of cell culture and animal model 
systems, instrumental for target validation and drug screening. Familial AD is 
caused by mutations in the beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaAPP) and in the 
gene products responsible for its proteolytic processing, namely the 
presenilins. Transgenic mice expressing these mutant genes develop 
characteristic AD plaques in an age-dependent manner. A reduction of plaque 
burden and amelioration of cognitive decline in these animals was recently 
achieved by vaccination with amyloid beta-protein fibrils. The other hallmark 
lesion of AD, the neurofibrillary tangle, has been modelled recently in 
transgenic mice expressing mutant tau protein linked to frontotemporal dementia. 
PD is characterised by intraneuronal cytoplasmic deposits (Lewy bodies) of the 
PD-associated gene product alpha-synuclein. Transgenic expression of 
alpha-synuclein recreated hallmark features of PD in mice and fruit flies, 
establishing alpha-synuclein as PD-causing drug target. Moreover, environmental 
risk factors such as the pesticide rotenone have been used successfully to 
generate rodent models of PD. Lesion models of PD are being exploited for the 
development of experimental gene therapy and transplantation approaches.

DOI: 10.1517/14728222.5.1.125
PMID: 15992171


1282. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2006 Mar;113(3):331-7. doi: 10.1007/s00702-005-0329-x. 
Epub 2005 Jul 6.

Analysis of the polymorphic prion protein gene codon 129 in idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease.

Gossrau G(1), Herting B, Möckel S, Kempe A, Koch R, Reichmann H, Lampe JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Technology, Dresden, Germany. 
ggossrau@uni-bonn.de

Idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) is a neurodegenerative disorder of unknown 
aetiology. Histopathological similarities between IPD and Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
prion disease (CJD) have been suggested. Homozygosity at polymorphic prion 
protein gene codon 129 (PRNP129) is a risk factor for developing CJD. Therefore 
we investigated a putative genetic link between CJD and IPD by studying PRNP129 
genotype segregation in 81 patients with IPD. We did not ascertain a different 
PRNP129 genotype distribution in IPD patients compared to healthy Germans. We 
found a significant difference in PRNP129 genotype in dependence of the clinical 
predominance type of IPD. Patients with tremor-dominant IPD presented less 
frequent a methionine homozygosis at PRNP129 than hypokinetic-rigid IPD patients 
(30% versus 62.5%; p<0.033). In conclusion, genotype distribution at codon 129 
is obviously not essential in determining IPD. But our results may provide first 
evidence of an association between certain PRNP129 polymorphisms and the 
clinical presentation of IPD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-005-0329-x
PMID: 15997418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1283. Mov Disord. 2005 Oct;20(10):1310-5. doi: 10.1002/mds.20581.

Abnormal sleep architecture is an early feature in the E46K familial 
synucleinopathy.

Zarranz JJ(1), Fernández-Bedoya A, Lambarri I, Gómez-Esteban JC, Lezcano E, 
Zamacona J, Madoz P.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital of Cruces, Department of Neurosciences, 
University of the Basque Country, Baracaldo, Vizcaya, Spain. 
jjzarranz@hcru.osakidetza.net

We examined 7 patients from a family harboring a novel mutation in the 
alpha-synuclein gene (E46K) that segregated with a phenotype of parkinsonism and 
dementia with Lewy bodies. An abnormal restless sleep was the presenting symptom 
in 2 of them. Polysomnographic (PSG) studies were performed in 4 of the 7 
patients and in 2 asymptomatic carriers of the mutation. A severe loss of both 
rapid eye movement (REM) and non-REM sleep was observed in 2 patients 
complaining of insomnia and in a third parkinsonian member of the family who did 
not complain of trouble with sleeping. Another parkinsonian family member had a 
mild disorganization of the sleep architecture. The 2 asymptomatic carriers also 
had minor changes in the PSG findings. Episodes of bizarre behavior at night 
were reported historically in the 2 symptomatic patients, but we did not 
observed the behaviors during the PSG studies. REM sleep behavior disorder could 
not be recorded in any case. Our findings expand the spectrum of sleep disorders 
reported in synucleinopathies whether sporadic or familial.

Copyright (c) 2005 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.20581
PMID: 16001411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1284. Neurocase. 2005 Jun;11(3):204-11. doi: 10.1080/13554790590944753.

Late-onset frontotemporal dementia associated with progressive supranuclear 
palsy/argyrophilic grain disease/Alzheimer's disease pathology.

Rippon GA(1), Boeve BF, Parisi JE, Dickson DW, Ivnik RI, Jack CR, Hutton M, 
Baker M, Josephs KA, Knopman DS, Petersen RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is typically manifested by vertical 
supranuclear gaze palsy, frequent falls early in the disease course, axial 
rigidity and poor response to levodopa. Prominent anterograde memory dysfunction 
with subsequent impairment in other cognitive domains is characteristic of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD). No clear clinical syndrome has been identified in 
argyrophilic grain disease (AGD). Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) is characterized 
by apathy, emotional blunting, disinhibition, and impairment in executive 
functioning despite relatively preserved memory and visuospatial abilities. 
Cognitive deficits are known to occur in PSP; however, overt clinical FTD 
without parkinsonism or supranuclear gaze palsy associated with PSP pathology 
has rarely been documented. We report an elderly patient with the typical 
clinical, neuropsychometric, and neuroimaging features of FTD who had autopsy 
findings most consistent with PSP plus AGD and AD in limbic structures. We 
suggest that PSP with or without coexisting AD and AGD be included in the 
differential diagnosis of patients presenting with FTD.

DOI: 10.1080/13554790590944753
PMID: 16006341 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1285. Eur J Clin Invest. 2005 Jul;35(7):421-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2005.01516.x.

International conference on the healthy effect of virgin olive oil.

Perez-Jimenez F(1), Alvarez de Cienfuegos G, Badimon L, Barja G, Battino M, 
Blanco A, Bonanome A, Colomer R, Corella-Piquer D, Covas I, Chamorro-Quiros J, 
Escrich E, Gaforio JJ, Garcia Luna PP, Hidalgo L, Kafatos A, Kris-Etherton PM, 
Lairon D, Lamuela-Raventos R, Lopez-Miranda J, Lopez-Segura F, Martinez-Gonzalez 
MA, Mata P, Mataix J, Ordovas J, Osada J, Pacheco-Reyes R, Perucho M, 
Pineda-Priego M, Quiles JL, Ramirez-Tortosa MC, Ruiz-Gutierrez V, Sanchez-Rovira 
P, Solfrizzi V, Soriguer-Escofet F, de la Torre-Fornell R, Trichopoulos A, 
Villalba-Montoro JM, Villar-Ortiz JR, Visioli F.

Author information:
(1)Lipid and Atherosclerosis Unit, Reina Sofia University Hospital, Cordoba, 
Spain. franperezjimenez@yahoo.com

1. Ageing represents a great concern in developed countries because the number 
of people involved and the pathologies related with it, like atherosclerosis, 
morbus Parkinson, Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, cognitive decline, 
diabetes and cancer. 2. Epidemiological studies suggest that a Mediterranean 
diet (which is rich in virgin olive oil) decreases the risk of cardiovascular 
disease. 3. The Mediterranean diet, rich in virgin olive oil, improves the major 
risk factors for cardiovascular disease, such as the lipoprotein profile, blood 
pressure, glucose metabolism and antithrombotic profile. Endothelial function, 
inflammation and oxidative stress are also positively modulated. Some of these 
effects are attributed to minor components of virgin olive oil. Therefore, the 
definition of the Mediterranean diet should include virgin olive oil. 4. 
Different observational studies conducted in humans have shown that the intake 
of monounsaturated fat may be protective against age-related cognitive decline 
and Alzheimer's disease. 5. Microconstituents from virgin olive oil are 
bioavailable in humans and have shown antioxidant properties and capacity to 
improve endothelial function. Furthermore they are also able to modify the 
haemostasis, showing antithrombotic properties. 6. In countries where the 
populations fulfilled a typical Mediterranean diet, such as Spain, Greece and 
Italy, where virgin olive oil is the principal source of fat, cancer incidence 
rates are lower than in northern European countries. 7. The protective effect of 
virgin olive oil can be most important in the first decades of life, which 
suggests that the dietetic benefit of virgin olive oil intake should be 
initiated before puberty, and maintained through life. 8. The more recent 
studies consistently support that the Mediterranean diet, based in virgin olive 
oil, is compatible with a healthier ageing and increased longevity. However, 
despite the significant advances of the recent years, the final proof about the 
specific mechanisms and contributing role of the different components of virgin 
olive oil to its beneficial effects requires further investigations.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2362.2005.01516.x
PMID: 16008542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1286. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2005 Aug;31(4):345-53. doi: 
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2005.00686.x.

Return of the cycad hypothesis - does the amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis/parkinsonism dementia complex (ALS/PDC) of Guam have new implications 
for global health?

Ince PG(1), Codd GA.

Author information:
(1)Academic Unit of Pathology, Division of Genomic Medicine, University of 
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK. p.g.ince@shef.ac.uk

Comment in
    Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2006 Jun;32(3):341-3.
    Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2006 Dec;32(6):679-82.

Recently published work provides evidence in support of the cycad hypothesis for 
Lytico--Bodig, the Guamanian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism dementia 
complex (ALS/PDC), based on a new understanding of Chamorro food practices, a 
cyanobacterial origin of beta-methylaminoalanine (BMAA) in cycad tissue, and a 
possible mechanism of biomagnification of this neurotoxic amino acid in the food 
chain. BMAA is one of two cycad chemicals with known neurotoxic properties (the 
other is cycasin, a proven developmental neurotoxin) among the many substances 
that exist in these highly poisonous plants, the seeds of which are used by 
Chamorros for food and medicine. The traditional diet includes the fruit bat, a 
species that feeds on cycad seed components and reportedly bioaccumulates BMAA. 
Plant and animal proteins provide a previously unrecognized reservoir for the 
slow release of this toxin. BMAA is reported in the brain tissue of Guam 
patients and early data suggest that some Northern American patients dying of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) have detectable brain levels of BMAA. The possible role 
of cyanobacterial toxicity in sporadic neurodegenerative disease is therefore 
worthy of consideration. Recent neuropathology studies of ALS/PDC confirm 
understanding of this disorder as a 'tangle' disease, based on variable 
anatomical burden, and showing biochemical characteristics of 'AD-like' combined 
3R and 4R tau species. This model mirrors the emerging view that other 
neurodegenerative disease spectra comprise clusters of related syndromes, owing 
to common molecular pathology, with variable anatomical distribution in the 
nervous system giving rise to different clinical phenotypes. Evidence for 
'ubiquitin-only' inclusions in ALS/PDC is weak. Similarly, although there is 
evidence for alpha-synucleinopathy in ALS/PDC, the parkinsonian component of the 
disease is not caused by Lewy body disease. The spectrum of sporadic AD includes 
involvement of the substantia nigra and a high prevalence of 
'incidental'alpha-synucleinopathy in sporadic AD is reported. Therefore the 
pathogenesis of Lytico-Bodig appears still to have most pertinence to the 
ongoing investigation of the pathogenesis of AD and other tauopathies.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1365-2990.2005.00686.x
PMID: 16008818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1287. Mutat Res. 2005 Dec 30;592(1-2):89-101. doi: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2005.06.006. Epub 
2005 Jul 11.

In search of genes involved in neurodegenerative disorders.

Pardo LM(1), van Duijn CM.

Author information:
(1)Genetic Epidemiology Unit, Department of Epidemiology & Biostatistics, 
Erasmus Medical Center Rotterdam, P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, The 
Netherlands.

Dissecting the genetics of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) 
has contributed significantly to our understanding of the pathogenesis of 
neurodegeneration in these two complex disorders. For AD, three highly penetrant 
genes (amyloid precursor protein (APP, PSEN1 and PSEN2) and one susceptibility 
gene (APOE) have been identified. For PD, seven genes (SNCA, Parkin, UCHL1, 
NR4A2, DJ1, PINK1 and LRRK2) have been found. These genes explain only a small 
proportion of AD and PD patients and are mostly associated with an early onset 
presentation of the disease. APOE remains the only common gene, which increases 
the risk of both rare early and late onset AD. The ongoing challenge is to 
unravel the genetics of the most frequent forms of these complex disorders. In 
the present paper, we briefly review the state of the art in the genetics of AD 
and PD. We also discuss the prospects of finding new genes associated with 
common forms of these diseases in light of two hypotheses concerning the genetic 
variation of complex diseases: common disease/common variants and common 
disease/rare variants.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mrfmmm.2005.06.006
PMID: 16009383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1288. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2005 Jul;20(7):645-50. doi: 10.1002/gps.1333.

The clinical utility of structural neuroimaging with MRI for diagnosis and 
differential diagnosis of dementia: a memory clinic study.

Hentschel F(1), Kreis M, Damian M, Krumm B, Frölich L.

Author information:
(1)Division for Neuroradiology, Central Institute for Mental Health, Faculty for 
Clinical Medicine Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Germany. 
hentsche@zi-mannheim.de

OBJECTIVES: The individual contribution to the final comprehensive clinical 
diagnosis of neuropsychology (NP) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), 
respectively, was quantified in a specialized tertiary care setting to 
investigate the added clinical value of routine MRI.
METHODS: In 106 patients referred to a university memory clinic for the work-up 
of cognitive disturbances the primary care diagnosis, the initial clinical 
neuropsychiatric diagnosis, the neuropsychological and MRI diagnoses, and the 
final comprehensive clinical diagnosis were documented. The neuropsychological 
investigation was performed using the CERAD test battery. MRI was performed 
using T1, double echo and FLAIR sequences without contrast medium. The change of 
the final comprehensive clinical diagnosis in relation to the initial 
neuropsychiatric diagnosis was used to determine the diagnostic contribution of 
both, MRI and NP.
RESULTS: NP and MRI led to a significant change of the final comprehensive 
diagnosis in 26% of patients (CI: 0.26 +/- 0.09; p < 0.05). In addition, three 
cases of secondary dementias, and six cases of vascular encephalopathy without 
dementia were recognized by MRI. Sensitivity, specificity, and the positive 
predictive value were higher for NP and MRI, respectively, than for the initial 
clinical diagnosis alone.
CONCLUSION: MRI as well as neuropsychological testing improves early detection 
and differential diagnosis of dementia and additionally supplies clinically 
relevant findings. MRI carries added clinical value in the investigation of 
dementias.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1333
PMID: 16021656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1289. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2005 Jul;20(7):668-73. doi: 10.1002/gps.1339.

Frontal dysfunction contributes to the genesis of hallucinations in non-demented 
Parkinsonian patients.

Grossi D(1), Trojano L, Pellecchia MT, Amboni M, Fragassi NA, Barone P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Second University, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Hallucinations occur in patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) with 
reported prevalence ranging from 8% to 40%. Hallucinations are significantly 
associated with dementia in PD, but little is known about possible distinctive 
cognitive features of non-demented PD patients who develop hallucinations.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to assess selected cognitive abilities in 
non-demented PD patients with and without hallucinations in order to identify 
specific neuropsychological correlates of such phenomena.
METHODS: Forty-eight consecutive patients with PD and Mini Mental State 
Examination (MMSE) > or = 23 were examined for the presence of hallucinations 
and assessed on standardized neuropsychological tasks for semantic and 
phonological fluency, verbal learning and logical abstract thinking; disease 
severity was staged according to Hoehn and Yahr scale.
RESULTS: Fourteen (29.2%) of 48 patients experienced hallucinations. There was 
no difference between hallucinators and non-hallucinators on demographic 
variables, disease severity and dose of any pharmacological treatment. Disease 
duration was significantly longer in hallucinator vs non-hallucinator patients 
(p = 0.02). Patients with hallucinations scored significantly lower than 
patients without hallucinations only on verbal learning-immediate recall task (p 
= 0.0324), and semantic and phonological fluency tasks (p = 0.0005 and p = 
0.0036, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that PD patients with hallucinations show 
reduced performance on tasks that explore executive functioning as compared with 
non-hallucinators. Therefore, executive dysfunction may be considered as a risk 
factor for the development of hallucinations in non-demented PD patients.

Copyright 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1339
PMID: 16021658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1290. Brain. 2005 Sep;128(Pt 9):1996-2005. doi: 10.1093/brain/awh598. Epub 2005 Jul 
20.

The evolution and pathology of frontotemporal dementia.

Kertesz A(1), McMonagle P, Blair M, Davidson W, Munoz DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cognitive Neurology, St Joseph's Hospital, London, Ontario N6A 
4V2, Canada. Andrew.Kertesz@sjhc.london.on.ca

This is a clinicopathologic study of a prospective, clinic-based cohort of 
patients with frontotemporal dementia (FTD)/Pick complex, who were followed to 
autopsy. A total of 60 patients with the clinical syndromes of the behavioural 
variant of FTD (FTD-bv) (n = 32), primary progressive aphasia (PPA) (n = 22), 
corticobasal degeneration syndrome (CBDS) (n = 4) and progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP) (n = 2) at onset, referred to a cognitive neurology clinic who had 
subsequent post-mortem examination were included. The most common histological 
variety was motor neurone disease type inclusion (MNDI) (n = 18), followed by 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) (n = 12), then Pick's disease (n = 6), dementia 
lacking distinctive histology (DLDH) (n = 6) and PSP (n = 3). Others fulfilled 
the histological criteria for Alzheimer's disease combined with glial pathology 
(n = 6), Alzheimer's disease only (n = 4), Lewy body variant (n = 2), prion 
disease (n = 1), vascular dementia (n = 1) and undetermined (n = 1). The most 
common first syndrome among the MNDI and DLDH (tau negative) pathologies was 
FTD-bv, but subsequently progressive aphasia (PA), occasionally CBDS and 
semantic dementia also developed. Tau positive histologies of CBD, PSP and Pick 
bodies were most frequently associated with PPA onset or CBDS/PSP, but 
behavioural symptoms were also common. Age of onset was earlier in tau negative 
cases, but the duration of illness and gender distribution were about the same 
in all histological variants. Although the tau negative and positive histologies 
are predicted to some extent by the clinical onset, the extent of the overlap 
and the convergence of the syndromes in the course of the disease argue in 
favour of maintaining the clinical and pathological varieties under a single 
umbrella.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awh598
PMID: 16033782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1291. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2005 Aug;20(8):776-82. doi: 10.1002/gps.1359.

Longitudinal study of cerebral blood flow SPECT in Parkinson's disease with 
dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Firbank MJ(1), Burn DJ, McKeith IG, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)The Institute for Ageing and Health, University of Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. 
m.j.firbank@ncl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: People with Parkinson's disease (PD) have an increased risk of 
developing dementia (PDD), which often has clinical features similar to dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB). Whilst perfusion studies have shown parieto-occipital 
hypoperfusion in DLB and PDD relative to controls, there have not been any 
longitudinal studies of perfusion changes in PDD and DLB.
METHODS: In this study, we measured brain perfusion using Tc99m HMPAO SPECT over 
one year in 17 PDD, 18 DLB and 34 healthy subjects. We used SPM99 to compare 
perfusion changes in the two dementia groups against the control group.
RESULTS: We did not see any reductions in perfusion in either of the dementia 
groups. However, in the DLB, but not PDD group, there was a significant increase 
in putamen perfusion relative to controls over the year. In both DLB and PDD 
groups, there was a correlation between striatal perfusion increase over the 
year, and worsening of parkinsonism. Perfusion changes were not secondary to 
changes in antiparkinsonian medication.
CONCLUSION: The increase in striatal perfusion may be a compensatory change 
related to decreasing striatal dopaminergic input from the substantia nigra in 
PDD and DLB, consistent with the increased predominance of rigidity over tremor 
symptoms in these groups compared with non-demented PD.

(c) 2005 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1359
PMID: 16035122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1292. Pharmacol Res. 2005 Nov;52(5):367-75. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2005.05.013. Epub 2005 
Jul 20.

Increase in plasma homocysteine levels induced by drug treatments in neurologic 
patients.

Siniscalchi A(1), Mancuso F, Gallelli L, Ferreri Ibbadu G, Biagio Mercuri N, De 
Sarro G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Annunziata Hospital, Cosenza, Italy.

Homocysteine (Hcy) is a thyol amino acid resulting from de-methylation of 
methionine, an essential amino acid derived from dietary proteins. It is 
metabolized through two pathways: re-methylation and transsulfuration, which use 
as cofactors folate, vitamin B6 and vitamin B12. Hyperhomocysteinemia has been 
identified as a risk factor for cerebrovascular disease, dementia, impaired 
cognitive function and depression. Several drugs may interfere with metabolic 
pathways of Hcy, leading to an alteration of plasma Hcy levels. Lipid-lowering 
agents, used to reduce the risk of cerebral venous thrombosis or occlusive 
vascular disease in patients with high levels of plasmatic lipids, can increase 
plasma Hcy levels. Hyperhomocysteinemia has been also documented in Parkinson 
disease patients treated with levodopa and in epileptic patients after chronic 
treatment with antiepileptic drugs. In contrast, vitamins supplementations may 
be warranted in patients treated with lipid-lowering agents, levodopa and 
antiepileptic drugs in order to maintain normal plasma Hcy values. In contrast, 
higher doses of vitamins can induce dysfunctions in central and peripheral 
nervous system; therefore excessive supplements should be avoided.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2005.05.013
PMID: 16039138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1293. Top Magn Reson Imaging. 2004 Dec;15(6):369-89. doi: 
10.1097/01.rmr.0000168070.90113.dc.

Pathological aging of the brain: an overview.

Bastos Leite AJ(1), Scheltens P, Barkhof F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Vrije Universiteit (VU) Medical Center, Amsterdam, 
the Netherlands. A.bastosleite@vumc.nl

The number of elderly people is increasing rapidly and, therefore, an increase 
in neurodegenerative and cerebrovascular disorders causing dementia is expected. 
Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia. Vascular dementia, 
dementia with Lewy bodies, and frontotemporal dementia are the most frequent 
causes after AD, but a large proportion of patients have a combination of 
degenerative and vascular brain pathology. Characteristic magnetic resonance 
(MR) imaging findings can contribute to the identification of different diseases 
causing dementia. The MR imaging protocol should include axial T2-weighted 
images (T2-WI), axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) or proton 
density-weighted images, and axial gradient-echo T2*-weighted images, for the 
detection of cerebrovascular pathology. Structural neuroimaging in dementia is 
focused on detection of brain atrophy, especially in the medial temporal lobe, 
for which coronal high resolution T1-weighted images perpendicular to the long 
axis of the temporal lobe are extremely important. Single photon emission 
computed tomography and positron emission tomography may have added value in the 
diagnosis of dementia and may become more important in the future, due to the 
development of radioligands for in vivo detection of AD pathology. New 
functional MR techniques and serial volumetric imaging studies to identify 
subtle brain abnormalities may also provide surrogate markers for pathologic 
processes that occur in diseases causing dementia and, in conjunction with 
clinical evaluation, may enable a more rigorous and early diagnosis, approaching 
the accuracy of neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1097/01.rmr.0000168070.90113.dc
PMID: 16041289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1294. Biochem Soc Trans. 2005 Aug;33(Pt 4):578-81. doi: 10.1042/BST0330578.

Expression of normal sequence pathogenic proteins for neurodegenerative disease 
contributes to disease risk: 'permissive templating' as a general mechanism 
underlying neurodegeneration.

Hardy J(1).

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, Porter Neuroscience 
Building, 35, Convent Drive, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. hardyj@mail.nih.gov

Loci underlying autosomal dominant forms of most neurodegenerative disease have 
been identified: prion mutations cause Gerstmann Straussler syndrome and 
hereditary Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, tau mutations cause autosomal dominant 
frontal temporal dementia and alpha-synuclein mutations cause autosomal dominant 
Parkinson's disease. In these cases, the pathogenic mutation is in the protein 
that is deposited in the diseased tissue and the whole protein is deposited. In 
Alzheimer's disease, mutations in amyloid precursor protein or in the 
presenilins cause autosomal dominant disease. These are the substrate and 
proteases responsible for the production of the deposited peptide Abeta. Thus, 
in all the cases, the mutations lead to the disease by a mechanism that involves 
the deposition process. Furthermore, sporadic forms of all these diseases are 
predisposed by genetic variability at the same loci, implying that the quantity 
of the normal protein influences the risk of this form of disease. These results 
show that the amount of pathogenic protein expression is a key factor in 
determining disease initiation. Recent work on transgenic models of these 
diseases is consistent with the view that there are two stages of pathogenesis: 
a concentration-dependent formation of a pathogenic protein oligomer followed by 
aggregation on to this oligomeric template by a process that is less dependent 
on the concentration of the protein.

DOI: 10.1042/BST0330578
PMID: 16042548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1295. J Neurol. 2006 Feb;253(2):186-93. doi: 10.1007/s00415-005-0951-4. Epub 2005 Jul 
27.

Differential effect of Huntington's and Parkinson's diseases in programming 
motor sequences of varied lengths.

Yágüez L(1), Lange HW, Hömberg V.

Author information:
(1)Dept. of Psychology, Henry Wellcome Building, Institute of Psychiatry, De 
Crespigny Park, Denmark Hill, London, UK. l.yaguez@iop.kcl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) and Huntington's disease (HD) patients have 
difficulties executing sequential movements. Attention control and short-term 
memory probably play an important role in programming sequential movements. To 
investigate the contribution of these cognitive factors to programming and 
executing visuomotor sequences in HD and PD patients a computerized version of 
the Corsi Block Tapping-Test was employed.
METHODS: the performance of 11 patients with early stage PD, 11 HD patients with 
borderline to mild caudate atrophy and 20 healthy subjects was compared. The 
task was a reaction time task where targets were illuminated in groups of 
sequences increasing from 2 items to 5 items. Subjects reproduced the sequence 
(pressing the illuminated target) in the same order of appearance. Reaction 
Times and movement times were recorded.
RESULTS: PD patients had increasing difficulties in programming and executing 
series greater than three components. HD patients did not differ significantly 
from the controls, although they showed a tendency to lose accuracy in the 
longer series. Both patient groups did not differ in their attention span.
CONCLUSIONS: In PD although the spatial information may be well stored, they 
have difficulty accessing it when their attention is overloaded, leading to poor 
encoding and slow information processing. This process interferes with 
programming and execution of movement sequences. HD patients in the early stages 
of the illness seem to have more attention resources than PD patients, so that 
they start to show more problems in executing visuomotor sequences with longer 
movement sequences than PD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-005-0951-4
PMID: 16044211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1296. Cleve Clin J Med. 2005 Jul;72(7):586, 589-90, 592-4 passim. doi: 
10.3949/ccjm.72.7.586.

Gait disorders: search for multiple causes.

Alexander NB(1), Goldberg A.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Gerontology, Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of 
Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0926, USA. 
nalexand@umich.edu

Gait disorders predict functional decline in older adults. They are often the 
result of multiple causes, so a full assessment should consider different 
sensorimotor levels and should include a focused physical examination and 
evaluation of functional performance. Exercise and medical and surgical 
interventions are effective and can reduce the degree of gait disorder, but 
usually not without some residual impairment. Orthoses and mobility aids are 
also important interventions to consider.

DOI: 10.3949/ccjm.72.7.586
PMID: 16044655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1297. Int Psychogeriatr. 2005 Jun;17(2):289-301. doi: 10.1017/s1041610205001511.

Differential cognitive impairment in subjects with geriatric depression who will 
develop Alzheimer's disease and other dementias: a retrospective study.

Jean L(1), Simard M, van Reekum R, Clarke DE.

Author information:
(1)Ecole de psychologie, Centre de Recherche Université Laval-Robert-Giffard, 
Université Laval, Québec City, Québec G1K 7P4, Canada. Leonie.Jean.1ulaval.ca

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to retrospectively differentiate the 
cognitive profile of subjects with geriatric depression who will later be 
diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease (AD) from those who will be diagnosed with 
other dementias, and subjects who will remain with no dementia.
METHODS: Forty-four depressed patients admitted to a day hospital program for 
depression who participated in a historical cohort study were assessed after 7.5 
years of follow-up. Fourteen of these subjects subsequently developed dementia: 
seven met the criteria for probable AD and seven met the criteria for dementias 
other than AD (Dementia-No-AD; D-NAD, such as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 
vascular and mixed dementia). Thirty subjects remained without dementia (No 
Dementia, ND) at follow-up. The three groups were thus compared on their 
baseline cognitive performances on the six sections of the Mini-mental State 
Examination (MMSE) and on the five subscales of the Dementia Rating Scale (DRS).
RESULTS: An analysis of variance (ANOVA) and post-hoc Student-Newman-Keuls 
analyses with an alpha of p < 0.05 revealed that the subjects who received a 
diagnosis of dementia at follow-up had previously had more impairment on tasks 
measuring attention and memory (DRS-MMSE) than those who did not develop 
dementia (AD = D-NAD < ND). Moreover, the future AD subjects could be 
differentiated on the basis of their difficulties on the MMSE-orientation 
subtest (AD < ND = D-NAD), whereas the future D-NAD subjects initially had more 
problems with executive functions (DRS) and MMSE-visuospatial abilities (D-NAD < 
AD = ND).
CONCLUSION: The identification of early neuropsychological markers in elderly 
depressed patients highlights the need to evaluate this population broadly as 
soon as possible in the depression/dementia process in order to improve the 
prognosis.

DOI: 10.1017/s1041610205001511
PMID: 16050437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1298. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2005 Jul-Aug;28(4):176-8. doi: 
10.1097/01.wnf.0000172498.24770.54.

Efficacy and safety of donepezil in the treatment of executive dysfunction in 
Parkinson disease: a pilot study.

Linazasoro G(1), Lasa A, Van Blercom N.

Author information:
(1)Centro de Investigación Parkinson, Policlínica Gipuzkoa, San Sebastián, 
Spain. glinazasoro@terra.es

Cognitive disturbances in Parkinson's disease (PD) are dominated by troubles in 
executive functions which affects to a vast majority of parkinsonian patients 
since the onset of the disease. A common clinical observation is that 
parkinsonian patients, who eventually develop dementia, exhibit subtle cognitive 
disturbances quite earlier. The main biochemical substrate of cognitive 
dysfunction in PD, even of the early dysexecutive syndrome, might be a 
cholinergic deficiency. The aim of this pilot study was to determine the 
efficacy and safety of donepezil in the treatment of 10 patients with PD and 
dysexecutive alterations without dementia. All the items of the Clinical Global 
Impression were significantly improved. An improvement on both the modified 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test and DIGIT Span was found. Parkinsonism remained 
unchanged during the study. Only 1 out of 10 patients experienced transient and 
mild gastrointestinal side effects. This study suggests that donepezil may be 
useful in the treatment of the dysexecutive syndrome associated with PD.

DOI: 10.1097/01.wnf.0000172498.24770.54
PMID: 16062096 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1299. Tijdschr Gerontol Geriatr. 2005 Jul;36(3):116-21.

[Chronic pain in dementia and in disorders with a high risk for congnitive 
impairment].

[Article in Dutch]

Scherder EJ(1), Oosterman JM, Ooms ME, Ribbe MW, Swaab DF.

Author information:
(1)Afdeling Klinische Neuropsychologie, Vrije Universiteit, van der 
Boechorststraat 1, 1081 BT Amsterdam. eja.scherder@psy.vu.nl

Ageing increases the risk for the etiology of chronic pain and dementia. hence, 
the increase in the number of elderly people implies that the number of elderly 
with dementia suffering from chronic pain will increase as well. A key question 
relates to if and how patients with dementia perceive pain. the inadequateness 
of pain assessment, particularly in a more advanced stage, is also reflected in 
a decreased use of analgesics by elderly people with dementia. Insight into 
possible changes in pain experience as have been observed in the few available 
clinical studies, could be enhanced by knowledge about the neuropathology which 
may differ per subtype of dementia. It is striking that pain has not been 
examined in degenerative diseases of the central nervous system with a high risk 
for cognitive impairment such as Parkinson's disease and multiple sclerosis. In 
these disorders, pain is a prominent clinical symptom and to date it is not 
known whether the experience of pain will change in a stage in which patients 
become cognitively impaired. Finally, a number of instruments which are most 
appropriate to assess pain in communicative and non-communicative patients are 
discussed.

PMID: 16078658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1300. Am J Pharmacogenomics. 2005;5(4):259-70. doi: 10.2165/00129785-200505040-00006.

The proteomics of neurodegeneration.

Johnson MD(1), Yu LR, Conrads TP, Kinoshita Y, Uo T, McBee JK, Veenstra TD, 
Morrison RS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of Washington School of 
Medicine, Seattle, Washington 98195-6470, USA.

The continuing improvement and refinement of proteomic and bioinformatic tools 
has made it possible to obtain increasing amounts of structural and functional 
information about proteins on a global scale. The emerging field of 
neuroproteomics promises to provide powerful strategies for further 
characterizing neuronal dysfunction and cell loss associated with 
neurodegenerative diseases. Neuroproteomic studies have thus far revealed 
relatively comprehensive quantitative changes and post-translational 
modifications (mostly oxidative damage) of high abundance proteins, confirming 
deficits in energy production, protein degradation, antioxidant protein 
function, and cytoskeletal regulation associated with neurodegenerative diseases 
such as Alzheimer and Parkinson disease. The identification of changes in 
low-abundance proteins and characterization of their functions based on 
protein-protein interactions still await further development of proteomic 
methodologies and more dedicated application of these technologies by 
neuroscientists. Once accomplished, however, the resulting information will 
certainly provide a truly comprehensive view of neurodegeneration-associated 
changes in protein expression, facilitating the identification of novel 
biomarkers for the early detection of neurodegenerative diseases and new targets 
for therapeutic intervention.

DOI: 10.2165/00129785-200505040-00006
PMID: 16078862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


