1701. Cogn Behav Neurol. 2007 Sep;20(3):184-92. doi: 10.1097/WNN.0b013e318145a6f6.

Relationship between self-reported apathy and executive dysfunction in 
nondemented patients with Parkinson disease.

Zgaljardic DJ(1), Borod JC, Foldi NS, Rocco M, Mattis PJ, Gordon MF, Feigin AS, 
Eidelberg D.

Author information:
(1)Transitional Learning Center at Galveston, Galveston, TX 77550, USA. 
dzgaljardic@tlc-galveston.org

OBJECTIVE: The prevalence of apathy was assessed across select cognitive and 
psychiatric variables in 32 nondemented patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and 
29 demographically matched healthy control participants.
BACKGROUND: Apathy is common in PD, although differentiating apathy from motor, 
cognitive, and/or other neuropsychiatric symptoms can be challenging. Previous 
studies have reported a positive relationship between apathy and cognitive 
impairment, particularly executive dysfunction.
METHOD: Patients were categorized according to apathy symptom severity. 
Stringent criteria were used to exclude patients with dementia.
RESULTS: Approximately 44% of patients endorsed significant levels of apathy. 
Those patients performed worse than patients with nonsignificant levels of 
apathy on select measures of verbal fluency and on a measure of verbal and 
nonverbal conceptualization. Further, they reported a greater number of symptoms 
related to depression and behavioral disturbance than did those patients with 
nonsignificant levels of apathy. Apathy was significantly related to self-report 
of depression and executive dysfunction. Performance on cognitive tasks 
assessing verbal fluency, working memory, and verbal abstraction and also on a 
self-report measure of executive dysfunction was shown to significantly predict 
increasing levels of apathy.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings suggest that apathy in nondemented patients with PD 
seems to be strongly associated with executive dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1097/WNN.0b013e318145a6f6
PMCID: PMC4456014
PMID: 17846518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1702. CNS Drugs. 2007;21(10):789-97. doi: 10.2165/00023210-200721100-00001.

The role of anti-inflammatory agents in Parkinson's disease.

McGeer EG(1), McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, University of British Columbia, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. mcgeer@interchange.ubc.ca

There is ample and increasing evidence, from studies of human pathology, animal 
models and tissue culture, that chronic inflammation occurs in the basal ganglia 
in patients with Parkinson's disease. In such inflammatory states, activated 
glia can produce large quantities of free radicals and other neurotoxic 
materials. Dopaminergic neurons appear to be particularly vulnerable to these 
neurotoxins. The anti-inflammatory drugs that are presently in wide use act on 
peripheral players in the inflammatory process. Many experiments are under way 
to find agents that inhibit more potent contributors, such as the activated 
microglia or terminal complement proteins. Whether such drugs will slow the 
process of Parkinson's disease or reduce the high risk of dementia in such 
patients remains to be determined in future work.

DOI: 10.2165/00023210-200721100-00001
PMID: 17850169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1703. J Alzheimers Dis. 2007 Aug;12(1):23-35. doi: 10.3233/jad-2007-12104.

Mild cognitive impairment: a systematic review.

Mariani E(1), Monastero R, Mecocci P.

Author information:
(1)Section of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of Clinical and 
Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

MCI is a nosological entity proposed as an intermediate state between normal 
aging and dementia. The syndrome can be divided into two broad subtypes: 
amnestic MCI (aMCI) characterized by reduced memory, and non-amnestic MCI 
(naMCI) in which other cognitive functions rather than memory are mostly 
impaired. aMCI seems to represent an early stage of AD, while the outcomes of 
the naMCI subtypes appear more heterogeneous--including vascular dementia, 
frontotemporal dementia or dementia with Lewy bodies--but this aspect is still 
under debate. MCI in fact represents a condition with multiple sources of 
heterogeneity, including clinical presentation, etiology, and prognosis. To 
improve classification and prognosis, there is a need for more sensitive 
instruments specifically developed for MCI as well as for more reliable methods 
to determine its progression or improvement. Current clinical criteria for MCI 
should be updated to include restriction in complex ADL; also the diagnostic and 
prognostic role of behavioral symptoms and motor dysfunctions should be better 
defined. A multidisciplinary diagnostic approach including biological and 
neuroimaging techniques may probably represent the best option to predict the 
conversion from MCI to dementia. In this review we discuss the most recent 
aspects related to the epidemiological, clinical, neuropathological, 
neuroimaging, biochemical and therapeutic aspects of MCI, with specific 
attention to possible markers of conversion to dementia.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2007-12104
PMID: 17851192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1704. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Mar 15;266(1-2):197-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.08.016. Epub 
2007 Sep 12.

Variability in the clinical expression of Parkinson's disease.

Wolters ECh(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, VU University Medical Center, P.O. Box 7057, 1007 MB 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. e.wolters@vumc.nl

Parkinsonism is a clinical syndrome characterized by bradykinesia, 
hypo-/akinesia, muscular rigidity, and resting tremor, mainly caused by 
Parkinson's disease (PD). Symptoms of PD are due to a progressive loss of nigral 
neurons causing striatal dopaminergic denervation. However, nigral degeneration 
is only a part of the underlying synucleinopathy, and clinical symptoms go far 
beyond motor parkinsonism. Olfactory disturbances, fatigue, pain, autonomic 
dysfunction, sleep fragmentation, depression, and dementia with or without 
psychosis are frequently seen. The variability in the expression of these signs 
and symptoms, as discussed in this paper, might be explained by the specific 
topographical sequence of the pathology, depending on the extent and progression 
of the degenerative process at defined sites. Better insight in the 
clinicopathological correlations of this disease may help to further develop 
early diagnosis and adequate therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.08.016
PMID: 17854836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1705. J Neurol Sci. 2008 Mar 15;266(1-2):20-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.08.018. Epub 
2007 Sep 14.

Serum heart-fatty acid binding protein levels in patients with Lewy body 
disease.

Wada-Isoe K(1), Imamura K, Kitamaya M, Kowa H, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, 36-1 Nishi-cho, Yonago, 683-8504, Japan. 
kewada@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: In order to examine a possible role of serum heart-fatty acid binding 
protein (H-FABP) in patients with Lewy body disease, we measured serum levels of 
H-FABP in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), Parkinson's disease 
(PD), and Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Serum levels of H-FABP were measured using a solid-phase enzyme-linked 
immunoassay. Iodine-123 metaiodobenzylguanidine ((123)I-MIBG) cardiac 
scintigraphy was performed on each patient and the heart to mediastinum (H/M) 
ratio was calculated. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) analysis was used 
to calculate the optimal cutoff values of the H-FABP between DLB and AD 
patients. Independent predictive variables for serum H-FABP levels were analyzed 
using multivariate regression analysis.
RESULTS: Serum levels of H-FABP were significantly higher in DLB patients and PD 
patients than in AD patients. H/M ratios of the DLB and PD patients were 
significantly lower than those of AD patients. The diagnostic value of the serum 
H-FABP levels between AD and DLB patients was inferior to that of the delayed 
H/M ratio of (123)I-MIBG cardiac scintigraphy. Multivariate regression analysis 
revealed that the delayed H/M ratio predicted serum H-FABP levels in the PD 
patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Examination of serum H-FABP levels did not allow discrimination 
between DLB and AD patients. Cardiac sympathetic nerve dysfunction may be 
associated with elevation of serum H-FABP in Lewy body disease patients.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2007.08.018
PMID: 17869272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1706. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Jun;79(6):652-5. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2007.124677. Epub 2007 Sep 14.

Using the presence of visual hallucinations to differentiate Parkinson's disease 
from atypical parkinsonism.

Williams DR(1), Warren JD, Lees AJ.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Neurosciences, Monash University, Alfred Hospital 
Campus, Commercial Rd, Melbourne 3004, Australia. 
david.williams@med.monash.edu.au

OBJECTIVES: Visual hallucinations (VH) occur frequently in Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and are much less common in other 
bradykinetic rigid syndromes. Pathological series suggest that the presence of 
VH is highly specific for Lewy body pathology. To address the issue of diagnosis 
in patients with parkinsonism, we developed instructions for a structured 
interview (Queen Square Visual Hallucination Inventory (QSVHI)), capable of 
rapidly screening for VH in the outpatient setting.
METHODS: 181 consecutive patients from a specialist movement disorders clinic 
were tested (115 with PD, 23 with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 9 with 
multiple system atrophy (MSA), 5 with vascular parkinsonism, 19 with 
unclassifiable parkinsonism (UP) and 8 others), and 15 selected patients from 
other clinics and 14 neurologically normal controls. The characteristics of 
hallucinators and non-hallucinators were compared and the sensitivity, 
specificity and predictive values of VH for a clinical diagnosis of PD 
calculated.
RESULTS: Screening questions identified VH in only 38% of patients with PD. The 
QSVHI identified VH in 75% of patients with PD and 47% of those with UP. The 
specificity of VH identified by the QSVHI for PD was 91%, sensitivity was 62%, 
positive predictive value was 95% and negative predictive value was 48%.
CONCLUSIONS: The QSVHI appears to be a sensitive method for identifying VH in a 
movement disorders clinic. VH occurred predominantly in PD and very rarely in 
PSP and MSA. Among patients with unclassifiable or undetermined parkinsonism, 
the presence of VH should be considered a red flag for underlying Lewy body 
pathology.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2007.124677
PMID: 17872984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1707. J Nucl Med. 2007 Oct;48(10):1641-50. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.107.042143. Epub 2007 
Sep 14.

Evaluation of probable or possible dementia with lewy bodies using 123I-IMP 
brain perfusion SPECT, 123I-MIBG, and 99mTc-MIBI myocardial SPECT.

Inui Y(1), Toyama H, Manabe Y, Sato T, Sarai M, Kosaka K, Iwata N, Katada K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Japan. 
yositaka@fujita-hu.ac.jp

We evaluated the diagnostic usefulness of combination studies with a statistical 
mapping method in N-isopropyl-p-(123)I-iodoamphetamine ((123)I-IMP) brain 
perfusion SPECT, cardiac sympathetic nerve function by 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine ((123)I-MIBG), and myocardial function by 
electrocardiographically gated (99m)Tc-sestamibi ((99m)Tc-MIBI) SPECT for 
patients with probable or possible dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: Twelve patients with probable DLB (7 male, 5 female; mean age +/- SD, 
72.3 +/- 5.63 y; range, 65-82 y) and 9 patients with possible DLB (3 male, 6 
female; mean age +/- SD, 73.1 +/- 9.23 y; range, 59-88 y) were enrolled in this 
study. (123)I-IMP SPECT images were analyzed with 3-dimensional stereotactic 
surface projections (3D-SSP) and the severity of ischemia was classified 
objectively using quantitatively analytic and display software; stereotactic 
extraction estimation (SEE) methods were compared with a normal database. In 
addition, we evaluated (123)I-MIBG heart-to-mediastinum (H/M) uptake ratios. 
Moreover, we performed (99m)Tc-MIBI SPECT to evaluate myocardial perfusion and 
the left ventricular ejection fraction (LVEF) compared with a normal database.
RESULTS: 3D-SSP images of group comparison with healthy control subjects showed 
significantly decreased perfusion in the parietotemporal, occipital cortex, 
posterior cingulated, and precuneus regions in the probable DLB group but no 
significant reduction in the possible DLB group. Mean H/M ratios in the probable 
DLB group were significantly lower than those of the possible DLB group and the 
control group, respectively. Ten of 12 patients (83.3%) with probable DLB and 1 
of 9 patients (11.1%) with possible DLB showed severe reduction in the bilateral 
occipital lobe and also a low (123)I-MIBG uptake. One patient (8.3%) with 
probable DLB and 2 patients (22.2%) with possible DLB showed no bilateral 
occipital hypoperfusion but showed low (123)I-MIBG uptake. One patient (8.3%) 
with probable DLB and 6 patients (66.7%) with possible DLB showed no occipital 
hypoperfusion and normal (123)I-MIBG uptake. (99m)Tc-MIBI gated SPECT did not 
indicate any wall motion abnormality in any subjects.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that combined examination of cerebral blood 
flow with 3D-SSP and SEE analysis, and cardiac sympathetic nerve function with 
(123)I-MIBG, would be a useful supporting diagnostic method in patients with 
DLB-particularly, in possible DLB and when cerebral blood flow does not indicate 
occipital hypoperfusion.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.107.042143
PMID: 17873141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1708. Ann Neurol. 2007 Oct;62(4):406-13. doi: 10.1002/ana.21208.

Pathological correlates of dementia in a longitudinal, population-based sample 
of aging.

Sonnen JA(1), Larson EB, Crane PK, Haneuse S, Li G, Schellenberg GD, Craft S, 
Leverenz JB, Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. 
jsonnen@u.washington.edu

OBJECTIVE: Previously published community- or population-based studies of brain 
aging and dementia with autopsy were restricted to a single sex, a single ethnic 
group, Roman Catholic clergy, or focused pathological assessments. Our goal was 
to determine the independent pathological correlates associated with dementia in 
a typical US population.
METHODS: We evaluated autopsy data from the Adult Changes in Thought study, an 
ongoing longitudinal, population-based study of brain aging and dementia. 
Analyses were based on data collected from about 3,400 people 65 years or older 
who were cognitively intact at the time of enrollment in the Group Health 
Cooperative in King County, Washington. All consecutive autopsies (n = 221; 20% 
of deaths) from this cohort were evaluated and analyzed by weighted multivariate 
analysis to account for potential participation bias.
RESULTS: After adjusting for age, sex, education, and APOE, independent 
correlates of dementia (relative risk, 95% confidence interval; overall p value) 
included Braak stage (V/VI vs 0/I/II: 5.89, 1.62-17.60; p < 0.05), number of 
cerebral microinfarcts in standardized sections (>2 vs none: 4.80, 1.91-10.26; p 
< 0.001), and neocortical Lewy bodies (any vs none: 5.08, 1.37-18.96; p < 0.05). 
Estimates of adjusted population attributable risk for these three processes 
were 45% for Braak stage, 33% for microinfarcts, and 10% for neocortical Lewy 
bodies.
INTERPRETATION: Our results underscore the therapeutic imperative for 
Alzheimer's and Lewy body diseases, and provide evidence to support the 
immediate use of strategies that target cerebral microinfarcts as a means to 
partially prevent or delay the onset of dementia.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21208
PMID: 17879383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1709. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2007 Aug;66(8):683-6. doi: 
10.1097/nen.0b013e31812503e1.

Common inflammatory mechanisms in Lewy body disease and Alzheimer disease.

Mrak RE(1), Griffin WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR 72205, USA. mrakroberte@uams.edu

Cortical Lewy body disease as a cause of dementia has been recognized for more 
than 40 years. Only in the past 15 to 20 years, however, has the true frequency 
of this entity come to be appreciated, primarily because of the advent of 
sensitive and specific immunohistochemical diagnostic techniques. We now know 
that there is frequent and extensive overlap, both clinically and 
pathologically, between Lewy body and Alzheimer diseases. Although some of this 
overlap may be attributable to common genetic and environmental risk factors, it 
is also now apparent that the 2 diseases share common neuroinflammatory 
mechanisms involving activation of microglia, overexpression of interleukin-1 
and other inflammatory mediators, and inflammatory toxicity to neurons. 
Activated microglia are found in association with alpha-synuclein-containing 
neurons and glia in Parkinson disease, in dementia with Lewy bodies, and in 
multiple system atrophy, and these associations are reminiscent of microglial 
associations with neurofibrillary tangle-containing neurons in Alzheimer 
disease. In vitro and in vivo experimental work has shown reciprocal induction 
between alpha-synuclein and injured neurons on one hand and activated microglia 
and cytokine overexpression on the other. These neuroinflammatory processes may 
be a common link driving progression in both diseases and explaining the 
frequent overlap between the 2 diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/nen.0b013e31812503e1
PMID: 17882012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1710. J Clin Neurosci. 2007 Dec;14(12):1155-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jocn.2006.09.005. Epub 
2007 Sep 19.

Prevalence of Parkinson's disease in Korea.

Seo WK(1), Koh SB, Kim BJ, Yu SW, Park MH, Park KW, Lee DH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University 
College of Medicine, #80 Guro-Dong, Guro-Ku, Seoul, Korea.

The prevalence of neurodegenerative disorders is not well documented in Korea. 
We assessed the prevalence of Parkinson's disease in an elderly population in a 
newly industrialized city in a rural region. Subjects for this study were 
randomly selected from a community-based cohort study. The sample in the cohort 
represented approximately 1.3% (4700) of 362 625 adults (age>18 years) listed in 
the city register in 1998. Among this group, 4218 subjects (1086 subjects 
aged>60 years) agreed to be interviewed and underwent a physical examination and 
neuropsychological tests administered by a neurologist and neuropsychologist. 
All participants were examined. Participants who had bradykinesia and at least 
one other possible cardinal sign of parkinsonism at the neurologic screening, 
and those who reported that they had Parkinson's disease, or were taking 
antiparkinsonian drugs were identified. In our study, 16 subjects showed 
evidence of Parkinson's disease. The prevalence in this population was 0.37%. 
Prevalence increased with age, and prevalence was 1.47% for those aged older 
than 60 years. Postural instability and gait disturbance were more common in the 
older age group. The results of neuropsychological tests were as follows: (1) 
only two subjects had low scores (<20) in the Korea-version mini-mental status 
examination; (2) seven subjects scored 0.5, one subject scored 2 and the other 
eight subjects scored 0 in the clinical dementia rating. The results of our 
prevalence study are similar to those of studies carried out in Western 
countries. Age is a risk factor for Parkinson's disease in Korea.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jocn.2006.09.005
PMID: 17884509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1711. Mov Disord. 2007 Dec;22(16):2418-25. doi: 10.1002/mds.21746.

A neuropsychological longitudinal study in Parkinson's patients with and without 
hallucinations.

Santangelo G(1), Trojano L, Vitale C, Ianniciello M, Amboni M, Grossi D, Barone 
P.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Neurologiche, Università di Napoli Federico II, 
Naples, Italy.

The aim of this work was to determine the progression of cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients with or without hallucinations. Two years 
after the first assessment, 36 PD patients were re-evaluated on standardized 
neuropsychological tests, including the Frontal Assessment Battery (FAB), and on 
rating scales for overall cognitive functioning, functional autonomy, behavioral 
disorders. Nine patients had hallucinations at baseline and endpoint 
assessments; 12 patients developed hallucinations during the follow-up; and 15 
patients were hallucination-free throughout the study. Cognitive performance 
significantly declined in all three groups, but at endpoint assessment PD 
hallucinators scored significantly lower than nonhallucinators on phonological 
and semantic fluency tasks, immediate free recall and the go/no-go FAB subtest; 
moreover, they showed more severe apathy than nonhallucinators. Reduced 
phonological fluency at baseline (odds ratio [OR], 13.5; 95% CI: 1.34-135.98, P 
= 0.027) was the only independent predictor of onset of hallucinations after 2 
years, whereas hallucinations (OR, 10.1; 95% CI: 1.94-51.54, P = 0.006) and poor 
phonological fluency (OR, 6.1; 95% CI: 1.04-35.03, P = 0.045) independently 
predicted development of diffuse cognitive impairment. We concluded that reduced 
verbal fluency scores may predict the onset of hallucinations, while 
hallucinations and poor phonological fluency may predict development of dementia 
in PD patients.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21746
PMID: 17894370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1712. Am J Psychiatry. 2007 Oct;164(10):1491-8. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07040715.

Presentation and management of psychosis in Parkinson's disease and dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

Weintraub D(1), Hurtig HI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, 3535 Market St., Rm. 
3003, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. weintrau@mail.med.upenn.edu

A 73-year-old man with a 10-year history of progressive Parkinson’s disease is 
referred for psychiatric evaluation and treatment by a neurologist for new-onset 
confusion and visual hallucinations of strangers in his house. Treatment of the 
early Parkinson’s symptoms began with a dopamine agonist, and /-dopa was added 
later to combat worsening tremor, rigidity, slowed mobility, and difficulty 
performing basic activities of daily living. A more detailed history elicits 
new-onset depression and vivid dreaming with insomnia. The patient’s wife is 
concerned about the hallucinations, worsening cognitive impairment, and 
disturbed sleep, all of which have an impact on her quality of life. Treatment 
options for addressing these new symptoms include lowering the dosages of 
antiparkinsonian medications, which can cause or aggravate visual hallucinations 
and confusion, or adding quetiapine, the atypical antipsychotic drug that is 
least likely to worsen the parkinsonism. After discussions with the patient and 
his wife, the decision is made to initiate quetiapine at a dose of 50 mg at 
bedtime and not to change the antiparkinsonian medication regimen. However, 
after only a few doses, the patient stops taking the quetiapine because of 
excessive sedation and increased confusion. An attempt is then made to slowly 
taper the dopamine agonist, which is more likely than /-dopa to cause 
psychiatric complications and is less effective as an antiparkinsonian 
medication. The patient’s parkinsonism worsens, however, so the dosage is 
restored to the previously effective level. The patient’s condition continues to 
deteriorate because of increasing visual hallucinations (now accompanied by 
persecutory delusions regarding the strangers in the house), confusion, and 
disturbed sleep. An urgent follow-up evaluation is arranged.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07040715
PMCID: PMC2137166
PMID: 17898337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1713. Med Sci Monit. 2007 Oct;13(10):SC1-3.

Olfactory and psychomotor symptoms in HIV and aging: potential precursors to 
cognitive loss.

Vance DE(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, USA. 
devance@uab.edu

In the United States, more than 100,000 adults 50 years old and over are 
diagnosed with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV). The number of older 
adults living with HIV is increasing dramatically due primarily to Highly Active 
Antiretroviral Therapy (HAART) which is transforming this disease into a chronic 
condition for many who are responding well to treatment. This population is also 
growing due to later-life infections and reflects the overall aging of the 
larger population in general. Yet, despite the novelty of such developing 
demographic trends, the negative consequences of aging with HIV are largely 
unknown. Therefore, it is necessary to synthesize the gerontological and 
HIV/AIDS literatures to hypothesize possible areas that may be of concern to 
people as they age with this disease. One area of particular concern focuses on 
tell-tale signs of cognitive problems and the development of dementia. 
Separately, older adults and adults with HIV are more susceptible of 
experiencing cognitive declines and dementia. Thus, as people age with HIV, they 
may be particularly susceptible of such cognitive problems and therefore 
detecting such problems in the early stages may be vital in preventing further 
problems. Based on the literature, adults infected with HIV experience 
impairments in olfaction and psychomotor ability. Similar symptoms are exhibited 
in older adults with Parkinson's disease and other dementias. Thus, for older 
adults with HIV, declines in both olfaction and psychomotor skills may be early 
signs of a developing neurodegenerative disorder. Implications for those aging 
with HIV are posited.

PMID: 17901863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1714. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2007;3(5):619-25.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: Definition, diagnosis, and pathogenic relationship to 
Alzheimer's disease.

Mrak RE(1), Griffin WS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology #1090, University of Toledo Health Sciences, Campus, 
3000 Arlington Avenue, Toledo, Ohio, USA. Robert.Mrak@UToledo.edu

Clinical dementia associated with the appearance of Lewy bodies in the cerebral 
cortex has been recognized for over 40 years. Until the 1990s, however, cortical 
Lewy body disease was thought to be a rare cause of dementia. At that time, the 
advent of sensitive and specific immunohistochemical techniques for highlighting 
these elusive structures led to the recognition of cortical Lewy body disease as 
a common substrate for clinical dementia. Current diagnostic criteria recognize 
dementia with Lewy bodies as a clinicopathological entity. Also recognized is 
the closely related (and perhaps biologically identical) entity of Parkinson's 
disease dementia, which differs from dementia with Lewy bodies only in the 
temporal sequence of appearance of clinical symptoms. The generic term "Lewy 
body disease" encompasses both entities. There is frequent and extensive 
overlap, both clinically and pathologically, between dementia with Lewy bodies 
and Alzheimer's disease. The two diseases share several genetic and 
environmental risk factors that have in common increased inflammatory states 
associated with increased disease risk. Moreover, pathological and experimental 
work has implicated the involvement of activated microglia and of 
microglia-derived interleukin-1 in the pathogenesis of the pathognomonic lesions 
of both diseases. Such neuroinflammatory processes may be the common link 
driving progression in both diseases and explaining the frequent overlap between 
the two diseases.

PMCID: PMC2656298
PMID: 19300591


1715. Alzheimers Dement. 2007 Oct;3(4):292-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2007.08.002.

Clinical diagnosis of dementia.

Robillard A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Medicine, Hôpital Maisonneuve-Rosemont & 
Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, Canada. robillal@videotron.ca

This paper presents recommendations deriving from the Third Canadian Consensus 
Conference on the Diagnosis and Treatment of Dementia, concerning the clinical 
diagnosis of dementia. There are currently no universally accepted biological or 
radiological markers of dementia. In the absence of these, the diagnosis of 
dementia remains a clinical exercise aiming to integrate all available clinical 
and laboratory information. It is proposed that the currently used National 
Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke/Alzheimer's 
Disease and Related Disorders Association (NINCDS/ADRA) criteria for diagnosis 
of Alzheimer's disease (AD) be retained. The currently available vascular 
dementia (VaD) diagnostic criteria have variable accuracy. An integrative 
approach to VaD diagnosis based on all the available evidence (history, vascular 
risk factors, physical exam, clinical course, neuroimaging, cognitive impairment 
pattern) is recommended. The separation of Lewy body dementia (DLB) from 
Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) is based on the dominant clinical presenting 
feature of each syndrome, and relies on the duration of this feature: long 
duration of parkinsonian "motor" syndrome preceding dementia for PDD versus 
early/initial dementia accompanied by extrapyramidal symptoms for DLB. It is 
recognized that it is impossible clinically to characterize DLB with 
(pathologically) coexisting AD changes. The Frontotemporal group of dementia 
syndromes are discussed in regards to their typical clinical pictures, 
recognizing that their neuropathological substrate are not predictable from 
their mode of presentation. Finally, the particular rapid time sequence of 
evolution of the dementias due to prior disease is recognized as the clinically 
most useful distinguishing feature of these syndromes.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2007.08.002
PMID: 19595950


1716. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2007 Sep;4(4):378-85. doi: 10.2174/156720507781788873.

TNF-alpha inhibition as a treatment strategy for neurodegenerative disorders: 
new drug candidates and targets.

Tweedie D(1), Sambamurti K, Greig NH.

Author information:
(1)Drug Design & Development Section, Laboratory of Neurosciences, Intramural 
Research Program, NIA, NIH, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. Tweedieda@grc.nia.nih.gov

As the average ages of North Americans and Europeans continue to rise; similarly 
the incidence of "old age" associated illnesses likewise increases. Most notably 
among these ailments are conditions linked to dementia-related neurodegenerative 
disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
stroke. While in the early stages, these conditions are associated with cellular 
dysfunction in distinctly different brain regions, thus affecting different 
neuronal cell types; it is most likely that the final stages share similar 
cellular and molecular processes leading to neuronal death and ultimately overt 
clinical symptoms. In this regard, different environmental and genetic triggers 
ranging from head trauma to protein mutations and toxicological exposure may 
instigate a cascade of intracellular events that ultimately lead to neuronal 
death. One strong candidate trigger protein, and thus a potential target for 
therapeutic manipulation is the potent pro-inflammatory / pro-apoptotic 
cytokine, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha). TNF-alpha is secreted by the 
brain resident marcophage (the microglial cell) in response to various stimuli. 
It has been demonstrated to play a major role in central nervous system (CNS) 
neuroinflammation-mediated cell death in AD, PD and amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) as well as several other CNS complications. Recently, agents 
that modulate the levels of circulating peripheral TNF-alpha protein have been 
shown to be worthwhile therapeutic agents with the use of Enbrel (Etanercept) 
and Remicade (Infliximab), both of which display beneficial properties against 
rheumatoid arthritis and other peripheral inflammatory diseases. Unfortunately, 
these agents are largely unable to penetrate the blood-brain barrier, which 
severely limits their use in the setting of neuroinflammation in the CNS. 
However, thalidomide, a small molecule drug, can inhibit TNF-alpha protein 
synthesis and, unlike larger molecules, is readily capable of crossing the 
blood-brain barrier. Thus thalidomide and its analogs are excellent candidate 
agents for use in determining the potential value of anti-TNF-alpha therapies in 
a variety of diseases underpinned by inflammation within the nervous system. 
Consequently, we have chosen to discuss the relevance of unregulated TNF-alpha 
expression in illnesses of the CNS and, to an extent, the peripheral nervous 
system. Additionally, we consider the utilization of thalidomide-derived agents 
as anti-TNF-alpha therapeutics in the setting of neuroinflammation.

DOI: 10.2174/156720507781788873
PMID: 17908040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1717. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007 Oct;64(10):1204-12. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.10.1204.

Conscientiousness and the incidence of Alzheimer disease and mild cognitive 
impairment.

Wilson RS(1), Schneider JA, Arnold SE, Bienias JL, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Rush University Medical Center, 600 S 
Paulina, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rwilson@rush.edu

CONTEXT: The personality trait of conscientiousness has been related to 
morbidity and mortality in old age, but its association with the development of 
Alzheimer disease is not known.
OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that a higher level of conscientiousness is 
associated with decreased risk of Alzheimer disease.
DESIGN: Longitudinal clinicopathologic cohort study with up to 12 years of 
annual follow-up.
SETTING: The Religious Orders Study.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 997 older Catholic nuns, priests, and brothers without 
dementia at enrollment, recruited from more than 40 groups across the United 
States. At baseline, they completed a standard 12-item measure of 
conscientiousness. Those who died underwent a uniform neuropathologic evaluation 
from which previously established measures of amyloid burden, tangle density, 
Lewy bodies, and chronic cerebral infarction were derived.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease and change in 
previously established measures of global cognition and specific cognitive 
functions.
RESULTS: Conscientiousness scores ranged from 11 to 47 (mean, 34.0; SD, 5.0). 
During follow-up, 176 people developed Alzheimer disease. In a proportional 
hazards regression model adjusted for age, sex, and education, a high 
conscientiousness score (90th percentile) was associated with an 89% reduction 
in risk of Alzheimer disease compared with a low score (10th percentile). 
Results were not substantially changed by controlling for other personality 
traits, activity patterns, vascular conditions, or other risk factors. 
Conscientiousness was also associated with decreased incidence of mild cognitive 
impairment and reduced cognitive decline. In those who died and underwent brain 
autopsy, conscientiousness was unrelated to neuropathologic measures, but it 
modified the association of neurofibrillary pathologic changes and cerebral 
infarction with cognition proximate to death.
CONCLUSION: Level of conscientiousness is a risk factor for Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.10.1204
PMID: 17909133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1718. Neurology. 2007 Oct 2;69(14):1434-41. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277640.58685.fc.

Predictors of fitness to drive in people with Parkinson disease.

Devos H(1), Vandenberghe W, Nieuwboer A, Tant M, Baten G, De Weerdt W.

Author information:
(1)Katholieke Universiteit Leuven, Faculty of Kinesiology and Rehabilitation 
Sciences, Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, Tervuursevest 101, BE-3001 
Leuven, Belgium. Hannes.Devos@faber.kuleuven.be

OBJECTIVE: To develop an efficient clinical screening battery to accurately 
predict the fitness to drive in people with Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: This prospective study included 80 participants: 40 patients with PD 
and 40 healthy age- and sex-matched control subjects. All participants were 
assessed using a driving simulator, a driving history survey, and the Clinical 
Dementia Rating. The patients with PD also underwent a clinical test battery and 
an evaluation of fitness to drive performed by an official center, which 
included visual, cognitive, and on-road tests. A two-class decision from this 
driving assessment center was the main outcome measure.
RESULTS: A screening battery assessing four clinical variables (disease 
duration, contrast sensitivity, Clinical Dementia Rating, and motor part of the 
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale) provided the best model (R(2) = 0.52) 
to predict the fitness to drive and correctly classified 36 (90%) of the 
patients with PD as pass or fail (sensitivity = 91%, specificity = 90%). The 
Test Ride for Investigating Practical fitness to drive (TRIP) driving simulator 
score discriminated significantly between drivers with PD and their healthy 
peers (p = 0.0008). When the TRIP driving simulator score was added to the 
clinical model, the total explained variance increased (R(2) = 0.60) and 
correctly classified 39 (97.5%) of drivers with PD into the pass/fail category 
(sensitivity = 91%, specificity = 100%).
CONCLUSIONS: A short clinical screening battery that measures disease duration, 
contrast sensitivity, cognitive and motor functions can predict fitness to drive 
in people with Parkinson disease with a high degree of accuracy.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277640.58685.fc
PMID: 17909156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1719. RETRACTED ARTICLE

Neurology. 2007 Oct 2;69(14):1460-5. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277450.49788.82.

Reduced cardiac 123I-MIBG uptake reflects cardiac sympathetic dysfunction in 
Lewy body disease.

Oka H(1), Yoshioka M, Morita M, Onouchi K, Suzuki M, Ito Y, Hirai T, Mochio S, 
Inoue K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
105-8461, Japan. h.oka@jike.ac.jp

Retraction in
    Oka H, Yoshioka M, Morita M, Onouchi K, Suzuki M, Ito Y, Hirai T, Mochio S, 
Inoue K. Neurology. 2008 Jul 1;71(1):63.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relation between the results of cardiac 
(123)I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scintigraphy and cardiovascular autonomic 
function in Lewy body disease (LBD).
METHODS: The subjects were 66 patients with LBD, 44 of whom had Parkinson 
disease (PD), 10 PD with dementia (PDD), and 12 dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB); 
20 age-matched healthy subjects were studied as controls. Cardiovascular 
autonomic function was evaluated on the basis of cardiac (123)I-MIBG uptake, 
cardiovascular autonomic response on the Valsalva maneuver (VM), and systolic 
blood pressure (SBP) response on head-up tilt table (HUT) testing.
RESULTS: Patients with LBD had reduced cardiac (123)I-MIBG uptake, 
cardiovascular autonomic response on the VM, and SBP response on HUT testing as 
compared with controls. Cardiac (123)I-MIBG uptake and cardiovascular autonomic 
function in PDD and DLB were severely impaired as compared with those in PD. 
Cardiac (123)I-MIBG uptake in LDB was not significantly related to vasomotor 
sympathetic function, baroreceptor reflex gain, cardiac parasympathetic 
function, or the changes in SBP on HUT testing. Cardiac (123)I-MIBG uptake was, 
however, significantly related to the blood pressure overshoot in phase IV of 
the VM.
CONCLUSION: Cardiac (123)I-meta-iodobenzylguanidine uptake clinically reflects 
cardiac sympathetic dysfunction in Lewy body disease.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277450.49788.82
PMID: 17909159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1720. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2007 Dec;109(10):862-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2007.08.010.

Relationship between visual hallucinations and REM sleep behavior disorder in 
patients with Parkinson's disease.

Meral H(1), Aydemir T, Ozer F, Ozturk O, Ozben S, Erol C, Cetin S, Hanoglu L, 
Ozkayran T, Yilsen M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Haseki Educational and Research Hospital, Turkey.

OBJECTIVES: REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) has been documented to precede or 
to co-occur with Parkinson's disease (PD). Parkinson's disease is one of the 
most common neurological conditions associated with visual hallucinations. 
Cognitive dysfunction is present in PD, even at the early stages of these 
diseases. In this study we aimed to investigate the relationship between visual 
hallucinations and RBD in patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD). 
Additionally, we evaluated the association of the cognition and the pattern of 
cognitive impairment with VHs and RBD, effects of factors like duration and 
severity of the disease and duration of levodopa usage.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seventy-nine patients, diagnosed as PD, were included the 
study and then, patients were divided into four groups; with RBD and VHs (group 
1), with RBD but no VHs (group 2), with VHs but no RBD (group 3), without RBD 
and VHs (group 4). We compared each group with the others according to 
demographic characteristics and neuropsychological test scores.
RESULTS: Of all patients, in 46% (n=36) RBD and in 48% (n=38) VHs were observed. 
Our study established VHs in 58% of patients with RBD, and RBD in 55% of 
patients with VHs. However, due to a 40% incidence of VHs in patients without 
RBD, RBD and VHs were not found to be correlated. All of the neuropsychometric 
test scores did not reveal significant difference between groups.
CONCLUSION: Although it seems like there is a small association between RBD and 
VHs in our patients, it was not significant. Group 1 presented with 
significantly worse scores in UPDRS total scores and I, II subscores.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2007.08.010
PMID: 17913346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1721. Neurology. 2008 Feb 12;70(7):521-7. doi: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000280574.17166.26. 
Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Corticobasal syndrome and primary progressive aphasia as manifestations of LRRK2 
gene mutations.

Chen-Plotkin AS(1), Yuan W, Anderson C, McCarty Wood E, Hurtig HI, Clark CM, 
Miller BL, Lee VM, Trojanowski JQ, Grossman M, Van Deerlin VM.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Institute on Aging and 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
Health System, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2008 Jul 22;71(4):303; author reply 303-4.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the LRRK2 gene are an important cause of familial and 
nonfamilial parkinsonism. Despite pleomorphic pathology, LRRK2 mutations are 
believed to manifest clinically as typical Parkinson disease (PD). However, most 
genetic screens have been limited to PD clinic populations.
OBJECTIVE: To clinically characterize LRRK2 mutations in cases recruited from a 
spectrum of neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODS: We screened for the common G2019S mutation and several additional 
previously reported LRRK2 mutations in 434 individuals. A total of 254 patients 
recruited from neurodegenerative disease clinics and 180 neurodegenerative 
disease autopsy cases from the University of Pennsylvania brain bank were 
evaluated.
RESULTS: Eight cases were found to harbor a LRRK2 mutation. Among patients with 
a mutation, two presented with cognitive deficits leading to clinical diagnoses 
of corticobasal syndrome and primary progressive aphasia.
CONCLUSION: The clinical presentation of LRRK2-associated neurodegenerative 
disease may be more heterogeneous than previously assumed.

DOI: 10.1212/01.WNL.0000280574.17166.26
PMCID: PMC3619720
PMID: 17914064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1722. Psychiatr Danub. 2007 Sep;19(3):184-8.

Involuntary emotional expression disorder - new/old disease in psychiatry and 
neurology.

Presecki P(1), Mimica N.

Author information:
(1)Pula General Hospital, Department of Psychiatry, Aldo Negri 6, HR-52 100 
Pula, Croatia. ppresecki@net.hr

Involuntary emotional expression disorder (IEED) is underrecognized by 
clinicians, misdiagnosed as depression or bipolar disorder and undertreated, 
because clinicians are unfamiliar with the disorder. An important clinical 
consideration for IEED is that of distinguishing mood from affect. IEED 
describes a syndrome of relatively stereotypical episodes of uncontrollable 
crying and/or laughing, resulting from lesions of multiple types, in multiple 
brain regions, without an apparent stimulus to trigger such responses. This 
syndrome is common among a number of neurological diseases like patients with a 
stroke or traumatic brain injury (TBI), patients with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS), multiple sclerosis (MS), as well as dementias such as 
Alzheimer;s disease (AD), and motor disorders such as Parkinson;s disease (PD). 
The neuropathological cause and neurochemistry of the disorder remains unclear. 
There is general agreement that IEED is the result of an injury to the 
neurological pathways that control the expression of emotions. Adequate 
treatment can reduce the frequency and improve the quality of life of patients 
and caregivers.

PMID: 17914317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1723. Accid Anal Prev. 2007 Nov;39(6):1114-20. doi: 10.1016/j.aap.2007.02.008. Epub 
2007 Mar 19.

Mild neuritic changes are increased in the brains of fatally injured older motor 
vehicle drivers.

Gorrie CA(1), Rodriguez M, Sachdev P, Duflou J, Waite PM.

Author information:
(1)Neural Injury Research Unit, School of Medical Sciences, University of New 
South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. c.gorrie@unsw.edu.au

Given the expected increase in the older population and driving in this age 
group, concerns have been raised about the safety of older drivers. People over 
65 years are over-represented in motor vehicle fatalities when calculated by 
distance driven. They are also at risk of neurodegenerative diseases, such as 
Alzheimer's disease, that affect cognitive function. We have examined the brains 
of older drivers (15M:12F) who died as a result of a motor vehicle accident 
(MVA) to determine the extent of Alzheimer's disease-related neurofibrillary 
changes (neuritic plaques and neurofibrillary tangles), Lewy body pathology and 
cerebrovascular disease and compared them to a control group of older licenced 
drivers (23M:5F) who died of other causes. The prevalence of moderate or severe 
neuritic plaque pathology was less than expected for the general population of 
this age and there was no difference between the groups. However, mild neuritic 
plaque pathology was increased for MVA deaths compared to controls. There was no 
evidence of vascular dementia or dementia with Lewy bodies. The current 
mandatory age-related re-licencing procedures in NSW may contribute to the low 
percentage of drivers with severe pathology. Further research into the role of 
mild pathology in cognitive impairment and older drivers is warranted.

DOI: 10.1016/j.aap.2007.02.008
PMID: 17920833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1724. Acta Neurol Scand. 2008 Apr;117(4):255-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00933.x. 
Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Executive dysfunction in non-demented Parkinson's disease patients with 
hallucinations.

Imamura K(1), Wada-Isoe K, Kitayama M, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. imamurakeiko@nifty.com

OBJECTIVE: We investigated executive function in Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients, and focused on executive dysfunction in PD with hallucinations, but 
without dementia.
METHODS: PD patients were classified by cognitive or neuropsychotic status as PD 
group, PD with vivid dreaming group, PD with hallucinations group and 
Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) group. Psychomotor speed tests, the Stroop 
test, a verbal fluency test and the Self-rating Depression Scale were performed.
RESULTS: The PDD group showed poorer scores in every test compared with the PD 
group. The PD with hallucinations group showed results similar to those of the 
PDD group, while the PD with vivid dreaming group was similar to the PD group.
CONCLUSIONS: The study suggests that PD patients with hallucinations, not 
extensive enough to qualify as dementia, already have executive dysfunction 
similar to that seen in PDD patients. Executive dysfunction may be an important 
substrate for hallucinations even when dementia is not yet apparent.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00933.x
PMID: 17922890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1725. Neurology. 2007 Oct 9;69(15):1521-7. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277459.83543.99.

The significance of medial temporal lobe atrophy: a postmortem MRI study in the 
very old.

Barkhof F(1), Polvikoski TM, van Straaten EC, Kalaria RN, Sulkava R, Aronen HJ, 
Niinistö L, Rastas S, Oinas M, Scheltens P, Erkinjuntti T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, VU University Medical Centre, P.O. Box 7057, 1007 MB 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. f.barkhof@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) is a sensitive radiologic marker 
for Alzheimer disease (AD) and associated with cognitive impairment. The value 
of MTA in the oldest old (>85 years old) is largely unknown.
METHODS: A total of 132 formalin-fixed brains from the Vantaa 85+ 
community-based study were subjected to postmortem MRI. Visual ratings of MTA 
were determined in a blinded fashion and compared with neuropathologic findings 
and clinical assessment (dementia according to Diagnostic and Statistical Manual 
of Mental Disorders-III-R).
RESULTS: A strong relationship was found between MTA scores and Alzheimer 
pathology (p < 0.001). The previously proposed cutoff MTA score >2 correctly 
excluded subjects with no or borderline Alzheimer-type pathology (45/48), but 
was not very sensitive for AD (modified National Institute on Aging-Reagan 
Institute criteria). MTA scores >2 were also found in subjects with other 
primary neurodegenerative hippocampal pathology including hippocampal sclerosis, 
Lewy-related pathology, and argyrophilic grain disease, either alone or in 
combination with Alzheimer-type pathology. High MTA scores were associated with 
clinical dementia-in this subgroup, sensitivity was 63% and specificity 69% for 
AD.
CONCLUSION: Medial temporal lobe atrophy (MTA) on postmortem MRI is sensitive to 
primary degenerative hippocampal pathology in the very old, but not specific for 
Alzheimer-type pathology. MTA scores of 2 or less are not frequently associated 
with dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000277459.83543.99
PMID: 17923614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1726. Arch Neurol. 2007 Oct;64(10):1436-46. doi: 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1436.

Alzheimer and Parkinson diagnoses in progranulin null mutation carriers in an 
extended founder family.

Brouwers N(1), Nuytemans K, van der Zee J, Gijselinck I, Engelborghs S, Theuns 
J, Kumar-Singh S, Pickut BA, Pals P, Dermaut B, Bogaerts V, De Pooter T, 
Serneels S, Van den Broeck M, Cuijt I, Mattheijssens M, Peeters K, Sciot R, 
Martin JJ, Cras P, Santens P, Vandenberghe R, De Deyn PP, Cruts M, Van 
Broeckhoven C, Sleegers K.

Author information:
(1)VIB Department of Molecular Genetics, Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, 
University of Antwerp CDE, Universiteitsplein 1, BE-2610 Antwerpen, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Progranulin gene (PGRN) haploinsufficiency was recently associated 
with ubiquitin-positive frontotemporal lobar degeneration linked to chromosome 
17q21 (FTLDU-17).
OBJECTIVE: To assess whether PGRN genetic variability contributed to other 
common neurodegenerative brain diseases, such as Alzheimer disease (AD) or 
Parkinson disease (PD).
DESIGN: Mutation analysis of PGRN.
SETTING: Memory Clinic of the Middelheim General Hospital. Patients We analyzed 
666 Belgian patients with AD and 255 with PD.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Results of PGRN sequencing, PGRN transcript analysis, 
short tandem repeat genotyping, and neuropathologic analysis.
RESULTS: We identified 2 patients with AD and 1 patient with PD who carried the 
null mutation IVS0 + 5G>C, which we reported earlier in an extensively 
characterized Belgian founder family, DR8, segregating FTLDU. Postmortem 
pathologic diagnosis of the patient with PD revealed both FTLDU and Lewy body 
pathologic features. In addition, we identified in PGRN only 1 other null 
mutation, the nonsense mutation p.Arg535X, in 1 patient with probable AD. 
However, in vitro analysis predicted a PGRN C-truncated protein, although it 
remains to be elucidated if this shortened transcript leads to 
haploinsufficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: Our mutation data indicated that null mutations are rare in 
patients with AD (3/666 = 0.45%) and PD (1/255 = 0.39%). Also, AD and PD 
clinical diagnoses in patients who carry PGRN null mutations likely result from 
etiologic heterogeneity rather than PGRN haploinsufficiency.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1436
PMID: 17923627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1727. Arch Neurol. 2007 Oct;64(10):1458-64. doi: 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1458.

Risk of cognitive impairment or dementia in relatives of patients with Parkinson 
disease.

Rocca WA(1), Bower JH, Ahlskog JE, Elbaz A, Grossardt BR, McDonnell SK, Schaid 
DJ, Maraganore DM.

Author information:
(1)Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic 
College of Medicine, 200 First St SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. rocca@mayo.edu

BACKGROUND: The evidence for increased risk of dementia in relatives of patients 
with Parkinson disease (PD) remains conflicting.
OBJECTIVE: To study the risk of cognitive impairment or dementia in first-degree 
relatives of patients with PD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We conducted a historical cohort study of 
1019 first-degree relatives of 162 patients with PD and of 858 relatives of 147 
matched controls representative of the population of Olmsted County, Minnesota. 
In addition, we studied 2716 first-degree relatives of 411 patients with PD 
referred to Mayo Clinic.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: We administered via telephone a cognitive test directly 
to relatives or a dementia questionnaire to proxies. For relatives reported by 
proxies to have dementia, we obtained copies of their medical records to confirm 
the diagnosis. We also obtained dementia information from a medical 
records-linkage system.
RESULTS: In the overall population-based sample, the risk of cognitive 
impairment or dementia was increased in relatives of patients with PD compared 
with relatives of controls (hazard ratio, 1.37; 95% confidence interval, 
1.03-1.81; P = .03) and was particularly increased in relatives of patients with 
onset of PD at age 66 years or younger (youngest tertile; hazard ratio, 1.73; 
95% confidence interval, 1.21-2.46; P = .003). The findings were consistent in 
several sensitivity analyses. In the referral-based sample, the risk of 
cognitive impairment or dementia in relatives increased with younger age at 
onset of PD but did not vary by other clinical characteristics.
CONCLUSION: Cognitive impairment or dementia may share familial susceptibility 
factors with PD (genetic or nongenetic).

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1458
PMID: 17923629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1728. Arch Neurol. 2007 Oct;64(10):1535-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1535.

Familial early-onset dementia with tau intron 10 + 16 mutation with clinical 
features similar to those of Alzheimer disease.

Doran M(1), du Plessis DG, Ghadiali EJ, Mann DM, Pickering-Brown S, Larner AJ.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Function Clinic, Walton Centre for Neurology and Neurosurgery, 
Lower Lane, Liverpool L9 7LJ, England.

BACKGROUND: Frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 
(FTDP-17) owing to the tau intron 10 + 16 mutation usually occurs with a 
prototypical frontotemporal dementia phenotype with prominent disinhibition and 
affective disturbances.
OBJECTIVE: To report a new FTDP-17 pedigree with the tau intron 10 + 16 mutation 
demonstrating a clinical phenotype suggestive of Alzheimer disease.
DESIGN: Case reports.
SETTING: Regional neuroscience centers in northwest England. Patients We 
examined 4 members of a kindred in which 8 individuals were affected in 3 
generations.
RESULTS: All 4 patients reported memory difficulty. Marked anomia was also 
present, but behavioral disturbances were conspicuously absent in the early 
stages of disease. All patients had an initial clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer 
disease. No mutations were found in the presenilin or amyloid precursor protein 
genes. Pathologic examination of the proband showed features typical of FTDP-17, 
and tau gene analysis showed the intron 10 + 16 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: This pedigree illustrates the phenotypic variability of tau intron 
10 + 16 mutations. In pedigrees with a clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease 
but without presenilin or amyloid precursor protein gene mutations, tau gene 
mutations may be found.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.64.10.1535
PMID: 17923640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1729. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2007 Oct 4;127(19):2517-20.

[Dementia in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in Norwegian]

Halvorsen Ø(1), Tysnes OB.

Author information:
(1)Medisinsk fakultet, Universitetet i Bergen.

Comment in
    Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2007 Nov 15;127(22):2973; author reply 2973-4.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease has traditionally been considered as a pure 
motor condition; characterized by tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and slow 
postural reflexes. The concomitant presence of neuropsychiatric symptoms, 
including dementia, has been increasingly recognized during the last decade.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Literature on epidemiology, neuropathology and clinical 
characteristics of dementia in Parkinson's disease was retrieved from PubMed.
RESULTS AND INTERPRETATION: Dementia in Parkinson's disease is more common than 
previously assumed. According to cross-sectional studies, up to 30% of the 
Parkinson patients have dementia and almost all patients with Parkinson' disease 
develop dementia over time. Dementia is associated with higher mortality, an 
increased risk of institutionalisation and increased caregiver distress. Reduced 
visuospatial and executive functions, severe motor symptoms and high age are 
risk factors for development of dementia. REM sleeping disorders, psychotic 
symptoms and depression are frequent comorbid conditions. Dementia in 
Parkinson's disease correlates with increased Lewy body pathology and reduced 
levels of neurotransmitters (especially acetylcholine) in neocortical and limbic 
structures of the brain. Treatment with acetylcholine esterase inhibitors has 
been shown to have moderate symptomatic effect.

PMID: 17925819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1730. Acta Neurol Scand. 2007 Dec;116(6):347-54. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00887.x. Epub 2007 Oct 10.

Posterior cortical brain dysfunction in cognitively impaired patients with 
Parkinson's disease--a rCBF scintigraphy study.

Wallin A(1), Ekberg S, Lind K, Milos V, Granérus AK, Granerus G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, 
Goteborg University, Mölndal, Sweden. anders.wallin@neuro.gu.se

OBJECTIVES: The aim of the study was to visualize cortical function in 
Parkinson's patients with various degrees of cognitive impairment.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty-seven patients with Parkinson's disease and three 
with Parkinson plus syndromes underwent cognitive assessment and rCBF using 
(99m)TC-HMPAO-SPECT.
RESULTS: Almost no regional reductions in cerebral blood flow were seen in 
patients without cognitive impairment (n = 16). Limited, mainly posterior, blood 
flow reductions were seen in patients with mild cognitive impairment (n = 14), 
whereas the reductions were extensive and bilaterally symmetric, involving both 
anterior and posterior brain regions in patients with dementia (n = 10).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest a widespread cortical, mainly posterior type 
of dysfunction and a relationship between the degree of cognitive impairment and 
the magnitude of the dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00887.x
PMID: 17927803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1731. Orv Hetil. 2007 Oct 21;148(42):1999-2002. doi: 10.1556/OH.2007.28066.

[The Danubian Biobank Initiative: synchronizing the biobanking activities of the 
Danube universities].

[Article in Hungarian]

Gyorffy B(1), Rosivall L, Prohászka Z, Falus A, Füst G, Munkácsy G, Tulassay T.

Author information:
(1)Danubian Biobank Konzorcium, Semmelweis Egyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi 
Kar, Budapest, Bókay u. 53/54. 1083. gyorffy@gyer1.sote.hu

Aging disorders pose an increasing challenge for the public health care systems 
in Europe. An important approach to cope with this task is the identification of 
relevant novel disease genes and the control of risk factors using new 
technological capabilities. A key element in this process is the availability of 
well classified, large enough patient cohorts and the establishment of 
quality-controlled central banks for DNA, serum, plasma, and 
cells/tissues/RNA/proteins together with the development of an IT based 
infrastructure to provide samples and data required for biomedical studies. The 
Danubian Biobank initiative connects universities, associated teaching hospitals 
and endpoint-related rehabilitation clinics along the Danube river and in 
neighbouring regions. The scientific network focuses on diabetes-related 
endpoints, vascular disease (e.g. myocardial infarction, stroke, arterial 
thrombosis, kidney failure), metabolic disease (e.g. obesity, diabetes, 
metabolic syndrome), and neurodegenerative disorders (e.g. dementia syndromes, 
Parkinsonism). Task forces are set up for the relevant topics of the biobank 
project including patient recruitment, sample and data management, public 
health, epidemiology and genetics, enabling technologies, and research 
strategies. The project aims to select the most relevant and promising 
scientific targets utilizing the core competences developed in the individual 
partner institutions. For this purpose a series of dedicated workshops and 
conferences are organized as well as joint research grant proposals are 
submitted.

DOI: 10.1556/OH.2007.28066
PMID: 17932006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1732. Neurodegener Dis. 2007;4(6):428-30. doi: 10.1159/000107703. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Predictors of survival in dementia with lewy bodies and Parkinson dementia.

Jellinger KA(1), Wenning GK, Seppi K.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Retrospective analysis of 243 autopsy-confirmed cases of dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and Parkinson disease with dementia (PDD) showed an average age at 
symptom onset of 67 years and a median survival of 5 years from symptom onset. 
Older age at onset, fluctuating cognition, and hallucinations at onset predicted 
shorter survival; initial parkinsonism with delayed dementia significantly 
improved survival. Associated Alzheimer pathology also shortened survival. When 
adjusted for age, gender, and Alzheimer pathology, fluctuating dementia at 
symptom onset was identified as best predictor of poor outcome.

Copyright (c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000107703
PMID: 17934326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1733. J Mol Biol. 2007 Nov 23;374(2):454-64. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.09.039. Epub 2007 
Sep 20.

Sequence Determinants for Amyloid Fibrillogenesis of Human alpha-Synuclein.

Zibaee S(1), Jakes R, Fraser G, Serpell LC, Crowther RA, Goedert M.

Author information:
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge,CB2 0QH, UK.

Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are characterized 
by the presence of filamentous inclusions in nerve cells. These filaments are 
amyloid fibrils that are made of the protein alpha-synuclein, which is 
genetically linked to rare cases of PD and DLB. beta-Synuclein, which shares 60% 
identity with alpha-synuclein, is not found in the inclusions. Furthermore, 
while recombinant alpha-synuclein readily assembles into amyloid fibrils, 
beta-synuclein fails to do so. It has been suggested that this may be due to the 
lack in beta-synuclein of a hydrophobic region that spans residues 73-83 of 
alpha-synuclein. Here, fibril assembly of recombinant human alpha-synuclein, 
alpha-synuclein deletion mutants, beta-synuclein and beta/alpha-synuclein 
chimeras was assayed quantitatively by thioflavin T fluorescence and 
semi-quantitatively by transmission electron microscopy. Deletion of residues 
73-83 from alpha-synuclein did not abolish filament formation. Furthermore, a 
chimera of beta-synuclein with alpha-synuclein(73-83) inserted was significantly 
less fibrillogenic than wild-type alpha-synuclein. These findings, together with 
results obtained using a number of recombinant synucleins, showed a correlation 
between fibrillogenesis and mean beta-strand propensity, hydrophilicity and 
charge of the amino acid sequences. The combination of these simple 
physicochemical properties with a previously described calculation of 
beta-strand contiguity allowed us to design mutations that changed the 
fibrillogenic propensity of alpha-synuclein in predictable ways.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jmb.2007.09.039
PMID: 17936783 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1734. Eur J Neurol. 2007 Dec;14(12):1357-62. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.01977.x. 
Epub 2007 Oct 17.

A comparison of cerebral glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease, Parkinson's 
disease dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Yong SW(1), Yoon JK, An YS, Lee PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South 
Korea.

Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) share 
many similar aspects, and making a clinical diagnosis of one disorder over the 
other relies heavily on an arbitrary criterion, so-called 1-year rule. This 
study was designed to search for any difference of metabolic patterns in these 
two disorders using F-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography 
(PET) images. We enrolled 16 patients with PD, 13 patients with PDD, and seven 
patients with DLB. FDG PET was performed, and images were reconstructed by 
iterative reconstruction using the computed tomography (CT) images, and were 
normalized to a standard template. Statistical comparison between groups were 
performed on a voxel-by-voxel basis using t-statistics (two-sample t-test). 
Compared with the patients with PD, both PDD and DLB patients showed similar 
patterns of decreased metabolism in bilateral inferior and medial frontal lobes, 
and right parietal lobe (P(uncorrected) < 0.001). In a direct comparison, DLB 
patients had significant metabolic decrease (p(uncorrected) < 0.005) in the 
anterior cingulate compared with those with PDD. These findings support the 
concept that PDD and DLB have similar underlying neurobiological 
characteristics, and that they can be regarded as a spectrum of Lewy body 
disorders.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.01977.x
PMID: 17941855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1735. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2007 Dec;55(12):2035-40. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01448.x. Epub 2007 Oct 18.

A pilot study of banxia houpu tang, a traditional Chinese medicine, for reducing 
pneumonia risk in older adults with dementia.

Iwasaki K(1), Kato S, Monma Y, Niu K, Ohrui T, Okitsu R, Higuchi S, Ozaki S, 
Kaneko N, Seki T, Nakayama K, Furukawa K, Fujii M, Arai H.

Author information:
(1)Center for Asian Traditional Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Tohoku 
University, Sendai, Japan. QFG03604@nifty.com

OBJECTIVES: To evaluate whether the traditional Chinese herbal medicine banxia 
houpu tang (BHT, formula magnolia et pinelliae) prevents aspiration pneumonia 
and pneumonia-related mortality in elderly people.
DESIGN: A prospective, observer-blinded, randomized, controlled trial.
SETTING: Two long-term care hospitals for handicapped elderly patients in Japan 
from March 2005 to February 2006.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred four elderly patients (31 men and 73 women; mean 
age+/-standard deviation 83.5+/-7.8) with dementia and cerebrovascular disease, 
Alzheimer's disease, or Parkinson's disease.
INTERVENTION: Ninety-five participants (mean age 84.0, M:F=28:67) were randomly 
assigned to the BHT treatment group (n=47) or the control group (n=48) and took 
BHT or placebo for 12 months.
MEASUREMENTS: The occurrence of pneumonia, mortality due to pneumonia, and the 
daily amount of self-feeding.
RESULTS: Complete data were available for analysis on 92 of the 95 subjects 
randomized. Four patients in the BHT group developed pneumonia, and one of them 
died as a result. Fourteen patients in the control group developed pneumonia, 
and six of them died as a result. There was a significant difference between the 
two groups in pneumonia onset (P=.008), and a tendency toward significance in 
pneumonia-related mortality (P=.05). The relative risk of pneumonia in the BHT 
group compared with the control group was 0.51 (95% confidence interval 
(CI)=0.27-0.84, P=.008) and that of death from pneumonia was 0.41 (95% 
CI=0.10-1.03, P=.06) according to the Cox proportional hazards model. No adverse 
events were observed from treatment with BHT. The BHT group was able to maintain 
self-feeding better than the control group (P=.006).
CONCLUSION: Treatment with BHT reduced the risk of pneumonia and 
pneumonia-related mortality in elderly patients with dementia.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2007.01448.x
PMID: 17944889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1736. Conf Proc IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2006;2006:3962-5. doi: 
10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260796.

Investigation of a portable performance measurement system for neurologic 
screening in clinics.

Kondraske GV(1), Mulukutla R, Stewart RM.

Author information:
(1)Human Performance Inst., Texas Univ., Arlington, TX 76019-0180, USA. 
gvk@hpi.uta.edu

Motivated by the need for clinical screening for early detection of neurologic 
disease, a prototype portable instrument dubbed the human performance multimeter 
(HPMM) was developed. The HPMM is based on a set of lab-based performance 
capacity tests developed and evaluated over the last two decades. We attempted 
to integrate selected functionality of a set of modular lab-based instruments 
into a single, small package. In the present study, a 4th generation prototype 
was developed and evaluated for usability, measurement repeatability, and 
preliminary measurement validity. Five performance capacity tests (upper 
extremity coordination, isometric grip strength, simple response speed, rapid 
alternating movement, and steadiness/tremor) were administered to twenty healthy 
adult volunteers. Short-term reliability was investigated using a test-retest 
protocol. Most measures were found to possess good test-retest reliability 
(r>0.75). Preliminary validity was investigated by comparing results to those 
obtained with non-portable devices that served as models for the HPMM. Results 
were in good agreement with those instruments. It is concluded that measures of 
good fidelity can be obtained with this type of instrument.

DOI: 10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260796
PMID: 17946212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1737. Climacteric. 2007 Oct;10 Suppl 2:92-6. doi: 10.1080/13697130701534097.

Alzheimer's disease and other neurological disorders.

Henderson VW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Health Research and Policy, Stanford University, Stanford, 
California 94305-5405, United States.

Menopausal status and estrogen-containing hormone therapy may influence several 
neurological disorders, including Alzheimer's disease, epilepsy, migraine 
headache, multiple sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, sleep disorders, and stroke. 
For most of these illnesses, evidence on hormone therapy is insufficient to 
guide practice decisions. For stroke, clinical trial evidence indicates that 
hormone therapy increases risk of cerebral infarction. For women with 
Alzheimer's disease, estrogen treatment trials have tended to be small and of 
short duration. Most suggest that estrogen started after the onset of dementia 
symptoms does not meaningfully improve cognition or slow disease progression. 
Hormone therapy initiated after age 64 increased all-cause dementia in the 
Women's Health Initiative Memory Study. Many observational studies, however, 
report protective associations between hormone use and Alzheimer risk. Apparent 
risk reduction may represent a bias toward hormone therapy, since hormones are 
more often prescribed to healthier women. However, when compared to the Women's 
Health Initiative Memory Study, estrogen exposures in many observational studies 
reflect hormone initiation at a younger age, closer to the time of menopause. 
One intriguing hypothesis is that hormone therapy initiated or used during an 
early critical window may reduce later Alzheimer incidence. Public health 
implications of this hypothesis are important, but current data are inadequate 
to decide the issue.

DOI: 10.1080/13697130701534097
PMID: 17882682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1738. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Jul;79(7):789-95. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2007.118786. Epub 2007 Oct 26.

Cognitive declines following bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain 
stimulation for the treatment of Parkinson's disease.

York MK(1), Dulay M, Macias A, Levin HS, Grossman R, Simpson R, Jankovic J.

Author information:
(1)Baylor College of Medicine, Department of Neurology, 6501 Fannin, NB302, 
Houston, Texas 77030, USA. myork@bcm.edu

BACKGROUND: We investigated the cognitive and psychiatric outcome 6 months after 
bilateral subthalamic nucleus deep brain stimulation (DBS) for the treatment of 
Parkinson's disease (PD) using a disease control group.
METHODS: 23 patients who underwent DBS were compared with 28 medically treated 
patients with PD at baseline and at 6 months for neuropsychological measures. In 
addition to the group outcomes, we report reliable change indices (RCI) and a 
dementia caseness analysis.
RESULTS: Patients who underwent DBS demonstrated a significant decline in verbal 
memory compared with the control group (p<0.003), and trends for decline on oral 
information processing, including verbal fluency, timed transcription and word 
naming. Patients who underwent DBS demonstrated declines in attention, set 
shifting and semantic fluency but these changes were similar to the rate of 
decline in the PD group. RCI indicated that patients who underwent DBS 
demonstrated clinically significant declines in verbal fluency (p<0.01) and 
inhibition of a dominant response (p<0.003), with trends for declines in set 
shifting (p<0.02) and verbal long term recall (p<0.08), indicative of 
frontostriatal dysfunction. Patients who underwent DBS did not demonstrate 
significant changes in depression, anxiety or psychological distress scores. The 
caseness analysis revealed that one of the patients who underwent DBS (4%) 
converted to dementia over 6 months compared with none of the PD controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrated that patients who underwent DBS 
experienced declines in verbal recall and trends for declines in oral 
information processing 6 months following surgery, even when good motor outcome 
was achieved. Potential candidates should be counselled about the risk of mild 
frontostriatal cognitive declines following DBS to weigh the risks and benefits 
of surgery.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2007.118786
PMID: 17965146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1739. Circulation. 2007 Nov 13;116(20):2269-74. doi: 
10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.686477. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Ankle-to-brachial index and dementia: the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study.

Laurin D(1), Masaki KH, White LR, Launer LJ.

Author information:
(1)Laval University Geriatrics Research Unit, Centre de recherche du CHA, and 
Faculty of Pharmacy, Laval University, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Measurement of the ankle-to-brachial index (ABI) is a noninvasive 
test to assess peripheral arterial disease. A low ABI is a strong correlate of 
cardiovascular disease and subsequent mortality. Evidence indicates the 
existence of vascular components in the pathogenesis of dementia. Here, we 
examine the association of ABI with dementia and subtypes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Data are from the Honolulu-Asia Aging Study (HAAS), a 
prospective community-based study of 3734 Japanese American men 71 to 93 years 
of age at baseline in 1991 to 1993. The analysis included 2588 men who were free 
of dementia at the first assessment, had an ABI measure, and were examined up to 
2 more times for dementia between 1994 and 1999. The sample included 240 
incident cases of dementia (144 of Alzheimer's disease, 46 of vascular dementia, 
and 50 of dementia of other causes). Hazard ratios (HRs) and 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) were calculated from Cox proportional-hazards models with age as 
the time scale after adjustment for education, year of birth, high blood 
pressure, body mass index, diabetes mellitus, cholesterol concentration, smoking 
status, alcohol consumption, and apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele. A low ABI was 
associated with an increased risk of dementia and vascular dementia (HR, 1.66; 
95% CI, 1.16 to 2.37; and HR, 2.25; 95% CI, 1.07 to 4.73, respectively). ABI was 
weakly associated with Alzheimer's disease (HR, 1.57; 95% CI, 0.98 to 2.53), 
particularly in the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 carriers (HR, 1.43; 95% CI, 1.02 
to 1.96).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that ABI, a measure of atherosclerosis, is 
associated with the incidence of total dementia, vascular dementia, and 
Alzheimer's disease in carriers of the apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele.

DOI: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.106.686477
PMID: 17967779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1740. Brain Nerve. 2007 Oct;59(10):1065-74.

[Revisit to Kii ALS--the innovated concept of ALS-Parkinsonism-dementia complex, 
clinicopathological features, epidemiology and etiology].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University School of Medicine, Tokyo 187-8551, 
Japan.

The high incidence of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) in the residents of 
Hohara and Kozagawa in the Kii peninsula was reported to have disappeared by 
early 1980 with its etiology unsolved. However, we found continuous high 
incidence in Hohara that was neuropathologically characterized by ALS pathology 
associated with many neurofibrillar tangles (NFTs) similar to Guam ALS. We 
confirmed existence of neuropathologically-verified parkinsonism-dementia 
complex (PDC) identical to Guamanian PDC clinically and neuropathologically. The 
core clinical features consisted of motor neuron signs, parkinsonism and 
dementia, and patients presented with clinical manifestations of ALS, PDC or PDC 
followed by ALS. PDC predominated over ALS in incidence. Approximately 70% of 
patients had family history of ALS/PDC. Neuropathological findings of 12 cases 
revealed that they were very similar to each others, consisting of many NFTs, no 
or scanty amyloid plaques, and ALS pathology affecting the upper and lower motor 
neurons. These findings suggest that ALS and PDC may be different clinical 
manifestations of a single entity "ALS-parkinsonism-dementia complex". TDP-43 
positive inclusions were seen in the neurons of the dentate gyrus and spinal 
cord in all 6 cases examined. A comparison of age-adjusted prevalence rates in 
1967 and 1998 revealed moderate decline of ALS and marked increase of PDC in the 
latter. The age-adjusted 5-year average incidence rates during 1950 and 2000 
showed gradual decline of ALS for 50 years and dramatic increase of PDC after 
1990. These findings suggest that the clinical manifestations may have changed 
in Kii ALS/PDC as in ALS/PDC on Guam, partly because of rapid aging of the 
population. Gene analyses have so far failed to demonstrate mutations of SOD1, 
parkin, alpha-synuclein, tau, progranulin, TDP-43 and other genes related to 
dementia, parkinsonism and motor neuron disease. There have been no differences 
in drinking water and food between the residents in the high incidence area and 
those in the neighboring low incidence areas, and none of the patients had 
habits of eating the cycad, flying fox or any other odd materials. These 
findings suggest that genetic factors may be etiologically primary and 
environmental factors may modify the clinical phenotypes.

PMID: 17969346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1741. Hum Brain Mapp. 2008 Dec;29(12):1442-9. doi: 10.1002/hbm.20480.

Validation of a fully automated hippocampal segmentation method on patients with 
dementia.

Firbank MJ(1), Barber R, Burton EJ, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Wolfson Research 
Centre, Westgate Road, Newcastle upon Tyne NE4 6BE, United Kingdom. 
m.j.firbank@ncl.ac.uk

We describe a fully automated method for hippocampal segmentation. The method 
uses SPM5 (http://www.fil.ion.ucl.ac.uk/spm/) software to segment the brain into 
grey/white matter, and spatially normalize the images to standard space. Grey 
matter pixels within a predefined hippocampal region in standard space are 
identified to segment the hippocampi. The method was validated on 36 subjects (9 
each of Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, vascular dementia, and 
healthy controls). The mean absolute difference in volume compared with manual 
segmentation was 11% (SD 9%). Linear regression between manual and automated 
volume gave V(auto) = V(manual) x 0.83 + 401 ml. The method provides an 
acceptable automated alternative to manual segmentation which may be of value in 
large studies.

Copyright 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/hbm.20480
PMCID: PMC6871146
PMID: 17979118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1742. Maturitas. 2007 Dec 20;58(4):327-39. doi: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2007.09.011. Epub 
2007 Nov 5.

Functional foods and physical activities in health promotion of aging people.

Ferrari CK(1).

Author information:
(1)Faculdades Integradas de Bauru, R. Rodolfina Dias Domingues Quadra 11, Quinta 
Ranieri, 17056-100 Bauru, SP, Brazil. ferrariphd@yahoo.com.br

Foods contain many bioactive compounds that can improve humans' health, helping 
to decrease the risk of cataract, macular degeneration, cardiovascular and 
neurological diseases, osteoporosis, and cancer. Regular practice of exercise 
and physical activity could also help to drive away aging-associated diseases 
(obesity, osteoporosis, type 2 diabetes, hypertension, Alzheimer's disease, 
Parkinson's disease, dementia, and stroke). Exercise recommendations to promote 
both women's and men's health and disease conditions that hinder exercise 
practice are described. Health promotion practices should focus on both dietary 
intake of functional foods and regular practice of exercise within the framework 
of a healthy lifestyle.

DOI: 10.1016/j.maturitas.2007.09.011
PMID: 17980978 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1743. J Neural Transm Suppl. 2007;(72):91-104. doi: 10.1007/978-3-211-73574-9_12.

Morphological substrates of parkinsonism with and without dementia: a 
retrospective clinico-pathological study.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

A retrospective study of a 50-year autopsy series of 900 patients with the 
clinical diagnosis of parkinsonism (31.2% with dementia) revealed pure Lewy body 
disease (LBD) in 84.9%, but only 44.7% with idiopathic Parkinson disease (PD); 
16% were associated with cerebrovascular lesions, 14.8% with Alzheimer 
pathology; 8.9% were classified dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 9.4% showed 
other degenerative disorders, and 5.6% other/ secondary parkinsonian syndromes. 
The frequency of LBD during different periods was fairly stable, with increase 
of DLB and PD plus Alzheimer changes, but decrease of associated cerebrovascular 
lesions during the last decades. Using variable clinical diagnostic criteria not 
only by specified neurologists, the misdiagnosis rate ranged from 11.5 to 23% 
and was similar to that in most previous clinico-pathological studies. The 
majority of cases with false clinical diagnosis of PD had a final pathological 
diagnosis of DLB with or without Alzheimer lesions. A postmortem series of 330 
elderly patients clinically diagnosed as parkinsonism with (37.6%) and without 
dementia showed that IPD, Braak stages 3-5 were rarely associated with cognitive 
impairment, which was frequently seen in IPD with associated Alzheimer pathology 
(35.5%), DLB (33.9%), and in Alzheimer disease (AD) or mixed dementia (17%), 
whereas it almost never was associated with minor cerebrovascular lesions. 
Clinico-pathological studies in DBL, demented and nondemented PD, and AD cases 
showed a negative relation between cognitive impairment and Alzheimer changes, 
suggesting that these either alone or in combination with cortical Lewy body 
pathologies are major causes of cognitive dysfunction. Further prospective 
clinico-pathological studies are needed to validate the currently used clinical 
criteria for PD, to increase the diagnostic accuracy until effective biomarkers 
are available, and to clarify the impact of structural and functional changes on 
cognitive function in parkinsonism as an ultimate goal of early disease 
detection and effective treatment.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-211-73574-9_12
PMID: 17982882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1744. Neurology. 2007 Nov 6;69(19):1843-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000278114.14096.74.

REM sleep behavior disorder predicts cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease 
without dementia.

Vendette M(1), Gagnon JF, Décary A, Massicotte-Marquez J, Postuma RB, Doyon J, 
Panisset M, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)CRCPC, Centre d'Etude du Sommeil et des Rythmes Biologiques, Hôpital du 
Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, 5400 Boul. Gouin Ouest, Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2008 Sep 16;71(12):955; author reply 955-6.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the relationship between the presence of REM sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) and the cognitive profile of nondemented patients with Parkinson 
disease (PD).
BACKGROUND: Cognitive impairment is an important nonmotor symptom in PD. Waking 
EEG slowing in nondemented PD has been related to the presence of RBD, a 
parasomnia affecting brainstem structures and frequently reported in PD. For 
this reason, RBD may be associated with cognitive impairment in PD.
METHODS: Thirty-four patients with PD (18 patients with 
polysomnographic-confirmed RBD and 16 patients without RBD) and 25 healthy 
control subjects matched for age and educational level underwent sleep 
laboratory recordings and a comprehensive neuropsychological assessment.
RESULTS: Patients with PD and concomitant RBD showed significantly poorer 
performance on standardized tests measuring episodic verbal memory, executive 
functions, as well as visuospatial and visuoperceptual processing compared to 
both patients with PD without RBD and control subjects. Patients with PD without 
RBD had no detectable cognitive impairment compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: This study shows that cognitive impairment in nondemented patients 
with Parkinson disease (PD) is closely related to the presence of REM sleep 
behavior disorder, a sleep disturbance that was not controlled for in previous 
studies assessing cognitive deficits in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000278114.14096.74
PMID: 17984452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1745. Acta Neuropathol. 2008 Apr;115(4):445-51. doi: 10.1007/s00401-007-0313-7. Epub 
2007 Nov 6.

Reduced striatal tyrosine hydroxylase in incidental Lewy body disease.

Beach TG(1), Adler CH, Sue LI, Peirce JB, Bachalakuri J, Dalsing-Hernandez JE, 
Lue LF, Caviness JN, Connor DJ, Sabbagh MN, Walker DG.

Author information:
(1)Sun Health Research Institute, 10515 West Santa Fe Drive, Sun City, AZ 85351, 
USA. thomas.beach@sunhealth.org

Incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) is the term used when Lewy bodies are found 
in the nervous system of subjects without clinically documented parkinsonism or 
dementia. The prevalence of ILBD in the elderly population has been estimated at 
between 3.8 and 30%, depending on subject age and anatomical site of sampling. 
It has been speculated that ILBD represents the preclinical stage of Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and/or dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Studies of ILBD could 
potentially identify early diagnostic signs of these disorders. At present, 
however, it is impossible to know whether ILBD is a precursor to PD or DLB or is 
just a benign finding of normal aging. We hypothesized that, if ILBD represents 
an early stage of PD or DLB, it should be associated with depletion of striatal 
dopaminergic markers. Eleven subjects with ILBD and 27 control subjects were 
studied. The ILBD subjects ranged in age from 74 to 96 years (mean 86.5) while 
the control subjects' age ranged from 75 to 102 years (mean 86.7). Controls and 
subjects did not differ in terms of age, postmortem interval, gender 
distribution, medical history conditions, brain weight, neuritic plaque density 
or Braak neurofibrillary stage. Quantitative ELISA measurement of striatal 
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH), the principal enzyme for dopamine synthesis, showed a 
49.8% (P = 0.01) reduction in ILBD cases, as compared with control cases. The 
finding suggests that ILBD is not a benign condition but is likely a precursor 
to PD and/or DLB.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-007-0313-7
PMCID: PMC2724592
PMID: 17985144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1746. Pathol Int. 2007 Dec;57(12):775-83. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2007.02173.x.

Brain tissue microarrays in neurodegenerative diseases: validation of 
methodology and immunohistochemical study of growth-associated protein-43 and 
calretinin.

Takei H(1), Buckleair LW, Rivera A, Powell SZ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, The Methodist Hospital, Houston, Texas, USA. 
HMTakei@tmhs.org

A tissue microarray (TMA) was constructed using 47 neurodegenerative diseases 
(NDD), including Alzheimer's disease (AD; n = 30) and non-AD NDD (n = 17), and 
from seven controls. For validation of the methodology, the following three 
immunostains were used. Tau and beta-amyloid-related pathologies were more 
significantly recognized in tauopathies/AD compared to non-tauopathies/controls, 
and these results were comparable to the assessment of the whole brain sections. 
But no alpha-synuclein pathologies were observed despite five cases of dementia 
with Lewy bodies. It was concluded that the TMA technique is useful for NDD with 
diffuse pathological processes but not for those with patchy and occasional 
lesions or in early stages. Growth-associated protein (GAP)-43 and calretinin 
were also immunostained. A significant reduction in GAP-43 expression was seen 
in the frontal lobe and hippocampus in AD compared to non-AD cases, but not in 
other areas. No significant difference in number of anticalretinin 
immunoreactive neurons or in density of immunoreactive neurites was observed 
between any of the NDD and controls, which may indicate that calretinin-positive 
neurons are spared in the degenerative process. These results are compatible 
with the previous studies. These analyses were performed rapidly in a large 
number of cases using a single slide under uniform staining conditions.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2007.02173.x
PMID: 17988278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1747. Curr Med Res Opin. 2007 Dec;23(12):3199-204. doi: 10.1185/030079908X253438.

Rivastigmine exposure provided by a transdermal patch versus capsules.

Mercier F(1), Lefèvre G, Huang HL, Schmidli H, Amzal B, Appel-Dingemanse S.

Author information:
(1)Novartis Pharma AG, Basel, Switzerland. francois.mercier@novartis.com

OBJECTIVES: The rivastigmine transdermal patch is the first transdermal 
treatment for Alzheimer's disease (AD) and dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease. The objective of this study was to evaluate the pharmacokinetics of 
rivastigmine following transdermal delivery by a patch versus oral delivery with 
conventional capsules in a population of AD patients.
METHODS: Both non-compartmental and compartmental analyses were performed on the 
same database showing relatively large inter-patient variations in 
pharmacokinetic parameters (up to 73% for the capsule group). The compartmental 
analysis provided model-based predictions of pharmacokinetic parameters, with 
the aim of comparing the two modes of administration when adjusting for 
confounding factors such as patient body weight and gender.
RESULTS: According to both non-compartmental and compartmental analyses, the 
patch provided significantly lower peak rivastigmine plasma concentrations 
(C(max)) and slower times to C(max) (t(max)), compared with capsules. However, 
drug exposure (area under the curve; AUC) was not significantly different 
between the 4.6 mg/24 hour (5 cm(2)) patch and 3 mg BID (6 mg/day) capsule 
doses, or between the 9.5 mg/24 hour (10 cm(2)) patch and 6 mg BID (12 mg/day) 
capsule doses, according to both analyses. This suggests comparable exposure 
from these two rivastigmine delivery systems.
CONCLUSION: The analyses were consistent with previous reports of a markedly 
less fluctuating, more continuous drug delivery with the rivastigmine patch. 
This characteristic delivery profile is associated with similar efficacy yet 
improved tolerability, compared with capsules.

DOI: 10.1185/030079908X253438
PMID: 18001519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1748. J Nucl Med Technol. 2007 Dec;35(4):232-6. doi: 10.2967/jnmt.107.040238. Epub 
2007 Nov 15.

123I-FP-CIT SPECT imaging of dopamine transporters in patients with recurrent 
sudden falls: are such falls a distinct entity?

Djaldetti R(1), Treves TA, Ziv I, Melamed E, Lorberboym M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Rabin Medical Center, 4 Kaplan Street, Petah Tiqwa 
41900, Israel.

Recurrent falls in older people are commonly associated with abnormalities that 
involve several parts of the central nervous system, especially with basal 
ganglion pathology. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the integrity 
of striatal dopamine transporters (DaTs) by use of 
(123)I-N-3-fluoropropyl-2beta-carbomethoxy-3beta-(4-iodophenyl)tropane 
((123)I-FP-CIT) SPECT of striatal DaTs in patients with recurrent sudden falls.
METHODS: Twenty-one patients without a definite neurologic diagnosis for 
recurrent sudden falls were enrolled in a cross-sectional study. SPECT with a 
DaT ligand was performed 180 min after injection of 185 MBq of (123)I-FP-CIT 
with a dual-head gamma-camera.
RESULTS: DaT SPECT findings were normal in 15 of 21 patients (71%). Of those, 
73% had abnormal MRI findings suggestive of atherosclerotic lesions. Eleven 
patients with normal DaT SPECT findings had mild parkinsonian symptoms. There 
was no correlation of the SPECT results with patient age, duration of occurrence 
of falls, or frequency of falls, and there was no significant difference in the 
relative distributions of SPECT findings between patients with and patients 
without parkinsonian symptoms or vascular risk factors.
CONCLUSION: Recurrent sudden falls are, in most cases, not attributable to the 
degeneration of the nigrostriatal system.

DOI: 10.2967/jnmt.107.040238
PMID: 18006592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1749. Rev Esp Med Nucl. 2007 Nov-Dec;26(6):375-84. doi: 10.1157/13112366.

[Effectiveness of 123I-ioflupane (DaTSCAN) in the diagnosis of Parkinsonian 
syndromes. A systematic review].

[Article in Spanish]

Puñal Riobóo J(1), Varela Lema L, Serena Puig A, Ruano-Ravina A.

Author information:
(1)Agencia de Evaluación de Tecnologías Sanitarias de Galicia (avalia-t). 
Consellería de Sanidade. Xunta de Galicia. Santiago de Compostela. A Coruña. 
España.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson disease (PD) is the second most frequent neurodegenerative 
disease, affecting the 1-2 % of the population over 65. Around 20-24 % of 
diagnosed patients are estimated to be misdiagnosed. The aim of this paper is to 
assess the efficacy of DaTSCAN in the diagnosis of early PD and to determine the 
efficacy of 123I-FP in the differential diagnosis of vascular parkinsonism, 
drug-induced parkinsonism, essential tremor, Lewy body dementia (LBD) and 
Alzheimer disease (AD).
METHODS: Systematic review. Two independent investigators reviewed and selected 
the papers according to predefined selection criteria. The quality of the 
original studies was assessed using one specifically designed scale.
RESULTS: Eleven original articles were included. No randomized clinical trials 
were found. Three papers assessed the effect of DaTSCAN in medication of 
patients and found that 17 to 69 % of the patients treatment changed after 
SPECT. Six studies assessed the change in the diagnosis for patients with 
parkinsonian syndromes after SPECT. Four of them showed that 123I-FP could be 
useful for the differential diagnosis between PD and non-degenerative disorders. 
One observed that ioflupane could help differentiate between PD and AD and 
between this last disease and LBD. The other investigation group showed that 
DaTSCAN could help in the differential diagnosis between PD and parkinsonian 
syndromes such as multisystem atrophy (MSA) and progressive supranuclear palsy 
(PSP).
CONCLUSIONS: The scientific evidence available indicates that 123I-FP can be 
useful to differentiate PD from essential tremor and vascular and drug-induced 
parkinsonism, and also to differentiate AD from LBD.

DOI: 10.1157/13112366
PMID: 18021694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1750. Sleep Med. 2008 Jul;9(5):473-4. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2007.10.002. Epub 2007 Nov 
19.

Autonomic dysfunction in RBD--what can it teach us about disease progression?

Postuma RB, Gagnon JF, Montplaisir J.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2007.10.002
PMID: 18024175 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1751. Neurology. 2007 Nov 20;69(21):1982-9. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000279339.87987.d7.

A population-based study of mortality in essential tremor.

Louis ED(1), Benito-León J, Ottman R, Bermejo-Pareja F; Neurological Disorders 
in Central Spain (NEDICES) Study Group.

Author information:
(1)G.H. Sergievsky Center and Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. EDL2@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Although data are sparse, people with essential tremor (ET) are 
usually assumed to have mortality rates similar to those in the general 
population. Because ET is common, particularly among older adults, an influence 
of ET on the life span would have important public health implications. The 
authors compared the risks of mortality in patients with ET and control subjects 
without ET.
METHODS: A prospective, population-based design was used to compare the risk of 
mortality in participants with ET vs controls in three communities in central 
Spain. Participants were evaluated at baseline (1994 to 1995) and at follow-up 3 
years later (1997 to 1998). The relative risk (RR) of mortality (ET vs controls) 
was estimated using Cox proportional hazards models that excluded participants 
with Parkinson disease or dementia.
RESULTS: Mean baseline age was 73.5 +/- 6.4 years. There were 33 (16.4%) deaths 
among 201 ET cases and 465 (13.9%) among 3,337 controls. In an unadjusted Cox 
model, risk of mortality was increased in ET (RR = 1.59, 95% CI = 1.11 to 2.27, 
p = 0.01). In a Cox model that adjusted for baseline age, gender, educational 
category, current ethanol drinking, use of antidepressant medication, and 
community, RR = 1.45, 95% CI = 1.01 to 2.08, p = 0.04. In an adjusted Cox model 
restricted to persons with longer (>3 years) follow-up, RR = 4.69 (95% CI = 2.18 
to 10.07, p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: In this longitudinal, prospective study, the risk of mortality was 
increased in essential tremor. Additional studies of incident cases are needed 
to confirm these results.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000279339.87987.d7
PMID: 18025392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1752. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2007 Sep-Oct;41(5):388-94.

The role of NAT2 gene polymorphism in aetiology of the most frequent 
neurodegenerative diseases with dementia.

Gołab-Janowska M(1), Honczarenko K, Gawrońska-Szklarz B, Potemkowski A.

Author information:
(1)Samodzielny Publiczny Szpital Kliniczny Nr 1 Pomorskiej Akademii Medycznej w 
Szczecinie, Poland. glissanda1@poczta.onet.pl

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The role of N-acetyltransferase gene (NAT2) polymorphism 
in the aetiology of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) is an 
interesting issue; it is suggested that the slow acetylator genotype favours the 
damage of central nervous system cells by environmental toxins. The aims of the 
study were: 1) to determine the genotype of NAT2 in patients with sporadic PD 
with dementia and in patients with sporadic AD; 2) to evaluate the relationship 
between the genotype of NAT2 and the age at the onset of the disease, the extent 
of dementia, and the dose and side effects of L-dopa (in PD patients only); 3) 
to evaluate the predispositions to PD and AD.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Fifty two PD patients with dementia aged 51-82 years 
(mean: 70.35) and 53 AD patients aged 58-84 years (mean: 72.58) were recruited. 
The control group consisted of 90 healthy subjects aged 65-86 years (mean: 
72.11). Four standardized instruments for evaluation of dementia in PD patients 
were used. Clinical scales for PD evaluation were used. Each AD patient 
satisfied the National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and 
Stroke/Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria for 
probable AD. Methods of molecular biology were used for genetic studies.
RESULTS: The NAT2*5/NAT2*5 genotype was more frequent in PD patients with 
dementia; the NAT2*4/NAT2*5 genotype was more frequent and the NAT2*4/NAT2*6 
genotype was less frequent in AD patients. No relationship was found between 
genotypes and NAT2 alleles and the age at onset, severity of dementia or with 
the dose and side effects of L-dopa (in PD patients).
CONCLUSIONS: The analysis of NAT2 polymorphism does not seem to be useful in 
predicting the risk of PD with dementia or AD.

PMID: 18033638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1753. Biomed Khim. 2007 Jul-Aug;53(4):351-72.

[Free radical processes in aging, neurodegenerative diseases and other 
pathological states].

[Article in Russian]

Dubinina EE, Pustygina AV.

Literature data on the role of oxidative stress in the aging of an organism have 
been summarized. The connection of some parameters of free radical processes 
(intensity of generation of reactive oxygen species in mitochondria, oxidative 
modification to the mitochondrial DNA, the activity of desaturases participating 
in biosynthesis of polyunsaturated C20 and C22 fatty acids) with life expectancy 
has been demonstrated. Oxidative stress is one of pathogenetical events in many 
diseases, including various neurodegenerative disorders. The special attention 
is paid to oxidatively modified proteins as one of early and reliable indicators 
of tissue injury in freeradical pathology. Oxidative protein destruction plays 
an important role in etiology of such neurodegenerative diseases, as Alzheimer's 
and Parkinson's diseases. Oxidative stress and the aggregation of proteins 
connected with it are considered to be a pathogenetical part in the development 
of familial amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Oxidatively modified proteins are 
also associated with the development of cataract. The increase of the oxidatized 
protein ratio with the age and in various pathologies is assessed as an early 
and specific parameter of oxidative stress.

PMID: 18035718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1754. Prostaglandins Leukot Essent Fatty Acids. 2007 Nov-Dec;77(5-6):287-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.plefa.2007.10.019. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Neuroprotective action of omega-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids against 
neurodegenerative diseases: evidence from animal studies.

Calon F(1), Cole G.

Author information:
(1)Molecular Endocrinology and Oncology Research Centre, Centre Hospitalier de 
l'Université Laval Research Centre (CHUL), 2705 Laurier Blvd, Quebec, Canada. 
frederic.calon@crchul.ulaval.ca

Studies in animals clearly show that oral intake of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA) 
can alter brain DHA concentrations and thereby modify brain functions. This 
provides us with an opportunity to use DHA as a nutraceutical or pharmaceutical 
tool in brain disorders such as Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease 
(PD). Most of the published epidemiological studies are consistent with a 
positive association between high reported DHA consumption or high DHA blood 
levels and a lower risk of developing AD later in life. Such observations have 
prompted the investigation of DHA in three different transgenic models of AD. 
These analyses show that animal models of AD are more vulnerable to DHA 
depletion than controls and that DHA exerts a beneficial effect against 
pathological signs of AD, including A beta accumulation, cognitive impairment, 
synaptic marker loss, and hyperphosphorylation of tau. Multiple mechanisms of 
action can be associated with the neuroprotective effects of DHA and include 
antioxidant properties and activation of distinct cell signaling pathways. 
Although the first randomized clinical assays have yet failed to demonstrate 
convincing beneficial effects of DHA for AD patients, the knowledge gathered in 
recent years holds out a hope for prevention and suggests that the elderly and 
people bearing a genetic risk for AD should at least avoid DHA deficiency.

DOI: 10.1016/j.plefa.2007.10.019
PMID: 18037281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1755. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2009 Jan-Feb;48(1):58-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2007.10.003. Epub 2007 Nov 26.

Characteristics of clock drawing test (CDT) errors by the dementia type: 
quantitative and qualitative analyses.

Lee AY(1), Kim JS, Choi BH, Sohn EH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chungnam University Hospital, 640 Daesa-dong, 
Joong-ku, Daejon 301-721, Republic of Korea. aelee@cnu.ac.kr

We wanted to define the characteristics of errors on the clock drawing test 
(CDT) and we also wanted to determine their value for making the early diagnosis 
of dementia, so the performance of patients with three types of dementia on the 
four CDT was evaluated. The patients with subcortical vascular dementia (VaD) 
and patients with Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) had more stimulus 
bound responses. Patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) made significantly more 
conceptual deficit (CD) errors. The CD correlated with the severity of dementia 
and it could be detected in the early and mild stage of dementia. Qualitative 
and quantitative analyses of the errors on the CDT might be useful for making 
the early differential diagnosis of dementia types.

DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2007.10.003
PMID: 18037511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1756. Annu Rev Pathol. 2008;3:41-66. doi: 10.1146/annurev.pathmechdis.2.010506.092044.

The aging brain.

Yankner BA(1), Lu T, Loerch P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. 
bruce_yankner@hms.harvard.edu

Aging is accompanied by cognitive decline in a major segment of the population 
and is the primary risk factor for Alzheimer's disease and other prevalent 
neurodegenerative disorders. Despite this central role in disease pathogenesis 
and morbidity, the aging of the brain has not been well understood at a 
molecular level. This review seeks to integrate what is known about age-related 
cognitive and neuroanatomical changes with recent advances in understanding 
basic molecular mechanisms that underlie aging. An important issue is how normal 
brain aging transitions to pathological aging, giving rise to neurodegenerative 
disorders. Toxic protein aggregates have been identified as potential 
contributory factors, including amyloid beta-protein in Alzheimer's disease, tau 
in frontotemporal dementia, and alpha-synuclein in Parkinson's disease. However, 
current models of pathogenesis do not explain the origin of the common sporadic 
forms of these diseases or address the critical nexus between aging and disease. 
This review discusses potential approaches to unifying the systems biology of 
the aging brain with the pathogenesis of neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.pathmechdis.2.010506.092044
PMID: 18039130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1757. ScientificWorldJournal. 2007 Nov 12;7:1768-76. doi: 10.1100/tsw.2007.269.

Traumatic brain injury and delayed sequelae: a review--traumatic brain injury 
and mild traumatic brain injury (concussion) are precursors to later-onset brain 
disorders, including early-onset dementia.

Kiraly M(1), Kiraly SJ.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, University of Toronto. kiraly@shaw.ca

Brain injuries are too common. Most people are unaware of the incidence of and 
horrendous consequences of traumatic brain injury (TBI) and mild traumatic brain 
injury (MTBI). Research and the advent of sophisticated imaging have led to 
progression in the understanding of brain pathophysiology following TBI. Seminal 
evidence from animal and human experiments demonstrate links between TBI and the 
subsequent onset of premature, psychiatric syndromes and neurodegenerative 
diseases, including Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Objectives of this summary are, therefore, to instill appreciation regarding the 
importance of brain injury prevention, diagnosis, and treatment, and to increase 
awareness regarding the long-term delayed consequences following TBI.

DOI: 10.1100/tsw.2007.269
PMCID: PMC5901335
PMID: 18040539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1758. Eur J Neurol. 2008 Jan;15(1):61-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02001.x. Epub 
2007 Nov 27.

(99m)Tc-ethyl cysteinate dimer brain SPECT findings in early stage of dementia 
with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease patients: a correlation with 
neuropsychological tests.

Chang CC(1), Liu JS, Chang YY, Chang WN, Chen SS, Lee CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Chang Gung Memorial Hospital-Kaohsiung Medical 
Center and Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Kaohsiung, Taiwan. 
neur099@adm.cgmh.org.tw

We examined clinical presentations, neuropsychological findings, and perfusion 
patterns of (99m)Tc-ethyl cysteinate dimer (ECD) single photon emission computed 
tomography (SPECT) in patients with early stage dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
(n = 17) and Parkinson's disease (PD) (n = 16), with age-matched healthy 
controls (n = 10). Seven paired regions of interest (ROIs) were drawn manually 
including inferior frontal, temporal, parietal, occipital, parieto-occipital 
junction, striatum and thalamus for semiquantitative measurement. 
Neuropsychological tests were applied for clinical correlation. The SPECT 
results showed significant hypoperfusion in DLB group in frontal, parietal, 
thalamus, temporal ROIs compared with controls (P < 0.01) whilst signals in 
temporal areas was significantly reduced compared with PD group (P < 0.05). 
Neuropsychological tests showed that DLB patients had deficits in mental 
manipulation, short-term memory, abstract thinking, drawing and semantic verbal 
fluencies (P < 0.05, compared with control). In addition, DLB group had lower 
scores than those with PD in mental manipulation, drawing and semantic verbal 
fluency (P < 0.05). Our study showed that even in early stages of DLB, 
neuropsychological and perfusion patterns were evident and may be different from 
PD group, despite they shared certain similarities both in neuropsychological 
and image findings compared with age-matched controls.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02001.x
PMID: 18042240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1759. Neuroepidemiology. 2007;29(3-4):193-200. doi: 10.1159/000111582. Epub 2007 Nov 
27.

Gait variability is associated with subclinical brain vascular abnormalities in 
high-functioning older adults.

Rosano C(1), Brach J, Studenski S, Longstreth WT Jr, Newman AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Graduate School of Public Health, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15213, USA. rosanoc@edc.pitt.edu

BACKGROUND: Gait variability is an index of how much gait parameters, such as 
step length, change from one step to the next. Gait variability increases with 
age and in individuals affected by cortical and subcortical neurodegenerative 
conditions, and it is associated with falls and incident mobility disability. 
The brain anatomical correlates of gait variability have not been studied in 
high-functioning community-dwelling older adults.
METHODS: Gait variability and brain MRIs were assessed in a cohort of 331 men 
and women (mean age = 78.3 years) free from stroke, dementia or Parkinson's 
disease. Gait variability was computed for spatial parameters (step length and 
step width) and for temporal parameters (stance time). Subclinical brain 
vascular abnormalities were measured on brain MRIs as infarcts and white matter 
hyperintensities.
RESULTS: Greater variability of step length was associated with greater 
prevalence of infarcts, including infarcts in the basal ganglia, and with 
greater white matter hyperintensities severity, independent of age, gender, 
cognitive function and cardiovascular disease. Weaker associations were found 
between the other variability measures and the MRI measures.
CONCLUSION: In this group of older adults free from neurodegenerative diseases, 
a greater variability of step length was associated with greater burden of 
subclinical brain vascular abnormalities as defined by MRI.

(c) 2007 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000111582
PMCID: PMC2824582
PMID: 18043004 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1760. Brain Nerve. 2007 Nov;59(11):1265-71.

[Demographic characteristics of RBD patients at a sleep center--with special 
emphasis on neurodegenerative diseases as the background condition].

[Article in Japanese]

Okura M(1), Taniguchi M, Sugita H, Ohi M, Tachibana N.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Medical Center, Osaka Kaisei Hospital, 1-6-10 Miyahara, Yodogawa-ku, 
Osaka 532-0003, Japan.

REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is characterized by loss of normal REM sleep 
skeletal muscle atonia, resulting in complex motor behaviors associated with 
dream mentation. Reports have been accumulated showing an association of RBD and 
neurodegenerative diseases. However, in Japan, no data has been available about 
demographic features of RBD in a large patient population. We describe 
demographic characteristics of RBD patients presenting to our sleep center with 
special emphasis on association of RBD and neurodegenerative diseases.
METHODS: The subjects were consecutive 10,745 patients who presented with sleep 
and/or wake problems at our sleep center from April 1998 to March 2006. 
Diagnosis of RBD was made based on ICSD-2 criteria. Medical and sleep histories 
with complementary information from family members, and findings of neurological 
examination were assessed retrospectively from the notes of RBD patients.
RESULTS: Sixty-seven patients (0.6%) were diagnosed as having RBD. There was 
strong male predominancy (85.1%). The onset of RBD symptoms was at 61.4+/-8.8 
years of age. Neurological symptoms and signs were present in twelve (17.9 % of 
RBD patients) when they firstly came to our sleep center: 4 patients with 
Parkinson disease, 4 with multiple system atrophy and 1 with probable dementia 
with Lewy body. Thirteen patients (43.3%) were aware of olfactory impairment 
when inquired (out of 30 patients). Clonazepam was administered in 29 patients, 
and 21 (72.4%) responded well.
CONCLUSION: Our study showed the similar demographic characteristics of RBD to 
what was shown in the previous large case series. Although the association 
between RBD and neurodegenerative diseases was not so strong in our cases, it 
may be mainly because our sleep center was not run in the domain of neurology 
department and we could not vigorously detect the possible coexistence of 
neurodegenerative disease. The pathogenesis of RBD is still unclear; therefore, 
neurologists and sleep specialists need to collaborate in following up RBD 
patients to confirm whether they are at higher risk for developing a 
neurodegenerative disease.

PMID: 18044204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1761. Mov Disord. 2008 Jan 30;23(2):297-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.21837.

A comparison of the mini mental state exam to the Montreal cognitive assessment 
in identifying cognitive deficits in Parkinson's disease.

Zadikoff C(1), Fox SH, Tang-Wai DF, Thomsen T, de Bie RM, Wadia P, Miyasaki J, 
Duff-Canning S, Lang AE, Marras C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Northwestern University, Parkinson's Disease and 
Movement Disorders Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Dementia is an important and increasingly recognized problem in Parkinson's 
disease (PD). The mini-mental state examination (MMSE) often fails to detect 
early cognitive decline. The Montreal cognitive assessment (MoCA) is a brief 
tool developed to detect mild cognitive impairment that assesses a broader range 
of domains frequently affected in PD. The scores on the MMSE and the MoCA were 
compared in 88 patients with PD. A pronounced ceiling effect was observed with 
the MMSE but not with the MoCA. The range and standard deviation of scores was 
larger with the MoCA(7-30, 4.26) than with the MMSE(16-30, 2.55). The percentage 
of subjects scoring below a cutoff of 26/30 (used by others to detect mild 
cognitive impairment) was higher on the MoCA (32%) than on the MMSE (11%) (P < 
0.000002). Compared to the MMSE, the MoCA may be a more sensitive tool to 
identify early cognitive impairment in PD.

2007 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21837
PMID: 18044697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1762. J Neurosci. 2007 Nov 28;27(48):13092-7. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4244-07.2007.

Enhanced accumulation of phosphorylated alpha-synuclein and elevated 
beta-amyloid 42/40 ratio caused by expression of the presenilin-1 deltaT440 
mutant associated with familial Lewy body disease and variant Alzheimer's 
disease.

Kaneko H(1), Kakita A, Kasuga K, Nozaki H, Ishikawa A, Miyashita A, Kuwano R, 
Ito G, Iwatsubo T, Takahashi H, Nishizawa M, Onodera O, Sisodia SS, Ikeuchi T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Center for Bioresources, Niigata 
University, Niigata 951-8585, Japan.

Mutations in the PSEN1 gene encoding presenilin 1 (PS1) are linked to a vast 
majority of pedigrees with early-onset, autosomal dominant forms of familial 
Alzheimer's disease (FAD). Lewy body (LB) pathology is frequently found in the 
brains of FAD patients harboring PSEN1 mutations. We recently reported on a 
novel PS1 mutation with the deletion of threonine at codon 440 (deltaT440) in a 
familial case diagnosed as having the neocortical type of dementia with LBs 
(DLB) and variant AD. In this report, we investigated the possible involvement 
of PS1 deltaT440 mutation in aberrant alpha-synuclein accumulation. We 
established cell lines that stably express either wild-type (WT) PS1 or the 
FAD-linked PS1 H163R, E280A, deltaE9, and PS1 deltaT440 mutants and now 
demonstrate that the expression of the PS1 deltaT440 mutant led to a marked 
elevation in the ratio of beta-amyloid (Abeta) 42/40 peptides in a conditioned 
medium. More importantly, we report here that the levels of phosphorylated 
alpha-synuclein increase in neuronal and non-neuronal cells expressing the PS1 
deltaT440 mutant compared with cells that express WT PS1 or the PS1 H163R and 
E280A variants that are not associated with LB pathology. This finding is 
consistent with our demonstration of elevated levels of phosphorylated 
alpha-synuclein in the detergent-resistant fraction prepared from a patient's 
brain with PS1 deltaT440 mutation. These observations raise the intriguing 
suggestion that the mechanism(s) by which the PS1 deltaT440 mutant causes DLB 
and variant AD are by enhancing the phosphorylation of alpha-synuclein and the 
ratio of Abeta(42/40) peptides, respectively, in the brain.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4244-07.2007
PMCID: PMC6673391
PMID: 18045903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1763. Biomark Med. 2007 Dec;1(4):487-90. doi: 10.2217/17520363.1.4.487.

Diagnostic potential of saccadometry in progressive supranuclear palsy.

Antoniades CA(1), Bak TH, Carpenter RH, Hodges JR, Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)University of Cambridge, Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of 
Clinical Neurosciences, Forvie Site, Cambridge, CB2 2PY, UK. ca314@cam.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), an atypical parkinsonian 
syndrome characterized by extrapyramidal features, imbalance, supranuclear gaze 
paresis and dementia, can be difficult to diagnose, especially in the early 
stages. From the clinician's point of view, the main difficulty with this 
disorder is the inability to provide an accurate diagnosis, at least for the 
initial stages of the disease, where symptoms are often confused with other 
parkinsonian disorders. This inability complicates the recruitment of patients 
with early-stage parkinsonism to trials of disease-modifying therapy.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether quantitative, objective examination of saccadic 
latency distributions can help to distinguish PSP patients from other groups of 
parkinsonian patients.
MATERIALS & METHODS: We used a newly developed portable saccadometer to compare 
saccadic latency distributions of a group of PSP patients with two other groups 
in whom the initial differential diagnosis included PSP: one of these groups had 
Parkinson's disease and the other had developed a range of parkinsonian 
conditions (multiple system atrophy, dementia with Lewy bodies and corticobasal 
degeneration).
RESULTS: The use of a combination of saccadic parameters provided a greater 
discriminative power than the use of only one parameter, such as median latency. 
Statistical analysis and parameterization of the distributions robustly 
distinguished the three groups.
CONCLUSIONS: This approach appears to have considerable diagnostic potential in 
allowing a more accurate diagnosis of PSP, and may help particularly to 
eliminate misdiagnosis with other parkinsonian conditions.

DOI: 10.2217/17520363.1.4.487
PMID: 20477368


1764. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Jan;21(1):172-88. doi: 10.1021/tx700210j. Epub 2007 Dec 
4.

Oxidative stress and neurotoxicity.

Sayre LM(1), Perry G, Smith MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA. LMS3@case.edu

There is increasing awareness of the ubiquitous role of oxidative stress in 
neurodegenerative disease states. A continuing challenge is to be able to 
distinguish between oxidative changes that occur early in the disease from those 
that are secondary manifestations of neuronal degeneration. This perspective 
highlights the role of oxidative stress in Alzheimer's, Parkinson's, and 
Huntington's diseases, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and multiple sclerosis, 
neurodegenerative and neuroinflammatory disorders where there is evidence for a 
primary contribution of oxidative stress in neuronal death, as opposed to other 
diseases where oxidative stress more likely plays a secondary or by-stander 
role. We begin with a brief review of the biochemistry of oxidative stress as it 
relates to mechanisms that lead to cell death, and why the central nervous 
system is particularly susceptible to such mechanisms. Following a review of 
oxidative stress involvement in individual disease states, some conclusions are 
provided as to what further research should hope to accomplish in the field.

DOI: 10.1021/tx700210j
PMID: 18052107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1765. Mitochondrion. 2008 Mar;8(2):109-16. doi: 10.1016/j.mito.2007.09.002. Epub 2007 
Oct 9.

The contribution of mitochondrial dysfunction to a gene-environment model of 
Guamanian ALS and PD.

Lynch D(1), Wanglund C, Spathis R, Chan CW, Reiff DM, Lum JK, Garruto RM.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biomedical Anthropology and Neurosciences, State University of 
New York, PO Box 6000, Binghamton, NY 13902-6000, USA.

Scientific investigations of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD) of Guam have implicated genetic and environmental 
risk factors in their etiology. Using brain tissue, we investigated 
mitochondrial dysfunction and report a higher frequency of somatic mutations in 
the light strand promoter (LSP) of the mitochondrial control region in Guam ALS 
and PD patients than in Guam controls, along with the presence of inherited 
mutations that may contribute to a novel gene-environment interaction risk 
model. Along with other risk factors, they demonstrate both the importance and 
significance of genetic and environmental contributions to Guam ALS and PD 
etiology.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mito.2007.09.002
PMID: 18054291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1766. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Mar 1;17(5):759-67. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddm348. Epub 2007 Dec 
6.

Evidence that common variation in NEDD9 is associated with susceptibility to 
late-onset Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease.

Li Y(1), Grupe A, Rowland C, Holmans P, Segurado R, Abraham R, Jones L, Catanese 
J, Ross D, Mayo K, Martinez M, Hollingworth P, Goate A, Cairns NJ, Racette BA, 
Perlmutter JS, O'Donovan MC, Morris JC, Brayne C, Rubinsztein DC, Lovestone S, 
Thal LJ, Owen MJ, Williams J.

Author information:
(1)Celera, 1401 Harbor Bay Parkway, Alameda, CA 94502, USA.

Late-onset Alzheimer's disease (LOAD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are the most 
common neurodegenerative disorders and in both diseases susceptibility is known 
to be influenced by genes. We set out to identify novel susceptibility genes for 
LOAD by performing a large scale, multi-tiered association study testing 4692 
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs). We identified a SNP within a putative 
transcription factor binding site in the NEDD9 gene (neural precursor cell 
expressed, developmentally down-regulated), that shows good evidence of 
association with disease risk in four out of five LOAD samples [N = 3521, P = 
5.38x10(-6), odds ratio (OR) = 1.38 (1.20-1.59)] and in addition, we observed a 
similar pattern of association in two PD sample sets [N = 1464, P = 0.0145, OR 
=1.31 (1.05-1.62)]. In exploring a potential mechanism for the association, we 
observed that expression of NEDD9 and APOE show a strong inverse correlation in 
the hippocampus of Alzheimer's cases. These data implicate NEDD9 as a novel 
susceptibility gene for LOAD and possibly PD.

DOI: 10.1093/hmg/ddm348
PMID: 18063669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1767. Brain. 2008 Jan;131(Pt 1):72-89. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm280. Epub 2007 Dec 7.

The tauopathy associated with mutation +3 in intron 10 of Tau: characterization 
of the MSTD family.

Spina S(1), Farlow MR, Unverzagt FW, Kareken DA, Murrell JR, Fraser G, Epperson 
F, Crowther RA, Spillantini MG, Goedert M, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202, USA.

Multiple system tauopathy with presenile dementia (MSTD) is an inherited disease 
caused by a (g) to (a) transition at position +3 in intron 10 of Tau. It belongs 
to the spectrum of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 
17 with mutations in Tau (FTDP-17T). Here we present the longitudinal clinical, 
neuropsychological, neuroimaging, neuropathological, biochemical and genetic 
characterization of the MSTD family. Presenting signs were consistent with the 
behavioural variant of frontotemporal dementia in 17 of 21 patients. Two 
individuals presented with an atypical form of progressive supranuclear palsy 
and two others with either severe postural imbalance or an isolated short-term 
memory deficit. Memory impairment was present at the onset in 15 patients, with 
word finding difficulties and stereotyped speech also being common. Parkinsonism 
was first noted 3 years after the onset of symptoms. Neuroimaging showed the 
most extensive grey matter loss in the hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus and 
frontal operculum/insular cortex of the right hemisphere and, to a lesser 
extent, in the anterior cingulate gyrus, head of the caudate nucleus and the 
posterolateral orbitofrontal cortex and insular cortex bilaterally. 
Neuropathologically, progressive nerve cell loss, gliosis and coexistent 
neuronal and/or glial deposits consisting mostly of 4-repeat tau were present in 
frontal, cingulate, temporal and insular cortices, white matter, hippocampus, 
parahippocampus, basal ganglia, selected brainstem nuclei and spinal cord. Tau 
haplotyping indicated that specific haplotypes of the wild-type allele may act 
as modifiers of disease presentation. Quantitative neuroimaging has been used to 
analyse the progression of atrophy in affected individuals and for predicting 
disease onset in an asymptomatic mutation carrier. This multidisciplinary study 
provides a comprehensive description of the natural history of disease in one of 
the largest known families with FTDP-17T.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm280
PMCID: PMC2702832
PMID: 18065436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1768. Ann Neurol. 2008 Feb;63(2):167-73. doi: 10.1002/ana.21291.

Association of olfactory dysfunction with risk for future Parkinson's disease.

Ross GW(1), Petrovitch H, Abbott RD, Tanner CM, Popper J, Masaki K, Launer L, 
White LR.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Pacific Islands Health Care System, University of Hawaii 
John A. Burns School of Medicine, Honolulu, HI 96819, USA. wross@phrihawaii.org

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2008 Feb;63(2):132-4.

OBJECTIVE: Although olfactory dysfunction is commonly associated with 
Parkinson's disease (PD), it is not known whether such dysfunction can predate 
the onset of clinical PD in a community-based population. This study examines 
the association of olfactory dysfunction with future development of PD in 
Honolulu-Asia Aging Study cohort members
METHODS: Olfaction was assessed from 1991 to 1996 in 2,267 men in the 
Honolulu-Asia Aging Study aged 71 to 95 years who were free of clinical PD and 
dementia at the time of olfaction testing. Participants were followed for up to 
8 years for incident PD RESULTS: In the course of follow-up, 35 men were 
diagnosed with PD (24.6/10,000 person-years). The average age at the time of 
diagnosis was 82.9 +/- 3.8 (range, 76-93) years, and the average time to a 
diagnosis was 4.0 +/- 1.9 (range, 1-8) years. During the first 4 years of 
follow-up, age-adjusted incidence of PD declined from 54.5/10,000 person-years 
in the lowest quartile of odor identification to 26.6, 8.2, and 8.4/10,000 
person-years in the second, third, and fourth quartiles, respectively (p < 0.001 
for trend). After adjustment for age and other potential confounders, the odds 
ratios for PD in the lowest quartile was 5.2 (95% confidence interval, 1.5-25.6) 
compared with the top two quartiles. This relation was not evident beyond 4 
years of follow-up.
INTERPRETATION: Impaired olfaction can predate clinical PD in men by at least 4 
years and may be a useful screening tool to detect those at high risk for 
development of PD in later life.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.21291
PMID: 18067173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1769. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2007;45(12):1590-606. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2007.356.

The role of hyperhomocysteinemia and B-vitamin deficiency in neurological and 
psychiatric diseases.

Obeid R(1), McCaddon A, Herrmann W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, Faculty of 
Medicine, University Hospital of Saarland, Homburg/Saar, Germany.

Hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy) is related to central nervous system diseases. 
Epidemiological studies show a positive, dose-dependent relationship between 
plasma total homocysteine (tHcy) concentration and neurodegenerative disease 
risk. tHcy is a marker of B-vitamin (folate, B(12), B(6)) status. 
Hypomethylation, caused by low B-vitamin status and HHcy, is linked to key 
pathomechanisms of dementia; B-vitamin supplementation could potentially reduce 
neurological damage. In retrospective studies, the association between tHcy and 
cognition is impressive; there is also evidence that tHcy-lowering treatment 
could be effective in primary and secondary stroke prevention. Increased tHcy 
and low serum folate occur in patients with Parkinson's disease, especially 
those receiving L-dopa. There is also an association between HHcy and multiple 
sclerosis, and between B-vitamin status and depression. Studies also confirm a 
causal role for tHcy in epilepsy, and certain anti-epileptics enhance HHcy. 
B-vitamin status should be optimized by ensuring sufficient intake in patients 
with neuropsychiatric diseases. HHcy occurs commonly in the elderly and can 
contribute to age-related neurodegeneration. Treatment with folic acid, B(12) 
and B(6) lowers tHcy. For secondary and primary prevention from several 
neuropsychiatric disorders, it seems prudent to actively identify deficient 
subjects and ensure sufficient vitamin intake.

DOI: 10.1515/CCLM.2007.356
PMID: 18067446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1770. Brain. 2008 Mar;131(Pt 3):642-50. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm302. Epub 2007 Dec 13.

Axonal alpha-synuclein aggregates herald centripetal degeneration of cardiac 
sympathetic nerve in Parkinson's disease.

Orimo S(1), Uchihara T, Nakamura A, Mori F, Kakita A, Wakabayashi K, Takahashi 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital, 6-25-1 Kami-Yoga, 
Setagaya-ku, 158-8531 Tokyo, Japan.. orimo@kanto-ctr-hsp.com

Degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve occurs in both Parkinson's disease 
(PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies and begins early in the disease progression 
of PD, accounting for reduced cardiac uptake of meta-iodobenzylguanidine even in 
the early stages of Lewy body disease (LBD). We previously demonstrated that 
degeneration of the distal axons of the cardiac sympathetic nerve precedes loss 
of their mother neurons in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia, suggesting 
distal dominant degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nerve in PD. Because 
alpha-synuclein is one of the key molecules in the pathogenesis of this disease, 
we further investigated how alpha-synuclein aggregates are involved in this 
distal-dominant degeneration. Both cardiac tissues and paravertebral sympathetic 
ganglia were obtained for comparison from 20 patients with incidental Lewy body 
disease (ILBD), 10 with PD, 20 with multiple system atrophy (MSA) and 10 control 
subjects. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed using antibodies against 
tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) as a marker for sympathetic nerves, phosphorylated 
neurofilament as a marker for axons and phosphorylated alpha-synuclein for 
pathological deposits. We found that (i) alpha-synuclein aggregates in the 
epicardial nerve fascicles, namely the distal axons of the cardiac sympathetic 
nerve, were much more abundant in ILBD with preserved TH-ir axons than in this 
disease with decreased TH-ir axons and PD; (ii) alpha-synuclein aggregates in 
the epicardial nerve fascicles were closely related to the disappearance of 
TH-ir axons; (iii) in ILBD with preserved TH-ir axons, alpha-synuclein 
aggregates were consistently more abundant in the epicardial nerve fascicles 
than in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia; (iv) this distal-dominant 
accumulation of alpha-synuclein aggregates was reversed in ILBD with decreased 
TH-ir axons and PD, which both showed fewer of these axons but more abundant 
alpha-synuclein aggregates in the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia and (v) MSA 
was completely different from ILBD and PD based on the preservation of TH-ir 
axons and the scarcity of alpha-synuclein aggregates in either the cardiac 
tissues or the paravertebral sympathetic ganglia. These findings indicate that 
accumulation of alpha-synuclein aggregates in the distal axons of the cardiac 
sympathetic nervous system precedes that of neuronal somata or neurites in the 
paravertebral sympathetic ganglia and that heralds centripetal degeneration of 
the cardiac sympathetic nerve in PD, which sharply contrasts with slight changes 
in MSA. This chronological and dynamic relationship between alpha-synuclein 
aggregates and distal-dominant degeneration of the cardiac sympathetic nervous 
system may represent the pathological mechanism underlying a common degenerative 
process in PD.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm302
PMID: 18079166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1771. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Jan;79(1):6-11. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.104828.

Descriptive epidemiology of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis: new evidence and 
unsolved issues.

Logroscino G(1), Traynor BJ, Hardiman O, Chio' A, Couratier P, Mitchell JD, 
Swingler RJ, Beghi E; EURALS.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology HSPH 3-819 Harvard University, 677 Huntington 
Avenue, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA. glogrosc@hsph.harvard.edu

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a relatively rare disease with a reported 
population incidence of between 1.5 and 2.5 per 100,000 per year. Over the past 
10 years, the design of ALS epidemiological studies has evolved to focus on a 
prospective, population based methodology, employing the El Escorial criteria 
and multiple sources of data to ensure complete case ascertainment. Five such 
studies, based in Europe and North America, have been published and show 
remarkably consistent incidence figures among their respective Caucasian 
populations. Population based studies have been useful in defining clinical 
characteristics and prognostic indicators in ALS. However, many epidemiological 
questions remain that cannot be resolved by any of the existing population based 
datasets. The working hypotheses is that ALS, like other chronic diseases, is a 
complex genetic condition, and the relative contributions of individual 
environmental and genetic factors are likely to be relatively small. Larger 
studies are required to characterise risks and identify subpopulations that 
might be suitable for further study. This current paper outlines the 
contribution of the various population based registers, identifies the 
limitations of the existing datasets and proposes a mechanism to improve the 
future design and output of descriptive epidemiological studies.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.104828
PMID: 18079297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1772. Ann Gen Psychiatry. 2007 Dec 17;6:33. doi: 10.1186/1744-859X-6-33.

A familial concurrence of schizophrenia and Gaucher's disease.

Mouzas OD(1), Siomos KE, Angelopoulos NV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Medical School, University of Thessaly, Greece. 
mouzas@med.uth.gr

BACKGROUND: Gaucher's disease (GD) is the most frequently encountered lysosomal 
storage disease. Here, we describe and discuss the observed concurrence of 
schizophrenia and Gaucher's disease in two siblings.
METHODS: Presentation of a family with two siblings with Gaucher's disease.
RESULTS: In a six-member family, the first son suffers from schizophrenia, while 
the third and fourth sons suffer from the Gaucher's disease (type 1 
non-neuronopathic). The parents and the second son do not suffer from either 
illness.
CONCLUSION: The concurrence of schizophrenia and Gaucher's disease in the same 
family is an unusual phenomenon. The literature regarding this coincidence is 
limited, despite the fact that patients with Gaucher's disease have one or two 
mutated alleles, considered to be a risk factor leading to conditions such as 
Dementia, Parkinson's disease and schizophrenia.

DOI: 10.1186/1744-859X-6-33
PMCID: PMC2180174
PMID: 18086296


1773. Panminerva Med. 2007 Dec;49(4):183-9.

Mild cognitive impairment.

Aggarwal NT(1).

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. neelum_t_aggarwal@rsh.net

A wide spectrum of cognitive ability is seen in older persons, ranging from 
intact cognitive function to clinically manifested dementia. The term mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) is increasingly used to refer to individuals who have 
some cognitive impairment but do not meet the criteria for dementia. Despite a 
lack of consensus about precisely how to define MCI, researchers agree that the 
condition is relatively common in older people, and data suggest that MCI may be 
associated with an increased risk of Alzheimer's disease, parkinsonian signs and 
disability. Presently, the clinical assessment of MCI should include a detailed 
evaluation of cognitive functioning and the use of structural MRI can provide 
important diagnostic and prognostic information. Although therapeutic trials in 
MCI using the Choline acetylcholinesterase's have been disappointing with short 
term affects noted, pharmacologic prevention studies for MCI, are underway and 
may provide valuable data to prevent the development of this condition.

PMID: 18091670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1774. Acta Neurol Scand. 2008 Jan;117(1):35-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00907.x.

Assessment of hallucinations in Parkinson's disease using a novel scale.

Wada-Isoe K(1), Ohta K, Imamura K, Kitayama M, Nomura T, Yasui K, Nakaso K, 
Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Neurological 
Sciences, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan. kewada@grape.med.tottori-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To assess hallucinations in Parkinson's disease (PD), we developed a 
novel practical rating scale that evaluates five items including variety, 
frequency, and severity of hallucinations, caregiver burden levels, and 
psychiatric status at nighttime.
METHODS: Forty-one PD patients and their caregivers were examined regarding the 
status of the hallucinations associated with PD.
RESULTS: As a measure of internal consistency, the Tottori University 
Hallucination Rating Scale (TUHARS) has a Cronbach's alpha of 0.88. Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE) and Hoehn-Yahr stage were associated with the TUHARS 
scores in a multivariate regression analysis. Visual hallucinations are the most 
common. However, half of the patients who reported visual hallucinations also 
had other hallucinations. The scale scores in the PD patients with dementia 
(PDD) group were significantly greater than in the PD patients without dementia 
(PDnD) group.
CONCLUSIONS: TUHARS appears to be a suitable and easily administered instrument 
for assessment of hallucinations in PD. PD patients experienced various kinds of 
hallucinations. Hallucinations may have a close relationship with cognitive 
decline in PD patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.2007.00907.x
PMID: 18095953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1775. Neurosignals. 2008;16(1):24-34. doi: 10.1159/000109756. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease and dementia with lewy bodies: a 
spectrum of disease.

Goldmann Gross R(1), Siderowf A, Hurtig HI.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Center, Department of Neurology, 
University of Pennsylvania Health System, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is classically thought of as a movement disorder 
characterized by tremor, rigidity and postural instability. Nevertheless, there 
is growing recognition of prominent cognitive impairment in PD and related 
disorders, which is responsible for substantial disability in these patients. 
This review will focus on cognitive impairment associated with Lewy body 
pathology, including PD with dementia (PDD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
We will review the epidemiology, clinical evaluation, underlying mechanisms and 
treatment of cognitive impairment in these patients. Despite differences between 
PDD and DLB, there is clinical, neuropathological and radiological overlap 
between these disorders, supporting the view that they represent a spectrum of 
disease. These observations suggest that common targets for diagnosis and 
treatment of these disorders can be identified.

DOI: 10.1159/000109756
PMID: 18097157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1776. Hum Psychopharmacol. 2008 Jan;23 Suppl 1:15-26. doi: 10.1002/hup.918.

Neurological complications of psychiatric drugs: clinical features and 
management.

Haddad PM(1), Dursun SM.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Psychiatry Unit, School of Psychiatry and Behavioural 
Sciences, University of Manchester, Manchester, UK. peter.haddad@bstmht.nhs.uk

This paper reviews the main neurological complications of psychiatric drugs, in 
particular antipsychotics and antidepressants. Extrapyramidal syndromes include 
acute dystonia, parkinsonism, akathisia, tardive dyskinesia and tardive 
dystonia. Extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS) are less frequent with atypical than 
with conventional antipsychotics but remain common in clinical practice partly 
due to lack of screening by health professionals. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome 
(NMS) consists of severe muscle rigidity, pyrexia, change in conscious level and 
autonomic disturbance but partial forms also occur. NMS is particularly 
associated with the initiation and rapid increase in dose of high-potency 
antipsychotics but it has been reported with all the atypical antipsychotics and 
rarely with other drugs including antidepressants. Serotonin toxicity comprises 
altered mental state (agitation, excitement, confusion), neuromuscular 
hyperactivity (tremor, clonus, myoclonus, hyper-reflexia) and autonomic 
hyperactivity and occurs on a spectrum. Severe cases, termed serotonin syndrome, 
usually follow the co-prescription of drugs that increase serotonergic 
transmission by different pathways, for example a monoamine oxidase inhibitor 
(MAOI) and a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI). Most antipsychotics 
and antidepressants lower the seizure threshold and can cause seizures; the risk 
is greater with clozapine than with other atypical antipsychotics and greater 
with tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) than with SSRIs. In randomised controlled 
trials in elderly patients with dementia atypical antipsychotics are associated 
with a higher risk of stroke and death than placebo. Cohort studies suggest that 
conventional drugs carry at least the same risk. Cessation of treatment with 
antipsychotics and antidepressants can lead to a wide range of discontinuation 
symptoms which include movement disorders and other neurological symptoms. 
Clinicians need to be familiar with strategies to reduce the risk of these 
adverse events and to manage them when they arise. Their occurrence needs to be 
balanced against the benefits of psychiatric drugs in terms of efficacy and 
improved quality of life in a range of disorders.

(c) 2007 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/hup.918
PMID: 18098217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1777. Neurobiol Aging. 2009 Sep;30(9):1477-82. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.11.019. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Association of MAPT haplotype-tagging SNPs with sporadic Parkinson's disease.

Vandrovcova J(1), Pittman AM, Malzer E, Abou-Sleiman PM, Lees AJ, Wood NW, de 
Silva R.

Author information:
(1)Reta Lila Weston Institute of Neurological Studies, UCL Institute of 
Neurology, London, UK.

Mutations in the tau gene (MAPT) have been found in families with frontotemporal 
dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. In addition, the MAPT 
H1-clade specific sub-haplotype, H1c, has been strongly associated with the 
tauopathies, progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration 
(CBD) and, to a lesser extent, with Alzheimer's disease (AD). In Parkinson's 
disease (PD), there have been several reports of association with the MAPT 
H1-clade. Although weak to inconclusive, this association is supported by 
meta-analyses of the various studies. To further investigate this baffling role 
of MAPT in PD, six haplotype-tagging SNPs were genotyped in a large cohort of 
sporadic PD cases; 324 pathologically confirmed and 248 clinically diagnosed, 
and 660 controls. In the single-locus association analysis, the H1-clade was 
associated with an increased risk of PD (p=0.032). In the haplotype-analysis, 
the sole H2-derived haplotype was under-represented in all of the PD cases 
compared to controls (p=0.03). There was no significant difference in the 
distribution of any of the common haplotypes derived from the H1-clade 
background. Our study supports the hypothesis that genetic variability in the 
MAPT gene confers susceptibility to PD. However, the effect is not strong, and 
the H1c haplotype is not involved, suggesting a mechanism that is distinct to 
that involved in the associated tauopathies and may be explained by the H1/H2 
inversion.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2007.11.019
PMID: 18162161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1778. Neuropharmacology. 2008 Mar;54(3):620-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2007.11.010. 
Epub 2007 Nov 23.

Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs have potent anti-fibrillogenic and 
fibril-destabilizing effects for alpha-synuclein fibrils in vitro.

Hirohata M(1), Ono K, Morinaga A, Yamada M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurobiology of Aging, Kanazawa University 
Graduate School of Medical Science, 13-1, Takara-machi, Kanazawa, and 
Neurological Center, Kanazawa-Nishi Hospital, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, 
Japan.

The aggregation of alpha-synuclein (alphaS) in the brain has been implicated as 
a critical step in the development of Lewy body diseases (LBD) [Parkinson's 
disease (PD)/dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)] and multiple system atrophy (MSA). 
The involvement of neuroinflammation and microglial activation has been 
emphasized in the pathogenesis of PD. Recent epidemiological studies have 
revealed that therapeutic use of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) 
reduces the risk of developing PD. Here, we examined the effects of NSAIDs, such 
as ibuprofen, aspirin, acetaminophen, meclofenamic acid sodium salt, sulindac 
sulfide, ketoprofen, flurbiprofen, diclofenac sodium salt, naproxen, and 
indomethacin, on the formation and destabilization of alphaS fibrils (falphaS) 
at pH 7.5 and 37 degrees C in vitro, using fluorescence spectroscopy with 
thioflavin S and electron microscopy. All examined NSAIDs, except for naproxen 
and indomethacin, inhibited the formation of falphaS in a dose-dependent manner. 
Moreover, these molecules dose-dependently destabilized preformed falphaS. The 
overall activity was in the order: ibuprofen approximately aspirin approximately 
acetaminophen approximately meclofenamic acid sodium salt approximately sulindac 
sulfide>ketoprofen approximately flurbiprofen approximately diclofenac sodium 
salt>naproxen approximately indomethacin. These findings indicate that NSAIDs 
could be key molecules for the development of therapeutic or preventive agents 
for LBD and MSA.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2007.11.010
PMID: 18164319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1779. Open Med Chem J. 2008 Jan 10;2:1-5. doi: 10.2174/1874104500802010001.

Chronic experimental diabetes accelerates urinary elimination of deprenyl and 
its metabolites.

Adeghate E(1), Sótonyi P Jr, Kalász H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Faculty of Medicine & Health Sciences, United Arab 
Emirates University, Al Ain, P.O. Box 17666, United Arab Emirates.

Many diabetic patients take several medications to treat diabetes-associated 
complications and other ailments. The mode of elimination of these drugs and 
their metabolites are poorly understood. The elimination of deprenyl, a MAO-B 
inhibitor, used for the treatment of the early stage of Parkinson's disease and 
senile dementia was investigated using thin layer chromatography.Male Wistar 
rats (180-200 g) were rendered diabetic by streptozotocin (STZ) treatment (60 
mg/kg, i.v.). Rats having at least three times higher plasma glucose level than 
the normal were considered diabetic. Rats were treated with a single oral dose 
of 5 mg/kg (14)C-(methyl)-labeled (-)-deprenyl, 98 microCi/mg. Diabetic rats 
excreted the majority of urinary radioactivity in 8 hours, while control rats 
did it in 16 hours. The approximate ratio of major metabolites as determined 
using thin-layer chromatography did not change. In conclusion, diabetic rats 
excreted radiolabelled-deprenyl more rapidly compared to control animals. 
Increased elimination of deprenyl should be taken into account in the management 
of patients suffering from diabetes.

DOI: 10.2174/1874104500802010001
PMCID: PMC2709476
PMID: 19662137


1780. Retin Cases Brief Rep. 2008 Winter;2(1):27-30. doi: 
10.1097/01.iae.0000243039.22011.5f.

Dementia with lewy bodies and charles bonnet syndrome.

Walker JD(1), Keys MA.

Author information:
(1)From *Indiana University School of Medicine, Fort Wayne, Indiana; and †Older 
Adult Mental Health Program, Deaconess Hospital, Cincinnati, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Ophthalmologists may be the first to hear about formed visual 
hallucinations in the setting of visual loss. Although such hallucinations are 
likely benign and occur in association with the Charles Bonnet syndrome, it is 
important to be aware of the strong association of hallucinations with dementia 
with Lewy bodies because the latter diagnosis is associated with significant 
prognostic and therapeutic implications for the patient.
METHODS: Single case report.
RESULTS: A patient with macular disease was presumed to have formed 
hallucinations due to the Charles Bonnet syndrome and was subsequently diagnosed 
with dementia with Lewy bodies after being admitted to a psychiatric facility.
CONCLUSION: Both patients with the Charles Bonnet syndrome and patients with 
dementia with Lewy bodies can present with formed visual hallucinations. 
Ophthalmologists and retina specialists, in particular, should be familiar with 
the features of dementia with Lewy bodies because the diagnosis of this 
condition can allow appropriate intervention and help prevent drug-related side 
effects. If there is any suspicion of early dementia in such patients, they may 
benefit from neuropsychiatric evaluation.

DOI: 10.1097/01.iae.0000243039.22011.5f
PMID: 25389610


1781. Eur J Neurol. 2008 Jan;15(1):1. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02036.x.

Progress in Parkinson's disease.

Schapira AH.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02036.x
PMID: 18171385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1782. Mov Disord. 2007 Sep;22 Suppl 17:S358-66. doi: 10.1002/mds.21677.

Cognitive dysfunction and dementia in Parkinson disease.

Caballol N(1), Martí MJ, Tolosa E.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Institut 
Clínic de Neurociencies, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i 
Sunyer, Hospital Clínic Universitari, University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

Impairment in different cognitive domains such as executive functions, language, 
memory, and visuospatial skills occurs frequently in Parkinson disease (PD) even 
in the early stages of the disease. Although frank dementia (Parkinson disease 
dementia, PDD) is less frequent, risk for developing dementia is two to six 
times greater than the prevalence rate in general population and it increases in 
relation to disease duration. Clinically, dementia in PD is characterized by 
uninsidious onset and slowly progressive cognitive decline, with a predominant 
dysexecutive syndrome accompanied frequently by a variety of behavioral symptoms 
such as hallucinations, depression, anxiety, and excessive daytime sleepiness. 
Although the exact pathophysiology and neurobiological basis of PDD is not 
known, dementia in PD probably develops as a result of progressive involvement 
of subcortical and cortical structures by Lewy-type pathology and associated 
Alzheimer-like histological changes. Dysfunction of different monoamine 
transmitter has also been implicated in the cognitive deterioration of PD but 
reduced cholinergic activity in the cortex is thought to account for the 
strongest mechanism in the development of dementia. Recent evidence suggests 
that cholinesterase inhibitors are effective in the treatment of dementia and 
accompanying behavioral symptoms in PD.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.21677
PMID: 18175397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1783. Am J Manag Care. 2007 Dec;13 Suppl 8:S193-7.

The burden of dementia.

Cotter VT(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Nursing, University of Pennsylvania, 420 Guardian Dr, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA. cottervt@nursing.upenn.edu

Dementia care is a significant and growing healthcare need that will have major 
economic and medical impact as the prevalence of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
related dementias continues to increase in the United States during the next 50 
years. The ability to differentiate the signs and symptoms of the most common 
dementing illnesses - AD, vascular dementia, frontotemporal dementia, and 
dementia with Lewy bodies - is essential to dementia care and management. 
Additionally, dementia patients in longterm care (LTC) facilities are prone to 
significantly greater risk of negative outcomes compared with nondemented 
residents as a result of a decline in activities of daily living, physical 
capacities, and behavioral manifestations. Careful and active assessment of risk 
factors and their management provides opportunities for improving outcomes. 
These include behavioral manifestations of pain, wandering, and risks of 
malnutrition, falls and injuries, and restraint use. Specific nonpharmacologic 
interventions to promote restraint- and pain-free care in LTC are highlighted.

PMID: 18095782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1784. Eur J Neurol. 2008 Mar;15(3):262-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02046.x. Epub 
2008 Jan 9.

Does motor subtype influence neurocognitive performance in Parkinson's disease 
without dementia?

Lyros E(1), Messinis L, Papathanasopoulos P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Neuropsychology Section, University of Patras 
Medical School, Patras, Greece. lyrosep@upatras.gr

The postural instability and gait difficulty (PIGD) motor subtype has been shown 
to represent a risk factor for development of dementia in Parkinson's disease. 
Whether this relationship extends to a more subtle cognitive dysfunction in 
patients is less clear. Therefore, we administered a battery of selected 
neuropsychological tests to two groups of non-demented patients with mild to 
moderate disease classified either as PIGD or as non-PIGD subtype and to a group 
of healthy controls. Groups were matched on potential confounders of 
neuropsychological performance. No significant differences were revealed between 
the two groups of patients in the performance of any of the administered 
neuropsychological tests. However, relative to controls there was a tendency 
towards a differential pattern of cognitive dysfunction. The PIGD group had 
slower performance in a test of psychomotor speed and cognitive flexibility, 
whilst the non-PIGD group performed worse in measures of verbal learning and 
visuo-spatial perception. In conclusion, the PIGD subtype was not associated 
with more severe cognitive deficits and may to a certain extent share common 
mechanisms of cognitive dysfunction with non-PIGD subtypes. Diverse pathological 
processes however may develop to account for unequal rates of dementia amongst 
different motor subtypes.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02046.x
PMID: 18190508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1785. J Alzheimers Dis. 2007 Dec;12(4):291-311. doi: 10.3233/jad-2007-12402.

Comparison analysis of gene expression patterns between sporadic Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's disease.

Grünblatt E(1), Zander N, Bartl J, Jie L, Monoranu CM, Arzberger T, Ravid R, 
Roggendorf W, Gerlach M, Riederer P.

Author information:
(1)Neurochemistry Laboratory, National Parkinson Foundation Centre of Excellence 
Laboratories, Clinic and Policlinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
of Würzburg, Germany. Gruenblatt_E@klinik.uni-wuerzburg.de

Sporadic Alzheimer's (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are late-onset 
neurodegenerative diseases with tremendous impact on lives of affected 
individuals. There is a great probability of developing concurrent Parkinsonism 
in AD and vice-versa than would be predicted by independent prevalence of each 
disease. We hypothesize that in sporadic AD as well as PD a combination of 
environmental effects and gene expression may affect specific brain areas 
leading to neurodegeneration. We profiled gene expression of AD compared to PD 
and age matched controls post-mortem in the hippocampus, the 
gyrus-frontalis-medius (Gfm) and the cerebellum using Gene-Chip microarray 
(Affymetrix) and quantitative-real-time-RT-PCR. Twelve genes altered in similar 
manner in AD and PD, while four genes showed differential expression profiles 
between AD and PD in different brain regions (cannabinoid-receptor-2, 
Histone-cluster-1-H3e, nicotinic-cholinergic-receptor-alpha6 and 
beta-site-APP-cleaving enzyme-1). Knowledge of selective gene expression profile 
can lead to better understanding of disease pathology and development of 
specific diagnosis and effective therapy.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2007-12402
PMID: 18198416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1786. J Neurosci. 2008 Jan 16;28(3):737-48. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2824-07.2008.

The potential for beta-structure in the repeat domain of tau protein determines 
aggregation, synaptic decay, neuronal loss, and coassembly with endogenous Tau 
in inducible mouse models of tauopathy.

Mocanu MM(1), Nissen A, Eckermann K, Khlistunova I, Biernat J, Drexler D, 
Petrova O, Schönig K, Bujard H, Mandelkow E, Zhou L, Rune G, Mandelkow EM.

Author information:
(1)Max Planck Unit for Structural Molecular Biology, 22607 Hamburg, Germany.

We describe two new transgenic mouse lines for studying pathological changes of 
Tau protein related to Alzheimer's disease. They are based on the regulatable 
expression of the four-repeat domain of human Tau carrying the FTDP17 
(frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17) mutation 
deltaK280 (Tau(RD)/deltaK280), or the deltaK280 plus two proline mutations in 
the hexapeptide motifs (Tau(RD)/deltaK280/I277P/I308P). The deltaK280 mutation 
accelerates aggregation ("proaggregation mutant"), whereas the proline mutations 
inhibit Tau aggregation in vitro and in cell models ("antiaggregation mutant"). 
The inducible transgene expression was driven by the forebrain-specific 
CaMKIIalpha (calcium/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase IIalpha) promoter. The 
proaggregation mutant leads to Tau aggregates and tangles as early as 2-3 months 
after gene expression, even at low expression (70% of endogenous mouse Tau). The 
antiaggregation mutant does not aggregate even after 22 months of gene 
expression. Both mutants show missorting of Tau in the somatodendritic 
compartment and hyperphosphorylation in the repeat domain [KXGS motifs, targets 
of the kinase MARK (microtubule affinity regulating kinase)]. This indicates 
that these changes are related to Tau expression rather than aggregation. The 
proaggregation mutant causes astrogliosis, loss of synapses and neurons from 5 
months of gene expression onward, arguing that Tau toxicity is related to 
aggregation. Remarkably, the human proaggregation mutant Tau(RD) coaggregates 
with mouse Tau, coupled with missorting and hyperphosphorylation at multiple 
sites. When expression of proaggregation Tau(RD) is switched off, soluble and 
aggregated exogenous Tau(RD) disappears within 1.5 months. However, tangles of 
mouse Tau, hyperphosphorylation, and missorting remain, suggesting an extended 
lifetime of aggregated wild-type Tau once a pathological conformation and 
aggregation is induced by a proaggregation Tau species.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.2824-07.2008
PMCID: PMC6670355
PMID: 18199773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1787. Brain. 2008 Mar;131(Pt 3):690-705. doi: 10.1093/brain/awm322. Epub 2008 Jan 17.

EEG comparisons in early Alzheimer's disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia patients with a 2-year follow-up.

Bonanni L(1), Thomas A, Tiraboschi P, Perfetti B, Varanese S, Onofrj M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Aging Research Center, Ce.S.I., Gabriele d'annunzio 
University Foundation, University G. D'annunzio of Chieti-Pescara, via Fonte 
Romana, 65124 Pescara, Italy.

EEG abnormalities have been reported for both dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
and Alzheimer's disease (AD). Although it has been suggested that variations in 
mean EEG frequency are greater in the former, the existence of meaningful 
differences remains controversial. No evidence is as yet available for 
Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD). The aim of this study was to evaluate 
whether EEG abnormalities can discriminate between DLB, AD and PDD in the 
earliest stages of dementia and to do this 50 DLB, 50 AD and 40 PDD patients 
with slight cognitive impairment at first visit (MMSE > or = 20) were studied. 
To improve clinical diagnostic accuracy, special emphasis was placed on 
identifying cognitive fluctuations and REM-sleep behaviour disorder. EEG 
variability was assessed by mean frequency analysis and compressed spectral 
arrays (CSA) in order to detect changes over time from different scalp 
derivations. Patients' initial diagnoses were revised at a 2-year follow-up 
visit with neuroimaging evaluation. Initial diagnoses were confirmed in 36 DLB, 
40 AD and 35 PDD patients. The most relevant group differences were observed 
between the AD and DLB patients in EEGs from posterior derivations (P<0.001). 
Dominant frequencies were 8.3 +/- 0.6 Hz for the AD group and 7.4 +/- 1.6 Hz for 
the DLB group, in which most of the patients (88%) exhibited a frequency band of 
5.6-7.9 Hz. Dominant frequency variability also differed between the AD (1.1 +/- 
0.4 Hz) and DLB groups (1.8 +/- 1.2 Hz, P<0.001). Of note, less than a half 
(46%) of the patients with PDD exhibited the EEG abnormalities seen in those 
with DLB. Graded according to the presence of alpha activity, five different 
patterns were identified on EEG CSA from posterior derivations. A pattern with 
dominant alpha bands was observed in patients with AD alone while, in those with 
DLB and PDD, the degree to which residual alpha and 5.6-7.9 bands appeared was 
related to the presence and severity of cognitive fluctuations. At follow-up, 
EEG abnormalities from posterior leads were seen in all subjects with DLB and in 
three-quarters of those with PDD. Of interest, in four patients initially 
labelled as having AD, in whom the occurrence of fluctuations and/or REM-sleep 
behaviour disorder during the 2-year follow-up had made the diagnosis of AD 
questionable, the initial EEG was characterized by the features observed in the 
DLB group. If revised consensus criteria for DLB diagnosis are properly applied 
(i.e. emphasizing the diagnostic weight of fluctuations and REM sleep behaviour 
disorder), EEG recording may act to support discrimination between AD and DLB at 
the earliest stages of dementia, since characteristic abnormalities may even 
precede the appearance of distinctive clinical features.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awm322
PMID: 18202105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1788. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2008;25(3):195-205. doi: 10.1159/000113417. Epub 
2008 Jan 17.

Early discriminatory diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies. The emerging role 
of CSF and imaging biomarkers.

Aarsland D(1), Kurz M, Beyer M, Bronnick K, Piepenstock Nore S, Ballard C.

Author information:
(1)Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Stavanger, Norway. daarsland@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: The clinical diagnostic criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
have a low sensitivity, and there are no generally accepted biomarkers to 
distinguish DLB from other dementias. Our aim was to identify biomarkers that 
may differentiate DLB from Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHOD: We performed a systematic literature search for studies of EEG, imaging 
techniques and genetic and CSF markers that provide sensitivity and specificity 
in the identification of DLB.
RESULTS: The best evidence was for scintigraphy of the striatal dopamine 
transporter system using FP-CIT SPECT. Several small scintigraphy studies of 
cardiovascular autonomic function using metaiodobenzylguanidine SPECT have 
reported promising results. Studies exploring innovative techniques based on CSF 
have reported interesting findings for the combination of amyloid beta (abeta) 
isoforms as well as alpha-synuclein, and there are interesting results emerging 
from preliminary studies applying proteomic techniques. Data from studies using 
structural MRI, perfusion SPECT, genetics and EEG studies show differences 
between DLB and AD but only at a group level.
CONCLUSION: Several potential biomarkers for the differential diagnosis of 
probable DLB and AD have shown good diagnostic accuracy in the research setting. 
Data from large multicentre studies and from studies with autopsy confirmation 
exist for scintigraphy of the dopamine transporter system. Future studies should 
explore its value in possible DLB and for clinical management and health 
economics.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000113417
PMID: 18204253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1789. J Neurol. 2008 Feb;255(2):255-64. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0720-2. Epub 2008 Jan 
22.

Cognitive impairment in 873 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease. 
Results from the German Study on Epidemiology of Parkinson's Disease with 
Dementia (GEPAD).

Riedel O(1), Klotsche J, Spottke A, Deuschl G, Förstl H, Henn F, Heuser I, 
Oertel W, Reichmann H, Riederer P, Trenkwalder C, Dodel R, Wittchen HU.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Psychology and Psychotherapy, Technical University of 
Dresden, Chemnitzer Strasse 46, Dresden, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is often accompanied by non-motor 
complications, such as dementia, depression, and psychotic symptoms, which 
worsen the prognosis and increase the personal and socioeconomic burden of 
disease. Prevalence estimates of these complications are quite variable and are 
lacking for the outpatient care sector.
METHODS: As part of a larger, nationwide, cross-sectional epidemiological study 
in n = 315 neurological outpatient settings in Germany, this paper estimates the 
frequency of dementia and cognitive impairment in n = 873 outpatients meeting 
the UK Brain Bank criteria for idiopathic PD. Assessments were based on a 
clinical interview and neuropsychological assessments, including the Hoehn & 
Yahr rating and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS). Cognitive 
impairment was assessed by the Mini-Mental State Exam (MMSE), Clock Drawing Test 
(CDT) and the Parkinson Neuropsychometric Dementia Assessment (PANDA) and the 
clinician's diagnosis of dementia was based on the diagnostic criteria of DSMIV.
RESULTS: Using standardized cutoff scores, the prevalence of cognitive 
impairment in the study sample as measured by various methods was 17.5% by MMSE 
(< or = 24), 41.8% by CDT (> or = 3), 43.6% by PANDA (< or = 14), and 28.6% met 
the DSM-IV criteria for dementia. All estimates increased with age and PD 
severity. Gender was an inconsistent contributor while illness duration had no 
significant impact on cognition. Multiple regression analyses revealed PD 
severity to be the strongest predictor of dementia risk (OR = 4.3; 95% CI: 
2.1-9.1), while neuropsychiatric syndromes had independent, although modest 
additional contributions (OR = 2.5, 95% CI: 1.6-3.8).
CONCLUSION: Estimates of cognitive impairment and dementia in PD patients are 
largely dependent on the diagnostic measure used. Using established clinical 
diagnostic standards for dementia the overall rate on routine outpatient 
neurological care is 28.6%, but using more sensitive neuropsychological 
measures, rates for cognitive impairment might be up to 2-fold higher. The MMSE 
revealed strikingly low sensitivity. Neuropsychiatric syndromes, in addition to 
PD severity and age, have an independent--although modest--additional 
contribution to patients' risk for cognitive impairment and dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-008-0720-2
PMID: 18204803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1790. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2007 Nov;47(11):695-702.

[Muro disease or ALS-parkinsonism-dementia complex of the Kii peninsula of 
Japan].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University School of Medicine.

"Muro disease" is an endemic ALS in the Muro district that includes the southern 
coastal mountainous areas of the Kii peninsula of Japan. Epidemiological survey 
in 1960s disclosed extremely high incidence of ALS in two villages, Hohara and 
Kozagawa, and disappearance of high incidence by early 1980s was reported with 
its etiology unsolved. We resurveyed for neurodegenerative diseases in Hohara 
and found continuous high ALS incidence. We also found parkinsonism-dementia 
complex (PDC) verified neuropathologically. ALS and PDC frequently occurred in 
one individual simultaneously and affected many members in the same family, and 
neuropathological findings of ALS and PDC were similar to each other, showing a 
combination of upper and lower motor neuron involvements and many neurofibrillar 
tangles (NFTs) in the brainstem and cerebral cortex, resembling those of ALS/PDC 
on Guam. TDP-43 positive inclusions were found in the dentate gyrus of the 
hippocampus and spinal motor neurons in all cases examined. Age-adjusted 
incidence rates during 1950 and 2000 have showed that incidence of ALS was 
gradually declining for 50 years while that of PDC rose up steeply in 1990s. No 
particular environmental factors were confirmed and gene analyses of candidate 
genes of ALS, parkinsonism and dementia failed to reveal any mutations. 
Continuing high incidence and high rates of familial occurrence suggest that 
primary cause of Kii ALS/PDC may be genetic rather than environmental.

PMID: 18210779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1791. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2007 Nov;47(11):749-51.

[The long journey to the discovery of PARK2].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamamura Y(1).

Author information:
(1)Hiroshima University.

It was acknowledged long ago that Parkinson's disease (PD) occur rarely in 
familial aggregations. Willige and Mjönes noted no difference between the 
clinical features of the familial form and those of sporadic PD. Research into 
this aspect remained at a standstill for several decades thereafter. The 
resurgence of research into familial parkinsonism was the discovery by Japanese 
neurologists of autosomal recessive form of PD. In 1965, at Nagoya University, 
our research group examined familial cases of early onset parkinsonism. Clinical 
features included autosomal recessive inheritance, symptomatic alleviation after 
sleep, hyperreflexia, foot dystonia, good response to medication, and benign 
course without dementia. The clinical study of four families of the disease 
(EPDF) was published in Neurology in 1973. Subsequently, I kept on with my study 
of EPDF at Hiroshima University. Pathological study by our group in 1993 
revealed neuronal loss in the substantia nigra without Lewy bodies. Based on 
these clinical and pathological evidences, EPDF was successfully defined as a 
distinct disease entity. Screening for the EPDF gene was started in 1994 in 
collaboration with Juntendo University. With the discovery of parkin gene in 
1998, EPDF was designated as PARK2. Of our 16 families examined for gene 
analysis, fifteen proved to be PARK2, and the resting one, PARK6.

PMID: 18210790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1792. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2007 Nov;47(11):822-5.

[Imaging of brain acetylcholinesterase activity in dementias and extrapyramidal 
disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Shinotoh H(1).

Author information:
(1)Asahi Hospital for Neurological Disorders and Rehabilitation.

Carbon-11 labeled N-methylpiperidin-4-yl acetate ([11C]MP4A) and carbon-11 
labeled N-methylpiperidin-4-yl propionate ([11C]MP4P) are acetylcholine 
analogues and have been successfully used for measurement of brain 
acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity in vivo in humans. In Alzheimer's disease 
(AD), there is a significant loss of AChE activity in the cerebral cortex in 
association with mental decline. The reduction of AChE activity in the cerebral 
cortex is more remarkable in early-onset AD than late-onset AD. There is mild 
but significant reduction of AChE activity in the cerebral cortex, even in the 
early stage of Parkinson's disease (PD) without dementia. There is remarkable 
reduction of AChE activity in the entire cerebral cortex in both PD with 
dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). In two patients with 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, there was 
prominent reduction of AChE activity in the cerebral cortex and thalamus. In 12 
patients with progressive supranuclear palsy, there was profound reduction of 
AChE activity in the thalamus but not in the cerebral cortex. In corticobasal 
degeneration, there is symmetrical loss of AChE activity in the sensori-motor 
cortex.

PMID: 18210807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1793. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2007 Nov;47(11):832-4.

[Functional mapping of dopaminergic transmission].

[Article in Japanese]

Sawamoto N(1).

Author information:
(1)Human Brain Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) are impaired when performing cognitive 
tasks such as mental operations and working memory paradigms, which engage 
frontal lobe regions. These impairments may reflect degeneration of either 
nigrostriatal or mesocortical dopaminergic projections. D2 receptor antagonist 
11C-raclopride (RAC) with positron emission tomography (PET) now provides an in 
vivo approach for investigating dopaminergic transmission by monitoring changes 
in synaptic dopamine levels during task performance, Our RAC PET study suggests 
that the capacity to release dopamine during a working memory task is impaired 
in the striatum but relatively preserved in the medial prefrontal cortex in 
patients with PD. This pattern of dopamine release is in accordance with our 
previous H2(15)O PET findings showing hypoactivity of the striatum during a 
mental operation task in PD. These PET findings support a view that degeneration 
of nigrostriatal dopaminergic projection causing disruption of the cortico-basal 
ganglia circuit contributes to the cognitive impairments observed in PD. The 
findings also implicates that mesocortical dopaminergic function may be 
preserved in PD. Since excessive stimulation of dopamine receptors in the 
frontal cortex can rather deteriorate its function, the benefit in the striatum 
and the risk in the frontal cortex should be properly evaluated for dopamine 
replacement therapy.

PMID: 18210810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1794. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2007 Nov;47(11):962-5.

[ALS-parkinsonism-dementia complex of the Kii peninsula of Japan (Muro disease). 
Historical review, epidemiology and concept].

[Article in Japanese]

Kuzuhara S(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University School of Medicine.

The Muro district includes the southern coastal mountainous areas of the Kii 
peninsula of Japan where high incidence foci of ALS and parkinsonism-dementia 
complex (PDC) exist. "Muro disease" refers to the endemic ALS in Muro, and the 
oldest description is in a book published in 1689. Miura reported high 
prevalence of ALS in Muro in 1911, and the first epidemiological survey by 
Kimura and Yase in 1960s disclosed extremely high prevalence of ALS in Hohara 
and Kozagawa. The high incidence was, however, reported to have disappeared by 
early 1980s as in Guam. In 1990s we resurveyed and found not only continuous 
high ALS incidence but also neuropathologically-verified PDC in Hohara. ALS and 
PDC here frequently affected one individual simultaneously and members in a 
family. Neuropathological changes were common to ALS and PDC, showing a 
combination of ALS changes and many neurofibrillar tangles (NFTs) in the 
brainstem and cerebral cortex, suggesting ALS/PDC may be a single entity with 
different clinical manifestations, "ALS-parkinsonism-dementia complex". 
TDP-43-positive inclusions were confirmed in all cases examined. Age-adjusted 
incidence rates during 1950 and 2000 have showed that incidence of ALS gradually 
declined for 50 years while that of PDC rose up steeply in 1990s, suggesting 
changing pattern of ALS/PDC that had occurred in Guam in 1970s. Continuing high 
incidence of ALS/PDC and high familial occurrence suggest that primary cause of 
Kii ALS/PDC may be genetic rather than environmental.

PMID: 18210849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1795. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2008 Jul;23(7):719-25. doi: 10.1002/gps.1966.

Clinical correlates of Parkinsonian signs in community- dwelling Chinese older 
persons: a population based study.

Tam CW(1), Lam LC, Lui VW, Chan WC, Chan SS, Chiu HF, Chan WM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Tai Po Hospital, Hong Kong SAR.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: This study examined the clinical correlates of 
parkinsonian signs including neuropsychiatric symptoms, cognitive impairment and 
medical illness burden in the community-dwelling non-demented Chinese elderly.
METHODS: A random sample of 765 Chinese elderly subjects from a thematic 
household survey was recruited. There were 389 normal elderly controls (Clinical 
Dementia Rating [CDR] 0) (NC) and 376 subjects with questionable dementia (CDR 
0.5). The subjects with questionable dementia (CDR 0.5) were categorized into 
two groups: a MCI group (n = 291) and a very mild dementia (VMD) group (n = 85). 
Parkinsonian signs were measured by Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale- 
motor scale (UPDRS). The clinical correlates were investigated in each group.
RESULTS: UPDRS motor score was associated with age, cumulative medical illness 
burden and cerebrovascular accidents in the normal control and MCI groups. It 
correlated negatively with MMSE scores in the NC group. It was associated with 
presence of soft signs in the NC and MCI groups; and apathy in the VMD group.
CONCLUSION: Neuropsychiatric symptoms, cognitive impairment and vascular risk 
factors had different patterns of associations with parkinsonian signs in the 
older persons with different degree of cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.1966
PMID: 18213739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1796. Neurology. 2008 Apr 8;70(15):1250-7. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000286943.79593.a6. 
Epub 2008 Jan 23.

Executive dysfunction and memory impairment in idiopathic REM sleep behavior 
disorder.

Massicotte-Marquez J(1), Décary A, Gagnon JF, Vendette M, Mathieu A, Postuma RB, 
Carrier J, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Etude du Sommeil et des Rythmes Biologiques, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur 
de Montréal, 5400 Boul. Gouin Ouest Montréal, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) might be a stage in 
the development of neurodegenerative disorders, especially Parkinson disease and 
dementia with Lewy bodies. Recent studies showing a slowing of waking EEG in 
iRBD suggest that iRBD is associated with cognitive impairment.
OBJECTIVE: To compare patients with iRBD on measures of cognitive function and 
quantitative waking EEG.
METHODS: Fourteen patients with iRBD and 14 healthy control subjects matched for 
age and educational level were studied. Subjects underwent an extensive 
neuropsychological evaluation and waking EEG recordings.
RESULTS: Compared to controls, patients with iRBD showed a lower performance on 
neuropsychological tests measuring attention, executive functions, and verbal 
memory. Moreover, patients with iRBD showed EEG slowing (higher delta and theta 
power) during wakefulness in all brain areas compared to controls. However, no 
correlation was found between performance on cognitive tests and quantitative 
waking EEG in patients with iRBD.
CONCLUSION: This study shows a co-occurrence of impaired cognitive profile and 
waking EEG slowing in patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder 
similar to that observed in early stages of some synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000286943.79593.a6
PMID: 18216303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1797. EMBO J. 2008 Jan 23;27(2):336-49. doi: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601930.

The two faces of protein misfolding: gain- and loss-of-function in 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Winklhofer KF(1), Tatzelt J, Haass C.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiochemisty, Department of Biochemistry, Adolf-Butenandt-Institute, 
Ludwig-Maximilians-University, Munich, Germany. 
konstanze.winklhofer@med.uni-muenchen.de

The etiologies of neurodegenerative diseases may be diverse; however, a common 
pathological denominator is the formation of aberrant protein conformers and the 
occurrence of pathognomonic proteinaceous deposits. Different approaches coming 
from neuropathology, genetics, animal modeling and biophysics have established a 
crucial role of protein misfolding in the pathogenic process. However, there is 
an ongoing debate about the nature of the harmful proteinaceous species and how 
toxic conformers selectively damage neuronal populations. Increasing evidence 
indicates that soluble oligomers are associated with early pathological 
alterations, and strikingly, oligomeric assemblies of different 
disease-associated proteins may share common structural features. A major step 
towards the understanding of mechanisms implicated in neuronal degeneration is 
the identification of genes, which are responsible for familial variants of 
neurodegenerative diseases. Studies based on these disease-associated genes 
illuminated the two faces of protein misfolding in neurodegeneration: a gain of 
toxic function and a loss of physiological function, which can even occur in 
combination. Here, we summarize how these two faces of protein misfolding 
contribute to the pathomechanisms of Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration, Parkinson's disease and prion diseases.

DOI: 10.1038/sj.emboj.7601930
PMCID: PMC2234348
PMID: 18216876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1798. J Neurol. 2008 Feb;255(2):192-6. doi: 10.1007/s00415-008-0629-9. Epub 2008 Jan 
29.

Is REM sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) a risk factor of dementia in idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease?

Marion MH(1), Qurashi M, Marshall G, Foster O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Atkinson Morley Wing, St George's Hospital, London, 
UK. marie-helene.marion@stgeorges.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: To study the sequence of occurrence of REM-sleep behaviour disorder 
(RBD) and dementia and their frequency among a population of patients with 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD).
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional study on 65 PD patients seen in a 
movement disorder clinic and their bed partner, and asked them to complete the 
validated Mayo Sleep Questionnaire for RBD and sleep disorders. The diagnosis of 
PD with dementia (PD-D) was based on a clinical diagnosis of dementia; following 
DSM-IV criteria and MMSE score less than 25 and a battery of cognitive tests.
RESULTS: From the 65 patients that completed the study, twenty-four met the 
clinical diagnosis of RBD. Ten of the 24 (42%) RBD patients met the clinical 
criteria of PD-D, whereas the remaining 14 patients were non-demented at the 
time of the study. The frequency of RBD was significantly higher in the PD-D 
group (n = 10, 77%) compared to the PD-ND group (n = 14, 27%, chi squared test: 
p = 0.0008). PD non-RBD had a lower occurrence of dementia (7.3%, 3 of 41) 
compared to those suffering from RBD (42%, 10 of 24). Of the 65 PD patients, 13 
were diagnosed with PD-D and the remaining 52 were non-demented PD (PD-ND) 
patients. PD with RBD showed a faster decline in the number of dementia-free 
patients compared to the non-RBD patients (Log Rank test: p < 0.001). RBD 
preceded, coincided or followed the onset of the motor symptoms.
CONCLUSION: This study shows that RBD and dementia have a significant 
coincidence in the course of PD, and RBD not only precedes or coincides with the 
motor signs, but can occur during the course of the progression of the PD, 
suggesting a degenerative process of the dopaminergic and cholinergic neurons of 
the brainstem nuclei, progressing at a different pace in each patient.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-008-0629-9
PMID: 18217187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1799. Eur J Neurol. 2008 Feb;15(2):128-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02011.x.

Is quality of life in non-demented Parkinson's disease patients related to 
cognitive performance? A clinic-based cross-sectional study.

Klepac N(1), Trkulja V, Relja M, Babić T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Clinical Hospital Center Zagreb, Zagreb 
University School of Medicine, Zagreb, Croatia. natasa.klepac@zg.t-com.hr

Whilst the association between dementia and poorer health-related quality of 
life (Hr-QoL) in Parkinson's disease (PD) has been well established, we aimed to 
explore the relationship between cognitive performance and Hr-QoL in PD without 
dementia. Consecutive PD patients (n = 124, 54% men, age 60.4 +/- 10.3 years) 
judged as non-demented based on DSM-IV criteria and Mini Mental State 
Examination, free of other neurodegenerative diseases or psychotic difficulties 
and antipsychotic/antidepressive/anxyolitic treatment were assessed in a battery 
of neuropsychological tests. We used Parkinson's disease questionnaire (PDQ-39) 
to asses Hr-QoL and Beck's Depression Inventory (BDI) to quantify depression. In 
the univariate analysis, better performance in each of the tests evaluating 
visual attention/memory or visuospatial and executive functions was associated 
with better Hr-QoL. In multivariate analysis [adjustment for BDI score, PD 
severity and duration, l-dopa dose, age, sex, education, employment status and 
early PD onset (<50 years of age)] in which these tests were either represented 
by a common variable identified in a principal components analysis or were 
considered individually, better cognitive performance was independently 
associated with better Hr-QoL. The association was conditional on the level of 
depression, i.e., apparent only in patients with low(er) BDI scores. Cognitive 
performance appears associated with Hr-QoL even in non-demented PD patients.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2007.02011.x
PMID: 18217883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


1800. CNS Neurol Disord Drug Targets. 2007 Dec;6(6):411-23. doi: 
10.2174/187152707783399201.

Neuronal death and survival under oxidative stress in Alzheimer and Parkinson 
diseases.

Nunomura A(1), Moreira PI, Lee HG, Zhu X, Castellani RJ, Smith MA, Perry G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurology, Asahikawa Medical College, Asahikawa 
078-8510, Japan. nuno@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

Neuronal death is a common feature in neurodegenerative diseases including 
Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease (PD). This occurs over years, not 
the minutes of classically defined apoptosis, and neurons show both responses of 
apoptosis and regeneration, evidenced by accumulated oxidative insult and 
attempts at cell cycle re-entry. There is recent evidence suggesting that 
several known gene mutations in causing familial AD (amyloid beta protein 
precursor, presenilin-1, or presenilin-2 gene) and familial PD (Parkin, PINK-1, 
or DJ-1 gene) are associated with increased oxidative stress. Also, several 
known genetic (e.g. Apolipoprotein Eepsilon4 variant) and environmental (e.g. 
metals or pesticides exposure) risk factors of sporadic AD and/or PD are 
associated with increased oxidative stress. In concord, patients at the 
preclinical stages of AD and PD as well as cellular and animal models of the 
diseases provide consistent evidence that oxidative insult is a significant 
early event in the pathological cascade of AD and PD. In contrast to the general 
aspects of the pathological hallmarks, aggregation of the disease-specific 
proteins such as amyloid-beta, tau, and alpha-synuclein may act as a 
compensatory (survival) response against the oxidative insult via the mechanism 
that the disease-specific structures sequester redox-active metals. Expanding 
knowledge of the molecular mechanisms of organism longevity indicates that 
pro-longevity gene products such as forkhead transcription factors and sirtuins 
are involved in the insulin-like signaling pathway and oxidative stress 
resistance against aging. An enhancement of the pro-longevity signaling (e.g. 
caloric restriction) may be a promising approach as anti-oxidative strategy 
against age-associated neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.2174/187152707783399201
PMID: 18220780 [Indexed for MEDLINE]