801. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2001 Nov;2(11):1592-4.

NS-2330 (Neurosearch).

Thatte U(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, BYL Nair Hospital, Mumbai, India. 
Clinpharm@vsnl.net

NeuroSearch is developing NS-2330, a compound that increases the activity of 
dopamine, norepinephrine and acetylcholine, as a potential therapy for 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) [260782]. It is in phase 
II for AD [355341], and by March 2001 was also in a phase II tolerability trial 
in PD patients with dyskinesia. Phase III studies are expected to begin in the 
third quarter of 2002 [413151]. At this time, NeuroSearch was in licensing 
negotiations with a number of companies and had expected an agreement to be 
concluded within the first half of 2001 [401800]. In June 2001, NeuroSearch 
decided to continue the in-house development of NS-2330 provided that a capital 
increase could be effected on satisfactory terms [412065], [413151]. In August 
2001, the company confirmed that it had raised these funds and phase III studies 
were planned for the third quarter of 2002 [420708]. In September 2001, WestLB 
Panmure predicted that NS-2330 had 12 and 15% probabilities of reaching market 
for its PD and AD indications, respectively. It also predicted that the drug 
would be launched in 2008 and 2007 for these indications, with market shares of 
12.5 and 25%, respectively [423585].

PMID: 11763162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


802. Int J Occup Med Environ Health. 2001;14(3):209-18.

Effects of metals on the nervous system of humans and animals.

Carpenter DO(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Public Health University at Albany Rensselaer, NY 12144, USA.

Several metals have toxic actions on nerve cells and neurobehavorial 
functioning. These toxic actions can be expressed either as developmental 
effects or as an increased risk of neurodegenerative diseases in old age. The 
major metals causing neurobehavioral effects after developmental exposure are 
lead and methylmercury. Lead exposure in young children results in a permanent 
loss of IQ of approximately 5 to 7 IQ points, and also results in a shortened 
attention span and expression of anti-social behaviors. There is a critical time 
period (<2 years of age) for development of these effects, after which the 
effects do not appear to be reversible even if blood lead levels are lowered 
with chelation. Methylmercury has also been found to have effects on cognition 
at low doses, and prenatal exposure at higher levels can disrupt brain 
development. Metals have also been implicated in neurodegenerative diseases, 
although it is unlikely that they are the sole cause for any of them. Elevated 
aluminum levels in blood, usually resulting from kidney dialysis at home with 
well water containing high aluminum, result in dementia that is similar to but 
probably different from that of Alzheimer's disease. However, there is some 
epidemiological evidence for elevated risk of Alzheimer's in areas where there 
is high concentration of aluminum in drinking water. Other metals, especially 
lead, mercury, manganese and copper, have been implicated in amvotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 11764847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


803. Folia Neuropathol. 2001;39(3):181-92.

Neurones and microglia in central nervous system immune response to degenerative 
processes. Part 1: Alzheimer's disease and Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's 
disease. Quantitative study.

Szpak GM(1), Lechowicz W, Lewandowska E, Bertrand E, Wierzba-Bobrowicz T, 
Gwiazda E, Schmidt-Sidor B, Dymecki J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropathology, Institute of Psychiatry and Neurology, 
Warszawa, Poland.

The quantitative correlation between neurone loss and brain immune response, 
assessed by intensity of microglia inflammatory reaction in cortical association 
area and limbic cortex, was investigated and compared in previously 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) and ultrastructural confirmed 11 cases of Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), 7 cases mixed form of Dementia with AD findings and Lewy bodies 
(AD/DLB) reported, in accordance with Consortium on Dementia, as Lewy body 
variant of AD (LBV) and 6 non-demented autopsy control cases from 63 to 86 years 
old. In the present work we investigated association and limbic cortical areas 
linked with memory mechanisms; there are regions characterised by early 
distribution of IHC confirmed AD and DLB/AD (LBV) markers, as well as a 
substantial physiological stability of neurone pool regardless of age. The 
results indicated that AD and LBV differ in their neurone loss intensity and 
inflammatory reaction, with much higher intensity in AD. In Alzheimer's disease, 
neurone loss in association temporal cortex made up 51% of control values with 
simultaneous 8-fold increase in the density of MHC II-positive activated 
microglia, whereas in LBV, both the loss of neurone density and the increase in 
activated microglia density, was not so high (up to 41% and 4-5-fold, 
respectively). Changes in the limbic cortex were less pronounced. A strong 
correlation in the clinical material between neurone loss and microglia 
activation in both processes, especially in AD (r = 0.73), speaks in favour of 
the hypothesis on the neuronal immune surveillance and arousal of immune brain 
response in conditions of declining control, due to significant neurone loss in 
the neurodegenerative process. The inflammatory reaction of MHC 
II-immunoreactive microglia, concomitant with neurodegenerative process, seems 
to be a consequence of increased immune response due to loss of neurones and 
weakening of their control upon immunosurveillance in central nervous system.

PMID: 11770129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


804. Vertex. 2001 Dec;12(46):292-302.

[Dementia: clinic and diagnosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Estol CJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro Neurológico de Tratamiento y Rehabilitación, Buenos Aires, Argentina.

Decline of the cognitive functions necessary for activities of daily living 
results in a spectrum ranging from benign forgetfulness and minimal cognitive 
impairment to dementia. The latter is characterized by personality and 
behavioral changes. Alzheimer's disease is the most frequent cause of dementia 
affecting almost one of two people older than 80 years. Lewy body and 
cerebrovascular disease are also frequent causes of cognitive decline. Recent 
studies have revealed genetic aspects of Alzheimer's disease and the role of 
certain enzymes in the pathophysiology of fibrillary amyloid deposition. The aim 
in cognitive disease is an early diagnosis to initiate therapy and adapting 
measures in the patient's daily routines. The diagnosis is basically clinical 
with neuroimaging and neuropsychological tests' support. The EEG, SPECT, LP and 
other studies are only useful in a few specific scenarios. At present, a few 
promising therapies are being evaluated. Family support is of vital importance.

PMID: 11780155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


805. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2001 Jul-Aug;35(4):569-81.

[Incidence of dementia in Parkinson disease].

[Article in Polish]

Sławek J(1), Bojko E, Szady J.

Author information:
(1)Wojewódzkiego Oddziału Neurologii Szpitala Specjalistycznego św. Wojciecha w 
Gdańsku.

The aim of our study was to assess the frequency of dementia in a highly 
selected (according to diagnostic criteria of Parkinson's disease and other 
causes of dementia) group of patients.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: 46 patients (F 18, M 28), mean age--63.9 (39-80) years, 
with good response to L-Dopa. Besides the neurological examination, all patients 
underwent CT and psychological tests (Wechsler-Bellevue, Mini Mental and 
Hamilton test--to exclude severe depression as cognitive problem cause). In the 
group with dementia thyroxine and cholesterol tests and EEG were performed.
RESULTS: Within the whole group the features of dementia (the index of 
deterioration in Wechsler test > 25% and/or 23 or less points in Mini-Mental) 
were recognized in 11 (23.9%) patients. In comparison to the rest of the 
patients, in the group with dementia the mean age was 8.1 years higher, mean age 
at onset of the disease was 6.4 years higher, mean time of the disease 1.5 years 
longer and the severity of the disease measured in Hoehn-Yahr rating scale was 
0.76 points higher (2.20 vs 2.96). In the whole group severe depression (> 18 
points in Hamilton test) was revealed in 6%, whereas moderate (8-17 points) 
occurred in 71%.
CONCLUSIONS: Older age, later onset of symptoms and more advanced disease are 
the risk factors of dementia. Other causes--like dementia of Alzheimer's type 
may be suspected or two distinctive forms of Parkinson's Disease with and 
without dementia exist.

PMID: 11783401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


806. Arch Neurol. 2002 Jan;59(1):43-6. doi: 10.1001/archneur.59.1.43.

Research evaluation and prospective diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Lopez OL(1), Becker JT, Kaufer DI, Hamilton RL, Sweet RA, Klunk W, DeKosky ST.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Pittsburgh, Pa, USA.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2002 Jan;59(1):29-30.
    Arch Neurol. 2003 Mar;60(3):452.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the relative merits of recently developed criteria for 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLBs) in a longitudinal study of dementia.
DESIGN: The diagnosis of DLBs was used in combination with other clinical 
diagnosis. Patients were classified primarily based on the NINCDS-ADRDA 
(National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and 
Stroke-Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association) clinical criteria 
for probable or possible Alzheimer disease, or with other disease process that 
can cause dementia (eg, Parkinson disease), and secondarily according to the 
consensus guidelines for DLBs. This "double" clinical diagnosis was implemented 
to capture different pathological entities. The neuropathological diagnosis of 
Lewy bodies was made with monoclonal antibodies against alpha-synuclein.
SETTING: Multidisciplinary research clinic.
RESULTS: Prospective application of the consensus guidelines for DLBs from 
January 1, 1997, to September 29, 2000, identified 11 patients having the 
diagnosis of probable DLBs and 35 having possible DLBs. The diagnosis of 
probable or possible DLBs was associated with probable Alzheimer disease in 34 
patients, with possible Alzheimer disease in 5 patients, with Parkinson disease 
in 2 patients, and with other disease processes in 2 patients. Three patients 
were diagnosed as having probable DLBs alone. An autopsy was performed in 26 of 
the cases who were clinically examined during the study period. Cortical Lewy 
bodies were identified in 13 cases; 4 had had premortem diagnosis of DLBs 
(sensitivity, 30.7%; specificity, 100%).
CONCLUSIONS: The prospective validation of the clinical criteria for DLBs showed 
poor accuracy in this series. We believe that current criteria for DLBs are 
useful when DLBs occur in isolation, but have low sensitivity when Lewy bodies 
coexist with the pathological abnormalities of Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.59.1.43
PMID: 11790229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


807. J Neurol Sci. 2002 Feb 15;194(1):49-53. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00674-8.

Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease revealed by event-related potential 
N270.

Wang H(1), Wang Y, Wang D, Cui L, Tian S, Zhang Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital University of Medical 
Sciences, 100053, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

Disturbed cognitive function is a well-recognized feature of idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (PD). The aim of this study was to find a susceptive index 
to reveal the minor cognitive impairment in PD patients. Thirty PD patients 
without clinical dementia and thirty-four age-matched normal controls performed 
a matching task while event-related potentials (ERPs) were recorded from their 
scalp. There were two kinds of stimulus pairs in this study: match condition, 
the second stimulus (S2) in a pair was identical to the first one (S1); conflict 
condition, S2 conflicted with S1 in the color attribute. Subjects were required 
to press a button in the match condition and another button in the conflict 
condition. A negative ERP component, N270, which was considered to reflect the 
conflict processing activity in human brain, was evoked by the S2 of the 
conflict condition. The patient group showed a delayed and smaller N270 than the 
control group. The prolongation of its peak latency was significant at P3 and P4 
electrodes and the reduction of its mean amplitude was significant at P3 
electrode. The amplitude of P300 elicited in the match condition was decreased 
in the patient group at P4 electrode but its latency did not differ from the 
control group. These results indicate that PD patients as a group showed 
cognitive decline even in the absence of clinical dementia. N270 is a sensitive 
index in revealing this minor cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(01)00674-8
PMID: 11809166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


808. Ugeskr Laeger. 2001 Dec 31;164(1):50-4.

[Exposure to electromagnetic fields and risk of central nervous system diseases 
among employees at Danish electric companies].

[Article in Danish]

Johansen C(1).

Author information:
(1)Institut for Epidemiologisk Kraeftforskning, Kraeftens Bekaempelse, 
Strandboulevarden 49, DK-2100 København. christof@cancer.dk

INTRODUCTION: Occupational exposure to electromagnetic fields has been 
associated with neurological diseases, such as amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
senile dementia, Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: I studied the incidence of disease in the central nervous 
system in 30,631 persons employed at Danish electric companies between 1900 and 
1993. I linked the cohort to the nationwide, population-based Danish National 
Register of Patients and compared the number of cases of these diseases found 
between 1978 and 1993 with the corresponding rates in the general population. In 
addition, I fit the data on utility workers to a multiplicative Poisson 
regression model in relation to estimated levels of exposure to 50 Hz 
electromagnetic fields.
RESULTS: Overall, there was an increase in the risk of senile dementia and motor 
neuron diseases combined. The incidences of Parkinson's disease, Alzheimer's 
disease and other diseases of the central nervous system were essentially 
unrelated to exposure to electromagnetic fields. A decreased risk of epilepsy 
compared with the general population probably reflects a healthy worker effect; 
I observed an increased risk of epilepsy based on internal comparisons.
DISCUSSION: The increased risk of senile dementia and motor neuron diseases may 
be associated with above average levels of exposure to electromagnetic fields.

PMID: 11810798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


809. Neurophysiol Clin. 2001 Dec;31(6):356-75. doi: 10.1016/s0987-7053(01)00282-9.

Sleep and brain lesions: a critical review of the literature and additional new 
cases.

Autret A(1), Lucas B, Mondon K, Hommet C, Corcia P, Saudeau D, de Toffol B.

Author information:
(1)Service de neurologie CHU Bretonneau, 37044 Tours, France. 
alain.autret@med.univ-tours.fr

We present a comprehensive review of sleep studies performed in patients with 
brain lesions complemented by 16 additional personal selected cases and by 
discussion of the corresponding animal data. The reader is cautioned about the 
risk of establishing an erroneous correlation between abnormal sleep and a given 
disorder due to the important inter and intra variability of sleep parameters 
among individuals. Salient points are stressed: the high frequency of 
post-stroke sleep breathing disorders is becoming increasingly recognised and 
may, in the near future, change the way this condition is managed. 
Meso-diencephalic bilateral infarcts induce a variable degree of damage to both 
waking and non-REM sleep networks producing and abnormal waking and sometimes a 
stage 1 hypersomnia reduced by modafinil or bromocriptine, which can be 
considered as a syndrome of cathecholaminergic deficiency. Central pontine 
lesions induce REM and non-REM sleep insomnia with bilateral lateral gaze 
paralysis. Bulbar stroke leads to frequent sleep breathing disorders. 
Polysomnography can help define the extent of involvement of various 
degenerative diseases. Fragmented sleep in Parkinson's disease may be preceded 
by REM sleep behavioural disorders. Multiple system atrophies are characterised 
by important sleep disorganization. Sleep waking disorganization and a specific 
ocular REM pattern are often seen in supra-nuclear ophtalmoplegia. In Alzheimer 
patients, sleep perturbations parallel the mental deterioration and are possibly 
related to cholinergic deficiency. Fronto-temporal dementia may be associated 
with an important decrease in REM sleep. Few narcoleptic syndromes are reported 
to be associated with a tumour of the third ventricle or a multiple sclerosis or 
to follow a brain trauma; all these cases raise the question whether this is a 
simple coincidence, a revelation of a latent narcolepsy or, as in non-DR16/DQ5 
patients, a genuine symptomatic narcolepsy. Trypanosomiasis and the abnormal 
prion protein precociously after sleep patterns. Polysomnography is a precious 
tool for evaluating brain function provided it is realised under optimal 
conditions in stable patients and interpreted with caution. Several unpublished 
cases are presented: one case of pseudohypersomnia due to a bilateral thalamic 
infarct and corrected by modafinil, four probable late-onset autosomal recessive 
cerebellar ataxias without sleep pattern anomalies, six cases of fronto-temporal 
dementia with strong reduction in total sleep time and REMS percentage on the 
first polysomnographic night, one case of periodic hypersomnia associated with a 
Rathke's cleft cyst and four cases of suspected symptomatic narcolepsy with a 
DR16-DQ5 haplotype, three of which were post-traumatic without MRI anomalies, 
and one associated with multiple sclerosis exhibiting pontine hyper signals on 
MRI.

DOI: 10.1016/s0987-7053(01)00282-9
PMID: 11810986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


810. Psychosomatics. 2001 Nov-Dec;42(6):477-81. doi: 10.1176/appi.psy.42.6.477.

Olanzapine for the treatment of psychosis in patients with Parkinson's disease 
and dementia.

Marsh L(1), Lyketsos C, Reich SG.

Author information:
(1)Morris K Udall Parkinson's Disease Research Center of Excellence at Johns 
Hopkins, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Johns Hopkins 
University, Baltimore, MD 21287, USA.

Psychotic symptoms are a common complication in Parkinson's disease with 
dementia. The authors conducted an open-label 6-week trial of olanzapine 
preceded by a placebo lead-in in five subjects with Parkinson's disease, mild to 
moderately severe dementia, and psychosis. Four of the subjects terminated the 
trial early because of worsening motor function, sedation, or paranoia. There 
was no improvement in psychotic symptoms, and functional abilities declined 
significantly. Olanzapine appears to be poorly tolerated in patients with 
Parkinson's disease, psychotic symptoms, and dementia.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.psy.42.6.477
PMID: 11815682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


811. JAMA. 2002 Jan 23-30;287(4):455-63. doi: 10.1001/jama.287.4.455.

Excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden-onset sleep in Parkinson disease: a 
survey by the Canadian Movement Disorders Group.

Hobson DE(1), Lang AE, Martin WR, Razmy A, Rivest J, Fleming J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Maitoba, Winnipeg. 
dhobson@cc.umanitoba.ca

Comment in
    JAMA. 2002 Jan 23-30;287(4):509-11.
    JAMA. 2002 Apr 24;287(16):2076; author reply 2076-7.

CONTEXT: Somnolence is a recognized adverse effect of dopamine agonists. Two new 
dopamine agonists, pramipexole and ropinirole, have been reported to cause 
sudden-onset sleep spells in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) while they 
were driving. The frequency of these spells and whether driving should be 
restricted has yet to be established.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the frequency of and predictors for sudden-onset sleep 
and, particularly, episodes of falling asleep while driving among patients with 
PD.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Prospective survey conducted between January 
and April 2000 in 18 clinics directed by members of the Canadian Movement 
Disorders Group; 638 consecutive highly functional PD patients without dementia 
were enrolled, of whom 420 were currently drivers.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Excessive daytime sleepiness and sudden-onset sleep as 
assessed by the Epworth Sleepiness Scale and the Inappropriate Sleep Composite 
Score. The latter score, designed for this study, addressed falling asleep in 
unusual circumstances. The 2 scales were combined in 3 separate formats: dozing 
off, sudden unexpected sleep, and sudden blank spells.
RESULTS: Excessive daytime sleepiness was present overall in 327 (51%) of the 
638 patients and in 213 (51%) of the 420 drivers. Patients taking a variety of 
different dopamine agonists had no differences in Epworth sleepiness scores, in 
the composite score, or in the risk of falling asleep while driving. Sixteen 
patients (3.8%) had experienced at least 1 episode of sudden onset of sleep 
while driving (after the diagnosis of PD); in 3 (0.7%), it occurred without 
warning. The 2 risk factors associated with falling asleep at the wheel were the 
Epworth Sleepiness Scale score (odds ratio [OR], 1.14; 95% confidence interval 
[CI], 1.06-1.24) and the Inappropriate Sleep Composite Score (OR, 2.54; 95% CI, 
1.76-3.66). A standard Epworth Sleepiness Scale score of 7 or higher predicted 
75% of episodes of sleep behind the wheel at a specificity of 50% (exclusion of 
the question related to driving provided 70% sensitivity and 52% specificity), 
whereas a score of 1 on the Inappropriate Sleep Composite Score generated a 
sensitivity of 52% and specificity of 82%.
CONCLUSIONS: Excessive daytime sleepiness is common even in patients with PD who 
are independent and do not have dementia. Sudden-onset sleep without warning is 
infrequent. The Epworth score has adequate sensitivity for predicting prior 
episodes of falling asleep while driving and its specificity can be increased by 
use of the Inappropriate Sleep Composite Score. It is unknown if routinely 
performing these assessments could be more effective in predicting future risk 
for these rare sleep attacks. Patients should be warned not to drive if they 
doze in unusual circumstances.

DOI: 10.1001/jama.287.4.455
PMID: 11798367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


812. J Am Board Fam Pract. 2002 Jan-Feb;15(1):50-4.

Lewy body dementia: case report and discussion.

Khotianov N(1), Singh R, Singh S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Family Medicine, State University of New York at Buffalo, USA.

BACKGROUND: Lewy body dementia is a common but frequently underdiagnosed cause 
of dementia often mistaken for the more familiar entity of Alzheimer disease. 
Clinically the distinction is important, because it can have profound 
implications for management.
METHODS: The medical literature was searched using the keywords "Lewy bodies," 
"Lewy body dementia," "Alzheimer dementia," and "parkinsonian disorders." A case 
of Lewy body dementia is described.
RESULTS: An elderly man had long-standing diagnoses of Alzheimer disease and 
Parkinson disease. After he was evaluated thoroughly, the diagnosis was revised 
to Lewy body dementia, leading to changes in treatment that were associated with 
dramatic improvement in the patient's mental status. Evidence from the 
literature suggests that Lewy body dementia can be diagnosed in primary care 
settings based on clinical criteria. The physician should be alert to this 
diagnosis, and special attention should be paid to dementia patients who exhibit 
parkinsonism, hallucinations, fluctuating cognition, or prominent 
visuosperceptual deficits.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of Lewy body dementia has important implications. It 
is associated with a high incidence of neuroleptic sensitivity, necessitating 
great caution in the use of these common antipsychotic agents. Early studies 
indicate cholinesterase inhibitors can be beneficial for treating the 
hallucinations and behavior disturbances that afflict these patients and might 
also improve cognition.

PMID: 11841138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


813. Brain. 2002 Feb;125(Pt 2):391-403. doi: 10.1093/brain/awf033.

Visual hallucinations in Lewy body disease relate to Lewy bodies in the temporal 
lobe.

Harding AJ(1), Broe GA, Halliday GM.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute and University of New South Wales, 
Barker Street, Sydney, NSW 2031, Australia.

Consensus opinion characterizes dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) as a progressive 
dementing illness, with significant fluctuations in cognition, visual 
hallucinations and/or parkinsonism. When parkinsonism is an early dominant 
feature, consensus opinion recommends that dementia within the first year is 
necessary for a diagnosis of DLB. If dementia occurs later, a diagnosis of 
Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) is recommended. While many previous 
studies have correlated the neuropathology in DLB with dementia and 
parkinsonism, few have analysed the relationship between fluctuating cognition 
and/or well-formed visual hallucinations and the underlying neuropathology in 
DLB and PDD. The aim of the present study was to determine any relationship 
between these less-studied core clinical features of DLB, and the distribution 
and density of cortical Lewy bodies (LB). The brains of 63 cases with LB were 
obtained over 6 years following population-based studies of dementia and 
parkinsonian syndromes. Annual, internationally standardized, clinical 
assessment batteries were reviewed to determine the presence and onset of the 
core clinical features of DLB. The maximal density of LB, plaques and tangles in 
the amygdala, parahippocampal, anterior cingulate, superior frontal, inferior 
temporal, inferior parietal and visual cortices were determined. Current 
clinicopathological diagnostic criteria were used to classify cases into DLB (n 
= 29), PDD (n = 18) or parkinsonism without dementia (n = 16) groups. Predictive 
statistics were used to ascertain whether fluctuating cognition or visual 
hallucinations predicted the clinicopathological group. Analysis of variance and 
regressions were used to identify any significant relationship(s) between the 
presence and severity of neuropathological and clinical features. Cognitive 
fluctuations and/or visual hallucinations were not good predictors of DLB in 
pathologically proven patients, although the absence of these features early in 
the disease course was highly predictive of PDD. Cases with DLB had higher LB 
densities in the inferior temporal cortex than cases with PDD. There was no 
association across groups between any neuropathological variable and the 
presence or absence of fluctuating cognition. However, there was a striking 
association between the distribution of temporal lobe LB and well-formed visual 
hallucinations. Cases with well-formed visual hallucinations had high densities 
of LB in the amygdala and parahippocampus, with early hallucinations relating to 
higher densities in parahippocampal and inferior temporal cortices. These 
temporal regions have previously been associated with visual hallucinations in 
other disorders. Thus, our results suggest that the distribution of temporal 
lobe LB is more related to the presence and duration of visual hallucinations in 
cases with LB than to the presence, severity or duration of dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awf033
PMID: 11844739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


814. Brain Res Cogn Brain Res. 2002 Feb;13(1):53-9. doi: 
10.1016/s0926-6410(01)00089-1.

Corticostriatal circuitry mediates fast-track visual categorization.

Antal A(1), Kéri S, Kincses T, Kálmán J, Dibó G, Benedek G, Janka Z, Vécsei L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Szeged, Szeged, Hungary. 
aantal@gwdg.de

Previous studies have shown that briefly presented natural scenes containing 
non-animals elicited more negative potentials than images with animals even at 
150 ms after stimulus onset (dN150). Cognitive models suggest that both 
feed-forward and feature weighting processes are involved in the rapid 
categorization of complex natural scenes. Here we examined the possible neuronal 
substrates of this model. Patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD) exhibited a 
delayed dN150, but in their case non-animals evoked more negative potentials 
similarly to the controls (presence of dN150). In contrast, in patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) animal and non-animal stimuli elicited nearly identical 
early responses (absence of dN150). The results indicate that when 
cortico-cortical pathways mediating feed-forward mechanisms are impaired (as in 
the case of AD), dN150 appears later, while in the case of corticostriatal 
dysfunctions (as in the case of PD) no differential response is present. This 
supports the hypothesis that corticostriatal circuits mediate perceptual feature 
weighting and integration in complex situations requiring categorical 
judgements.

DOI: 10.1016/s0926-6410(01)00089-1
PMID: 11867250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


815. Scand J Work Environ Health. 2002 Feb;28(1):42-8. doi: 10.5271/sjweh.645.

Occupational exposure to magnetic fields in case-referent studies of 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Noonan CW(1), Reif JS, Yost M, Touchstone J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Health, Colorado State University, United States. 
cnoonan@cdc.gov

OBJECTIVES: Case-referent studies of Alzheimer's disease, amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease were conducted to explore the relationship 
between these neurodegenerative diseases and occupational exposure to magnetic 
fields. Three methods of exposure assessment were used for the comparison, and 
the consistency of findings between these approaches was evaluated.
METHODS: Separate case-referent sets were formed from among recorded deaths of 
males in the state of Colorado for the years 1987 through 1996. The following 
three methods of exposure assessment were used: a dichotomous grouping of 
electrical versus nonelectrical occupations, a three-tiered grouping of 
potential magnetic-field exposure based on a combination of job title and 
industry, and categories of exposure based on the means of the magnetic fields 
estimated from a job-exposure matrix.
RESULTS: A positive association was observed for Parkinson's disease with all 
the methods of magnetic-field exposure assessment, the odds ratio (OR) for the 
highest category in the job-exposure matrix being 1.50 [95% confidence interval 
(95% CI) 1.02-2.19]. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis was associated with a history 
of electrical occupations (OR 2.30, 95% CI 1.29-4.09) but not with 
magnetic-field exposure as estimated by the job-exposure matrix. No consistent 
associations with magnetic fields were observed for Alzheimer's disease.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides some support for an association between 
occupational magnetic-field exposure and Parkinson's disease, but the findings 
are novel and require replication. Associations with the other neurodegenerative 
diseases were inconsistent and dependent on the method of exposure assessment.

DOI: 10.5271/sjweh.645
PMID: 11871851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


816. Brain. 2002 Mar;125(Pt 3):575-83. doi: 10.1093/brain/awf050.

Clinical predictive factors of subthalamic stimulation in Parkinson's disease.

Welter ML(1), Houeto JL, Tezenas du Montcel S, Mesnage V, Bonnet AM, Pillon B, 
Arnulf I, Pidoux B, Dormont D, Cornu P, Agid Y.

Author information:
(1)Centre d'Investigation Clinique and INSERM U 289, Hôpital de la Salpêtrière, 
Paris, France.

High-frequency stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (STN) constitutes one of 
the most effective treatments for advanced forms of Parkinson's disease. The 
cost and potential risks of this procedure encourage the determination of 
clinical characteristics of patients that will have the best postoperative 
outcome. Forty-one Parkinson's disease patients underwent surgery for bilateral 
STN stimulation. The selection criteria were severe parkinsonian motor 
disability, clear response of symptoms to levodopa, occurrence of disabling 
levodopa-related motor complications and the absence of dementia and significant 
abnormalities on brain MRI. Clinical evaluation was performed 1 month before and 
6 months after surgery. The improvement in the activities of daily living 
subscale of the Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, Part II (UPDRS II) and 
parkinsonian motor disability (UPDRS III) was greater when the preoperative 
scores for activities of daily living and parkinsonian motor disability, in 
particular axial symptoms, such as gait disorders and postural instability 
assessed at the time of maximal clinical improvement (on drug), were lower. Age 
and disease duration were not predictive, but parkinsonian motor disability 
tended to be more improved in patients with younger age and shorter disease 
duration. The severity of levodopa-related motor complications was not a 
predictive factor. The outcome of STN stimulation was excellent in 
levodopa-responsive forms of Parkinson's disease, i.e. in patients with 
selective brain dopaminergic lesions, and moderate in patients with axial motor 
symptoms and cognitive impairment known to be less responsive or unresponsive to 
levodopa treatment, i.e. when brain non-dopaminergic lesions develop in addition 
to the degeneration of the nigrostriatal dopaminergic system. The results are 
consistent with the classical inclusion criteria for STN stimulation, but imply 
that the decision to operate on the oldest patients and/or patients with gait 
and postural disorders, who are poorly responsive to levodopa, should be weighed 
carefully.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awf050
PMID: 11872614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


817. Neurology. 2002 Mar 12;58(5):765-73. doi: 10.1212/wnl.58.5.765.

ALS and PDC of Guam: forty-year follow-up.

Plato CC(1), Galasko D, Garruto RM, Plato M, Gamst A, Craig UK, Torres JM, 
Wiederholt W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California San Diego School of 
Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0624, USA. drccplato@mindspring.com

BACKGROUND: It was noticed in the mid-1950s that the incidence of ALS and 
parkinsonism--dementia complex (PDC) were much higher on Guam than anywhere else 
in the world. In 1958, a registry of patients and controls was established to 
ascertain the familial and genetic aspects of these diseases. Patients and 
individually matched controls and their relatives were registered from 1958 to 
1963. The registry was updated and analyzed in 1998 through 1999.
OBJECTIVE: To ascertain whether first-degree relatives of patients had a higher 
risk for developing ALS or PDC than relatives of controls.
METHODS: During the period of 1958 to 1963, 126 new patients and 126 
individually matched controls and their respective first-degree relatives and 
spouses were evaluated neurologically and registered. Forty years later, the 
number of new cases among the patient and control relatives were compared to an 
expected number of new cases based on the age- and sex-specific incidence of ALS 
and PDC in the population at large.
RESULTS: From 1958 to 1999, there were 102 new ALS or PDC cases among relatives 
of patients and 33 among relatives of controls. These values were compared with 
the derived expected values. There were more observed than expected new cases 
among patients' relatives, and less observed cases than expected among the 
controls' relatives.
CONCLUSIONS: Relatives of patients with ALS or PDC have significantly higher 
risks for developing the disease than the Guamanian population, whereas 
relatives of controls have significantly lower risks.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.58.5.765
PMID: 11889241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


818. Exp Gerontol. 2002 May;37(5):701-12. doi: 10.1016/s0531-5565(01)00232-7.

Dehydroepiandrosterone-sulfate serum levels and common age-related diseases: 
results from a cross-sectional Italian study of a general elderly population.

Ravaglia G(1), Forti P, Maioli F, Sacchetti L, Nativio V, Scali CR, Mariani E, 
Zanardi V, Stefanini A, Macini PL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Cardioangiology, and Hepatology, University 
Hospital S. Orsola-Malpighi, Via Massarenti, 9, Bologna, Italy. 
ravaglia@almadns.unibo.it

The association of low serum dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEAS) levels with 
age, lifestyle, general health status indicators, and specific diseases was 
investigated in 436 men and 544 women of 65-97 yr old. In both sexes low serum 
DHEAS levels were associated with age, alcohol intake, number of current 
medications, and decreased thyroid function. Low DHEAS was also associated with 
low serum albumin in men and low systolic blood pressure in women. Compared to 
healthy men (n=106) age-adjusted serum DHEAS levels were significantly lower in 
men with atrial fibrillation, chronic obstructive lung disease, dementia, 
parkinsonism, cancer, diabetes, hypothyroidism, and in institutionalized men. 
Compared to healthy women (n=100) age-adjusted serum DHEAS levels were 
significantly lower in women with occlusive arterial disease, chronic 
obstructive lung disease, and osteoporosis. After controlling for differences in 
lifestyle and general health status parameters, low DHEAS levels remained 
statistically associated only with atrial fibrillation in men and osteoporosis 
in women, and it cannot be excluded that these association were spurious, due to 
multiple comparisons. These data suggest that in elderly people low serum DHEAS 
levels are more a non-specific indicator of aging and health status than a risk 
indicator of specific diseases.

DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(01)00232-7
PMID: 11909687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


819. Annu Rev Public Health. 2002;23:213-31. doi: 
10.1146/annurev.publhealth.23.100901.140525. Epub 2001 Oct 25.

The public health impact of Alzheimer's disease, 2000-2050: potential 
implication of treatment advances.

Sloane PD(1), Zimmerman S, Suchindran C, Reed P, Wang L, Boustani M, Sudha S.

Author information:
(1)Cecil G. Sheps Center for Health Services Research, Department of Family 
Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chaper Hill, 27599, USA. 
psloane@med.unc.edu

Recent developments in basic research suggest that therapeutic breakthroughs may 
occur in Alzheimer's disease treatment over the coming decades. To model the 
potential magnitude and nature of the effect of these advances, historical data 
from congestive heart failure and Parkinson's disease were used. Projections 
indicate that therapies which delay disease onset will markedly reduce overall 
disease prevalence, whereas therapies to treat existing disease will alter the 
proportion of cases that are mild as opposed to moderate/severe. The public 
health impact of such changes would likely involve both the amount and type of 
health services needed. Particularly likely to arise are new forms of outpatient 
services, such as disease-specific clinics and centers. None of our models 
predicts less than a threefold rise in the total number of persons with 
Alzheimer's disease between 2000 and 2050. Therefore, Alzheimer's care is likely 
to remain a major public health problem during the coming decades.

DOI: 10.1146/annurev.publhealth.23.100901.140525
PMID: 11910061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


820. Brain. 2002 Apr;125(Pt 4):801-11. doi: 10.1093/brain/awf086.

Guadeloupean parkinsonism: a cluster of progressive supranuclear palsy-like 
tauopathy.

Caparros-Lefebvre D(1), Sergeant N, Lees A, Camuzat A, Daniel S, Lannuzel A, 
Brice A, Tolosa E, Delacourte A, Duyckaerts C.

Author information:
(1)Neurologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de la Guadeloupe, Pointe à 
Pitre, French West Indies. caparros.lefebvre@chu-guadeloupe.fr

An unusually high frequency of atypical Parkinson syndrome has been delineated 
over the last 5 years in the French West Indies. Postural instability with early 
falls, prominent frontal lobe dysfunction and pseudo-bulbar palsy were common 
and three-quarters of the patients were L-dopa unresponsive. One-third of all 
patients seen had probable progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP). This new focus 
of atypical parkinsonism is reminiscent of the one described in Guam and may be 
linked to exposure to tropical plants containing mitochondrial complex I 
inhibitors (quinolines, acetogenins, rotenoids). Two hundred and twenty 
consecutive patients with Parkinson's syndrome seen by the neurology service at 
Pointe à Pitre, Guadeloupe University Hospital were studied. Currently accepted 
operational clinical criteria for Parkinson's syndromes were applied. The 
pathological findings of three patients who came to autopsy are reported. 
Fifty-eight patients had probable PSP, 96 had undetermined parkinsonism and 50 
had Parkinson's disease, 15 had amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with parkinsonism 
and one had probable multiple system atrophy. All three PSP patients in whom 
post-mortem study was performed had early postural instability, gaze palsy and 
parkinsonian symptoms, followed by a frontolimbic dementia and corticobulbar 
signs. Neuropathological examination showed an accumulation of tau proteins, 
predominating in the midbrain. There was an exceptionally large accumulation of 
neuropil threads in Case 1. Biochemical studies detected a major doublet of 
pathological tau at 64 and 69 kDa in brain tissue homogenates. All cases were 
homozygous for the H1 tau haplotype, but no mutation of the tau gene was 
observed. Clinical, neuropathological and biochemical features were compatible 
with the diagnosis of PSP, although some unusual pathological features were 
noted in Case 1. A cluster of cases presenting with atypical parkinsonism is 
reported. Guadeloupean parkinsonism may prove to be a tauopathy identical or 
closely related to PSP.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awf086
PMID: 11912113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


821. Neurology. 2002 Mar 26;58(6):922-8. doi: 10.1212/wnl.58.6.922.

Early onset autosomal dominant dementia with ataxia, extrapyramidal features, 
and epilepsy.

Filla A(1), De Michele G, Cocozza S, Patrignani A, Volpe G, Castaldo I, Ruggiero 
G, Bonavita V, Masters C, Casari G, Bruni A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, Federico II University, Naples, Italy. 
afilla@unina.it

OBJECTIVE: To perform a clinical and molecular study of a large autosomal 
dominant family with a complex neurologic syndrome that comprises early-onset 
dementia, extrapyramidal and cerebellar features, and epilepsy.
BACKGROUND: Early-onset forms of dementia often are caused by genetic factors. 
Mutations of three different genes-amyloid precursor protein (APP), presenilin 1 
(PS-1), presenilin 2 (PS-2)-have been found in early-onset autosomal dominant 
forms of AD, of the human microtubule associated-protein tau gene (MAPT) in 
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17), of 
the BRI gene in familial British dementia, of the PI12 gene in familial 
encephalopathy with neuroserpin inclusion bodies. Linkage to chromosome 3 has 
been found in familial nonspecific dementia (FND) and linkage to chromosome 20 
has been found in Huntington disease (HD)-like neurodegenerative disease. 
Dementia may be a feature of other neurodegenerative diseases such as HD, 
dentatorubro-pallidoluysian atrophy (DRPLA), diseases caused by mutations of the 
prion protein gene (PRNP), spinocerebellar ataxias (SCA), and familial 
parkinsonism.
METHODS: A southern Italian family with autosomal dominant dementia-plus was 
observed. The family includes 57 individuals in 5 generations (14 affected, 7 
personally observed). The authors performed linkage analysis to APP, PS-1, PS-2, 
FTDP-17, BRI, PI12, FND, HD-like, SCA4, SCA5, SCA10, SCA11, SCA13, PARK1, PARK2, 
PARK3 loci; direct mutation analysis of HD, DRPLA, SCA1, SCA2, SCA3, SCA6, SCA7, 
SCA8, SCA12, and PRNP genes; and sequencing of the PRNP open reading frame.
RESULTS: Linkage to the examined loci was excluded. All of the direct mutation 
analyses were negative excluding mutations in the examined genes.
CONCLUSIONS: This family has a peculiar phenotype and molecular analyses 
excluded genes known to cause hereditary dementias.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.58.6.922
PMID: 11914409 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


822. Mov Disord. 2002 Mar;17(2):250-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.10086.

Do risk factors for Alzheimer's disease predict dementia in Parkinson's disease? 
An exploratory study.

Levy G(1), Tang MX, Cote LJ, Louis ED, Alfaro B, Mejia H, Stern Y, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, New York, USA.

The extent to which concomitant Alzheimer's disease (AD) is etiologically 
related to the development of dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) remains 
controversial. We explored the association of four risk factors associated with 
AD, including head injury, smoking, hypertension, and diabetes mellitus, with 
incident dementia in PD. A cohort of 180 nondemented PD patients from the 
Washington Heights community in northern Manhattan, New York, completed a risk 
factor questionnaire at baseline and was followed annually with neurological and 
neuropsychological evaluations. The association of baseline variables with 
incident dementia was analyzed by using Cox proportional hazards models. All 
analyses controlled for age at baseline, gender, years of education, duration of 
PD, and total Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) motor score at 
baseline. Of 180 patients (mean age, 71.0 +/- 10.3 years), 52 (29%) became 
demented during a mean follow-up period of 3.6 +/- 2.2 years. Head injury risk 
ratio ([RR] 0.9; 95% confidence interval [CI], 0.4-2.2; P = 0.9), hypertension 
(RR, 0.7; 95% CI, 0.4-1.4, P = 0.3), and diabetes mellitus (RR, 0.8; 95% CI, 
0.3-2.3; P = 0.7) were not significantly associated with incident dementia in 
the Cox models. Patients who reported having ever smoked were at increased risk 
for the development of dementia compared with nonsmokers (RR, 2.0; 95% CI, 
1.0-3.9; P = 0.05). Current smoking was significantly associated with incident 
dementia (RR, 4.5; 95% CI, 1.2-16.4; P = 0.02), whereas past smoking approached 
significance (RR, 1.9; 95% CI, 0.9-3.7; P = 0.07). Although an inverse 
association between smoking and PD has been reported in several studies, our 
study showed a positive association between smoking and dementia in the setting 
of PD. The association of smoking with incident dementia in PD deserves further 
study.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10086
PMID: 11921109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


823. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002 Mar;17(3):254-60. doi: 10.1002/gps.585.

Psychometric properties of Clock Drawing Test and MMSE or Short Performance Test 
(SKT) in dementia screening in a memory clinic population.

Schramm U(1), Berger G, Müller R, Kratzsch T, Peters J, Frölich L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, JW Goethe University, Heinrich Hoffmann Strasse 
100, D-60128 Frankfurt/Main, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate five different scoring methods of the Clock Drawing Test 
(CDT) and to examine whether a combination of Mini Mental State Examination 
(MMSE) or Short Performance Test (Syndrom Kurz Test, SKT), respectively, with 
CDT can be used for cognitive screening.
METHODS: Retrospective blinded analysis of clock drawing performance using five 
scoring methods (Shulman et al. (1986), Sunderland et al. (1989), Wolf-Klein et 
al. (1989), Watson et al. (1997), Manos (1997)). A Memory Clinic at an academic 
psychiatric hospital (University of Frankfurt am Main, Germany). 123 consecutive 
patients (79 dementia patients, 44 controls). Inter-rater reliability and 
correlation of five different scoring methods of the CDT with established 
psychometric tests. Sensitivity and specificity of all five CDT's using the 
original and modified cut-off scores. Sensitivity, specificity and positive and 
negative predictive value of a combination of the CDT with MMSE and SKT, 
respectively.
RESULTS: All scoring methods of the CDT showed a highly significant interrater 
reliability (0.82 to 0.94). Correlation with the MMSE and the SKT was also 
significant (p < 0.01) for all five CDTs. Highest sensitivity was achieved by 
the Shulman scoring method (81% sensitivity, specificity 79%). Sensitivity of 
all scoring methods could be improved up to 89% by modifying the originally 
proposed cut-off scores at the cost of lower specificity. By combining the CDT 
with the MMSE or the SKT, respectively, the sensitivity of each of the tests 
could be improved to 92% (SKT and Shulman scale). In patients with mild dementia 
(GDS 3), a combination of the Shulman Scale with the SKT (92%) and the MMSE 
(75%) achieved the highest sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The CDT in combination with the MMSE or SKT is an easily 
administered, non threatening and highly sensitive screening test for dementia 
in the setting of a memory clinic.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.585
PMID: 11921154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


824. Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2002 Feb;56(1):71-5. doi: 
10.1046/j.1440-1819.2002.00931.x.

Prevalence of dementia in the older Japanese-Brazilian population.

Yamada T(1), Kadekaru H, Matsumoto S, Inada H, Tanabe M, Moriguchi EH, Moriguchi 
Y, Ishikawa P, Ishikawa AG, Taira K, Yamori Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Health Care, Fukuoka University, Fukuoka, 
Japan. tyamada@fukuoka-u.ac.jp

The prevalence of dementing disorders in Campo Grande of a community of 
Japanese-Brazilians who immigrated from Okinawa was studied. Previous reports 
showed that the dietary pattern in Japanese immigrants in Brazil, which 
characterized by a low fish and large meat intake, is possibly responsible for 
increased risk of cardiovascular diseases compared with Japanese in Okinawa. A 
total of 157 persons over 70-year-old were examined, and 19 cases were diagnosed 
as having dementia. The prevalence (cases/100 aged 70-year-older) was 12.1 for 
all types of dementia, 5.7 for Alzheimer's disease (AD), 0.6 for vascular 
dementia (VD), 4.5 for mixed dementia (AD/VD) and 1.3 for other types of 
dementia. There was no case of dementia with Lewy bodies or frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration. These results are similar to many previous studies in Western 
countries and some recent surveys in Japan, and clearly show that more AD than 
VD appears even in the Japanese-Brazilian population. The higher prevalence rate 
of dementia in Japanese-Brazilians compared with several studies in Japan may 
indicate the importance of dietary factors rather than genetic factors.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1440-1819.2002.00931.x
PMID: 11929573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


825. Arch Neurol. 2002 Apr;59(4):588-93. doi: 10.1001/archneur.59.4.588.

Effect of extrapyramidal signs and Lewy bodies on survival in patients with 
Alzheimer disease.

Haan MN(1), Jagust WJ, Galasko D, Kaye J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Michigan, School of Public Health, 
109 S Observatory St, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2029, USA. mnhaan@umich.edu

BACKGROUND: Patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) who have psychiatric and 
parkinsonian symptoms experience faster cognitive deterioration and shorter 
survival vs those without such disease features. Extrapyramidal signs (EPSs) in 
particular have been associated with the presence of Lewy bodies (LBs) on 
autopsy and with poorer survival in patients with AD. Lewy bodies found at 
autopsy are not always correlated with EPSs during late life.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the association between LBs and age at death is 
modified by the presence of EPSs, hallucinations, or delusions.
DESIGN: An autopsy series of patients with clinically diagnosed AD.
SETTINGS: Three AD clinics (San Diego and Sacramento, Calif, and Portland, Ore).
PATIENTS: Data on 379 patients with a clinical diagnosis of AD who were 
initially assessed between May 1, 1984, and August 1, 1996, and who were 
autopsied between January 1, 1990, and April 1, 1998, were pooled from 3 AD 
centers.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Presence of LBs on autopsy and differences in age at 
death in those with EPSs, LBs, or both.
RESULTS: Individuals with EPSs at initial assessment were more than 3 times as 
likely to have LBs at autopsy than were those without EPSs. Age at death was 
younger in those with LBs and EPSs than in those with LBs only and those without 
EPSs or LBs.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of EPSs in patients with AD indicates worse prognosis 
and may be related to underlying LBs. The presence of EPSs is a strong predictor 
of LBs.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.59.4.588
PMID: 11939893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


826. Med Sci Monit. 2002 Apr;8(4):CR241-6.

Predictors of mortality among nursing home residents with a diagnosis of 
Parkinson's disease.

Fernandez HH(1), Lapane KL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, Brown University School of Medicine, 
Providence, RI, USA.

BACKGROUND: Little is known about predictors of mortality among Parkinson 
patients living in long term care.
MATERIAL/METHODS: We conducted a 3-year follow-up study on 15,237 PD residents 
aged 65 years and older using the Systematic Assessment in Geriatric drug use 
via Epidemiology (SAGE) database. The SAGE database consists of the Minimum Data 
Set (MDS) data collected on over 400,000 nursing home residents in 5 U. S. 
states, including demographic characteristics, dementia severity, comorbidity 
and other clinical variables. Information on death was derived through linkage 
to Medicare files. Baseline characteristics were used to predict survival using 
univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazard models.
RESULTS: The overall 3-year mortality rate was 50%. Advanced age (relative rate 
(RR) 2.22; 95% confidence interval (CI) 1.99-2.47, for patients 85+ years), male 
gender (RR 1.73; 95% CI 1.60-1.87), severe functional (RR 1.81; 95% CI 
1.53-2.13) and cognitive (RR 1.54; 95% CI 1.38-1.72) impairment, the presence of 
vision problems (RR 1.25; 95% CI 1.20-1.57), pressure ulcers (RR 1.25; 95% 
1.14-1.37), and a diagnosis of congestive heart failure (RR 1.49; 95% CI 
1.35-1.65), diabetes mellitus (RR 1.22; 95% 1.11-1.35) and pneumonia (RR 1.39; 
95% CI 1.09-1.77) were independent predictors of death. The specific presence of 
aspiration pneumonia had the highest mortality risk ratio among all 
comorbidities (RR 1.58; CI 0.97-2.56). African-Americans and other minority 
groups were less likely to die relative to white PD residents.
CONCLUSIONS: Age, sex, functional and cognitive impairment and the diagnosis of 
pneumonia or congestive heart failure were the strongest predictors of death. 
Minority groups have a reduced risk of death relative to white PD nursing home 
residents.

PMID: 11951064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


827. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2002 Mar;109(3):329-39. doi: 10.1007/s007020200027.

Impact of coexistent Alzheimer pathology on the natural history of Parkinson's 
disease.

Jellinger KA(1), Seppi K, Wenning GK, Poewe W.

Author information:
(1)L. Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

OBJECTIVE: To assess the impact of coexisting Alzheimer (AD) pathology on the 
natural history of Parkinson's disease (PD).
BACKGROUND: AD changes are frequently present in brains of demented PD patients. 
Assessing the relative contribution of AD pathology to the natural history of PD 
is difficult and the impact of both AD and cortical Lewy body (LB) pathologies 
on cognitive dysfunction is still under discussion. From clinical experience, 
dementia in PD patients, mainly related to AD pathology, is associated with a 
poor outcome, but the impact of AD pathology on the natural history of PD has 
not been studied systematically.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: In 200 consecutive autopsy cases of PD (sex (m/f) ratio 
1:1.1), age at death 58-98 (mean 77.0 +/- 9.5) years, from a specialized 
Austrian brain bank, retrospectively assessed major initial clinical symptoms 
(tremor, akinesia), moderate/severe dementia, and duration of illness were 
correlated with associated AD pathologies using CERAD, Braak and NIA-Reagan 
criteria. Mann-Whitney U-test, Cox-regression were used for statistical 
analysis.
RESULTS: While gender had no influence on the clinical motor symptoms and 
outcome, tremor dominant type had a significantly better outcome than akinetic 
forms (p = 0.022), even after adjustment with age at onset and associated AD 
pathology (CERAD and Braak criteria). Patients with late onset showed 
significantly shorter duration of illness irrespective of dementia. Moderate to 
severe dementia, reported in 33% of the sample, was significantly correlated 
with AD pathology (all 3 criteria) that showed significantly negative 
correlation with survival: between CERAD 0-A vs. B and C there was a significant 
difference of odd ratios (p < 0.001), as was between Braak stages 0-2, 3-4.5, 
and 5, but not between Braak stages 3-4 and 5.
CONCLUSIONS: The present data confirm previous studies suggesting better outcome 
of tremor-dominant than akinetic-rigid type of PD, significantly worse outcome 
in PD with late onset and dementia that is significantly correlated with 
coexistent neuritic Alzheimer pathology, particularly when using the CERAD and 
NIA-R criteria for the diagnosis of AD. Further studies are needed to elucidate 
the relative impact of cortical LB and AD pathologies on the natural history of 
PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s007020200027
PMID: 11956955 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


828. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2001 Sep;41(9):582-7.

[Diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease using brain SPECT with three-dimensional 
stereotactic surface projections].

[Article in Japanese]

Hanyu H(1), Asano T, Kogure D, Abe S, Iwamoto T, Takasaki M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Tokyo Medical University.

We compared the diagnostic usefulness of three-dimensional stereotactic surface 
projection (3D-SSP) with that of standard transaxial images in brain SPECT in 
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD). The subjects consisted of 69 patients 
with AD and 60 patients with non-AD, including vascular dementia, Parkinson's 
disease with dementia, frontotemporal dementia, other dementing diseases and 
neuropsychiatric diseases. Standard transaxial section and 3D-SSP SPECT images 
with N-isopropyl-p-[123I] iodoamphetamine were blindly interpreted by three 
examiners and were classified into the following three patterns: typical AD, 
atypical AD, and not indicative AD patterns. The 3D-SSP images demonstrated 
reductions of cerebral blood flow in the parieto-temporal association cortex and 
posterior cingulate gyrus more clearly and easily than the standard transaxial 
images. The diagnostic sensitivity and specificity were 93% and 85% with 3D-SSP 
and 83% and 82% with standard transaxial section respectively. 3D-SSP was 
especially useful for early or atypical AD which showed no characteristic 
perfusion abnormalities on standard transaxial images. These results suggest 
that SPECT with 3D-SSP provides an sensitive as well as accurate tool for the 
diagnosis of AD.

PMID: 11968741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


829. Clin Neuropharmacol. 2002 Mar-Apr;25(2):107-10. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-200203000-00009.

Successful use of donepezil for the treatment of psychotic symptoms in patients 
with Parkinson's disease.

Bergman J(1), Lerner V.

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Center Tirat Carmel, Haifa, Israel.

The risk of psychosis among patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) is high, and 
the management of these patients remains a substantial problem for physicians. 
Atypical antipsychotics, despite their advantages over conventional 
antipsychotics, can cause different side effects and deterioration of PD. 
Several reports have suggested that donepezil can be helpful in the treatment of 
psychotic conditions in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's 
disease. This report presents the results of preliminary study of six patients 
(four women, two men; age range, 60-75 years) with PD (range of duration, 3-7 
years) and dementia complicated by psychosis. All patients were treated with 
antiparkinsonian therapy, and donepezil was added to their regular treatment. 
The severity of the psychotic symptoms was assessed using the Scale for the 
Assessment of Positive Symptoms, and extrapyramidal symptoms were assessed using 
the Simpson-Angus Scale. With the addition of donepezil (as much as 10 mg/day) 
to their constant antiparkinsonian treatment, five patients had clinically 
significant (more than 53%) improvement on the assessment scale, and one patient 
had minimal (24%) improvement after 6 weeks of the treatment. None of the 
patients had side effects or deterioration of parkinsonian symptoms. The results 
suggest that donepezil may ameliorate psychotic symptoms in patients with PD, 
but this will need to be tested further in controlled, double-blind trials.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-200203000-00009
PMID: 11981238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


830. Expert Rev Neurother. 2002 May;2(3):403-16. doi: 10.1586/14737175.2.3.403.

Neuroprotection in Parkinson's disease: love story or mission impossible?

Linazasoro GJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Neurología y Neurocirugía funcional, Clínica Quirón. Parque Alcolea 
s/n, 20012 San Sebastián, Guipúzcoa, Spain. glinazasoro@terra.es

Parkinson's disease was the first neurodegenerative disease in which a deficient 
neurotransmitter (dopamine) was successfully replaced by a systemically 
administered drug (levodopa). However, chronic levodopa therapy is associated 
with the development of motor and psychiatric complications. Furthermore, the 
progressive course of the disease is not halted and levodopa-resistant symptoms, 
such as dementia or postural instability, eventually appear. Most of these 
problems are related to the progressive nature of Parkinson's disease. 
Therefore, stopping or slowing the progression of Parkinson's disease is one of 
the main therapeutic objectives. Since the discovery 
of1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-induced parkinsonism in the early 
1980s, the possibility of protecting dopaminergic nigral neurons against the 
action of toxic insults has attracted the attention of the neurological 
community. Could Parkinson's disease also be the first neurodegenerative 
condition with a potential neuroprotective treatment? The promise of rational 
neuroprotective therapy is generating much excitement and some frustration among 
researchers. In this article, the state of the art of neuroprotection in 
Parkinson's disease is reviewed.

DOI: 10.1586/14737175.2.3.403
PMID: 19810872


831. Psychol Sci Public Interest. 2002 May;3(1):12-38. doi: 10.1111/1529-1006.00007. 
Epub 2002 May 1.

"Brain-Specific" Nutrients: A Memory Cure?

McDaniel MA(1), Maier SF(2), Einstein GO(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 
mcdaniel@unm.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado, Boulder, Colorado.
(3)Department of Psychology, Furman University, Greenville, South Carolina.

We review the experimental evaluations of several widely marketed 
nonprescription compounds claimed to be memory enhancers and treatments for 
age-related memory decline. We generally limit our review to double-blind 
placebo-controlled studies. The compounds examined are phos-phatidylserine (PS), 
phosphatidylcholine (PC), citicoline, piracetam, vinpocetine, acetyl-L-carnitine 
(ALC), and antiox-idants (particularly vitamin E). In animals, PS has been shown 
to attenuate many neuronal effects of aging, and to restore normal memory on a 
variety of tasks. Preliminary findings with humans, though, are limited. For 
older adults with probable Alzheimer's disease, a single study failed to 
demonstrate positive effects of PS on memory performance. For older adults with 
moderate cognitive impairment, PS has produced consistently modest increases in 
recall of word lists. Positive effects have not been as consistently reported 
for other memory tests. There is one report of consistent benefits across a 
number of memory tests for a subset of normal adults who performed more poorly 
than their peers at baseline. The choline compounds PC and citicoline are 
thought to promote synthesis and transmission of neurotransmitters important to 
memory. PC has not proven effective for improving memory in patients with 
probable Alzheimer's disease. The issue remains open for older adults without 
serious degenerative neural disease. Research on citicoline is practically 
nonexistent, but one study reported a robust improvement in story recall for a 
small sample of normally aging older adults who scored lower than their peers in 
baseline testing. Animal studies suggest that piracetam may improve neuronal 
efficiency, facilitate activity in neurotransmitter systems, and combat the 
age-related decrease in receptors on the neuronal membrane. However, for 
patients with probable Alzheimer's disease, as well as for adults with 
age-associated memory impairment, there is no clear-cut support for a mnemonic 
benefit of piracetam. Vinpocetine increases blood circulation and metabolism in 
the brain. Animal studies have shown that vinpocetine can reduce the loss of 
neurons due to decreased blood flow. In three studies of older adults with 
memory problems associated with poor brain circulation or dementia-related 
disease, vinpocetine produced significantly more improvement than a placebo in 
performance on global cognitive tests reflecting attention, concentration, and 
memory. Effects on episodic memory per se have been tested minimally, if at all. 
ALC participates in cellular energy production, a process especially important 
in neurons, and in removal of toxic accumulation of fatty acids. Animal studies 
show that ALC reverses the age-related decline in the number of neuron membrane 
receptors. Studies of patients with probable Alzheimer's disease have reported 
nominal advantages over a range of memory tests for ALC-treated patients 
relative to placebo groups. Significant differences have been reported rarely, 
however. Whether ALC would have mnemonic benefits for aging adults without brain 
disease is untested as far as we know. Antioxidants help neutralize 
tissue-damaging free radicals, which become more prevalent as organisms age. It 
is hypothesized that increasing antioxidant levels in the organism might retard 
or reverse the damaging effects of free radicals on neurons. Thus far, however, 
studies have found that vitamin E does not significantly slow down memory 
decline for Alzheimer's patients and does not produce significant memory 
benefits among early Parkinson's patients. Neither did a combination of vitamins 
E and C significantly improve college students' performance on several cognitive 
tasks. In sum, for most of the "brain-specific" nutrients we review, some mildly 
suggestive effects have been found in preliminary controlled studies using 
standard psychometric memory assessments or more general tests designed to 
reveal cognitive impairment. We suggest that future evaluations of the possible 
memory benefits of these supplements might fruitfully focus on memory processes 
rather than on memory tests per se.

© 2002 Association for Psychological Science.

DOI: 10.1111/1529-1006.00007
PMID: 26151475


832. Duodecim. 2000;116(10):1049-58.

[Imaging diagnostics in early dementia].

[Article in Finnish]

Partanen K(1), Laakso M, Erkinjuntti T, Soininen H.

Author information:
(1)KYS:n Kliinisen radiologian Osasto PL 1777, 70211 Kuopio. 
kaarina.partanen@kuh.fi

PMID: 11989015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


833. Nat Rev Neurosci. 2002 Mar;3(3):237-43. doi: 10.1038/nrn751.

Modelling neurodegenerative diseases in Drosophila: a fruitful approach?

Muqit MM(1), Feany MB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Division of Neuropathy, Brigham and Women's Hospital 
and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Human neurodegenerative diseases are characterized by the progressive loss of 
specific neuronal populations, resulting in substantial disability and early 
death. The identification of causative single-gene mutations in families with 
inherited neurodegenerative disorders has facilitated the modelling of these 
diseases in experimental organisms, including the fruitfly Drosophila 
melanogaster. Many neurodegenerative diseases have now been successfully 
modelled in Drosophila, and genetic analysis is under way in each of these 
models. Using fruitfly genetics to define the molecular pathways that underlie 
the neurodegenerative process is likely to improve substantially our 
understanding of the pathogenesis of the human diseases, and to provide new 
therapeutic targets.

DOI: 10.1038/nrn751
PMID: 11994755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


834. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002 Apr;17(4):335-42. doi: 10.1002/gps.598.

Physical disorders and causes of death in relatives of Alzheimer's disease 
patients.

Kockler M(1), Nitardy A, Papassotiropoulos A, Ptok U, Maier W, Heun R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Genetic risk factors are important in Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
These risk factors might also predispose for other disorders. This might lead to 
a familial coaggregation of AD and other disorders, e.g. Down's syndrome or 
Parkinson's disease. In the present study the risk of physical disorders in 
relatives of AD patients, of depressed patients and of control subjects were 
compared.
METHODS: Family history and, if possible, interview information on physical 
disorders and causes of death in relatives of 146 patients with AD, 168 patients 
with major depression (MD) and 136 controls was collected. Statistical 
comparisons were performed using chi-square tests and, if necessary, logistic 
regression analysis accounting for age, gender and interview status.
RESULTS: In contrast to our hypotheses, there was no increased risk of 
cerebrovascular disease, Down's syndrome, haematological malignancies or 
Parkinson's disease in relatives of AD patients compared with relatives of 
patients with MD and of controls. The explorative analysis revealed that 
congenital malformations, i.e. malformations of the heart or of the extremities, 
were slightly increased in relatives of AD patients. Relatives of patients with 
AD or MD were at increased risk of dying as a result of accidents, in most cases 
falls in advanced age, and relatives of patients with MD were at slightly 
increased risk of dying from gastroenterologic diseases, in most cases 
complications of peptic ulcers.
CONCLUSION: The results do not support a major overlap between the genetic risk 
of AD and the genetic risk of cerebrovascular disease, Down's syndrome, 
haematological malignancies or Parkinson's disease. The finding of an increased 
risk of congenital malformations in relatives of AD patients needs further 
replication before it can be stated. The increased risk of dementia or 
depression with cognitive impairment in elderly relatives of patients with AD or 
MD increases the risk of accidents like falls. The genetic risk of depression in 
relatives of patients with MD could have a negative influence on the prognosis 
of peptic ulcera.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.598
PMID: 11994887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


835. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):26587-99. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M203794200. Epub 
2002 May 8.

tau Exon 10 expression involves a bipartite intron 10 regulatory sequence and 
weak 5' and 3' splice sites.

D'Souza I(1), Schellenberg GD.

Author information:
(1)Division of Gerontology, Department of Medicine, University of Washington and 
Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget Siund 
Health Care System, Seattle Division, USA.

tau mutations that deregulate alternative exon 10 (E10) splicing cause 
frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism chromosome 17-type by several 
mechanisms. Previously we showed that E10 splicing involved exon splicing 
enhancer sequences at the 5' and 3' ends of E10, an exon splicing silencer, a 
weak 5' splice site, and an intron splicing silencer (ISS) within intron 10 
(I10). Here, we identify additional regulatory sequences in I10 using both 
non-neuronal and neuronal cells. The ISS sequence extends from I10 nucleotides 
11-18, which is sufficient to inhibit use of a weakened 5' splice site of a 
heterologous exon. Furthermore, ISS function is location-independent but 
requires proximity to a weak 5' splice site. Thus, the ISS functions as a linear 
sequence. A new cis-acting element, the intron splicing modulator (ISM), was 
identified immediately downstream of the ISS at I10 positions 19-26. The ISM and 
ISS form a bipartite regulatory element, within which the ISM functions when the 
ISS is present, mitigating E10 repression by the ISS. Additionally, the 3' 
splice site of E10 is weak and requires exon splicing enhancer elements for 
efficient E10 inclusion. Thus far, tau FTDP-17 splicing mutations affect six 
predicted cis-regulatory sequences.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M203794200
PMID: 12000767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


836. Isr J Psychiatry Relat Sci. 2002;39(1):28-35.

Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder: a sleep disturbance affecting 
mainly older men.

Oksenberg A(1), Radwan H, Arons E, Hoffenbach D, Behroozi B.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Unit, Loewenstein Rehabilitation Hospital, Raanana, Israel. 
psycot3@post.tau.ac.il

Rapid Eye Movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder is characterized by the 
intermittent loss of REM-related muscle atonia and the appearance of elaborated 
motor behaviors (sometimes violent behavior) and vocalizations associated with 
dream mentation. Nine patients were diagnosed in our Sleep Disorders Unit with 
this syndrome during the period August 1997-April 2000. All were male, average 
age 67.9 +/- 6.9 years. The complaint of all our patients was the occurrence of 
violent or injurious sleep behavior mainly during the dream stage. Jumping or 
falling out of bed and slapping or beating their wives were more common. None 
had history or showed signs of dementia, Parkinson or other neurodegenerative 
diseases. A relative high amount of SWS (20.9%) was found. Seven showed an 
intermittent increase in chin EMG tonus while the other two had an almost 
continuous high chin EMG tonus during REM sleep. We did not observe any violent 
motor behavior during the polysomnographic recordings. Phasic activities during 
REM sleep were high but density quantification was not performed. Six patients 
had also Periodic Limb Movement (PLM) Disorders, four had also Obstructive Sleep 
Apnea (OSA) Syndrome. The treatment recommended to all patients was Clonazepam 
beginning with a 0.5-mg dose. Four patients reported a decrease or disappearance 
of sleep agitation and nightmares and were very happy with the treatment and 
without side effects. The others decided not to try Clonazepam or stopped after 
a few days of using it. RBD appears to be a sleep disturbance affecting mainly 
aged men. Its violent expression may frighten the patients and their 
bed-partners and may cause injury to both. In some cases this sleep disorder 
seems to be an early manifestation of a neurodegenerative disorder while in 
others it may represent only an idiopathic form. Clonazepam at lower doses is a 
good agent for the treatment of this condition.

PMID: 12013707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


837. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2002 Jun;72(6):721-5. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.72.6.721.

Incidence and prediction of falls in Parkinson's disease: a prospective 
multidisciplinary study.

Wood BH(1), Bilclough JA, Bowron A, Walker RW.

Author information:
(1)25 Churchill Mews, St Peter's Marina, Newcastle upon Tyne NE6 1BH, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To accurately establish the incidence of falls in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) and to investigate predictive risk factors for fallers from 
baseline data.
METHODS: 109 subjects with idiopathic PD diagnosed according to the brain bank 
criteria underwent a multidisciplinary baseline assessment comprising 
demographic and historical data, disease specific rating scales, physiotherapy 
assessment, tests of visual, cardiovascular and autonomic function, and bone 
densitometry. Patients were then prospectively followed up for one year using 
weekly prepaid postcards along with telephone follow up.
RESULTS: Falls occurred in 68.3% of the subjects. Previous falls, disease 
duration, dementia, and loss of arm swing were independent predictors of 
falling. There were also significant associations between disease severity, 
balance impairment, depression, and falling.
CONCLUSIONS: Falls are a common problem in PD and some of the major risk factors 
are potentially modifiable. There is a need for future studies to look at 
interventions to prevent falls in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.72.6.721
PMCID: PMC1737913
PMID: 12023412 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


838. Arch Neurol. 2002 Jun;59(6):935-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.59.6.935.

Association between the extended tau haplotype and frontotemporal dementia.

Verpillat P(1), Camuzat A, Hannequin D, Thomas-Anterion C, Puel M, Belliard S, 
Dubois B, Didic M, Michel BF, Lacomblez L, Moreaud O, Sellal F, Golfier V, 
Campion D, Clerget-Darpoux F, Brice A.

Author information:
(1)Département d'Epidémiologie, de Biostatistique, et de Recherche Clinique, 
Hôpital Bichat-Claude Bernard, 46 rue Henri Huchard, 75877 Paris CEDEX 18, 
France. patrice.verpillat@bch.ap-hop-paris.fr

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have shown an association between an extended tau 
haplotype (H1) that covers the entire human tau gene and progressive 
supranuclear palsy or, more inconsistently, other neurodegenerative disorders, 
such as corticobasal degeneration, Parkinson disease, Alzheimer disease, and 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD). In addition, disease-causing mutations in the tau 
gene on chromosome 17 have been detected in some families with autosomal 
dominant FTD and parkinsonism. In FTD, the pathological accumulation of the 
microtubule-associated protein tau suggests that the tau gene may be a genetic 
risk factor for this disorder.
OBJECTIVE: To confirm or refute the association between the H1 haplotype or the 
H1H1 genotype of the tau gene and FTD.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Neurology departments of 12 French university hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: One hundred unrelated patients with FTD and 79 controls.
METHODS: Tau genotype (contiguous polymorphisms in exons 1, 7, and 13 and in 
intron 9 used to reconstruct the extended haplotypes H1 and H2). Clinical 
examination, psychometric testing, laboratory tests, computed tomography and 
magnetic resonance imaging, single-photon emission computed tomography, and 
electroencephalography for patients with FTD.
RESULTS: The H1H1 genotype was significantly overrepresented in patients with 
FTD compared with controls (62% vs 46%; P=.01, 1-sided; odds ratio adjusted for 
age and sex, 1.95). After stratification according to apolipoprotein E (APOE) 
genotype, we found a significant interaction between APOE and tau genotypes 
(P=.03).
CONCLUSIONS: This study of the largest series of patients with FTD confirms the 
primary role of tau in FTD and establishes that the H1 haplotype of the tau gene 
and the E2 allele of APOE interact by an unknown mechanism that increases the 
risk of FTD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.59.6.935
PMID: 12056929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


839. Arch Neurol. 2002 Jun;59(6):986-9. doi: 10.1001/archneur.59.6.986.

Contributions of dopaminergic drugs and disease severity to daytime sleepiness 
in Parkinson disease.

O'Suilleabhain PE(1), Dewey RB Jr.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Center for Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, University 
of Texas Southwestern Medical School, Dallas, TX, USA. 
padraig.osuilleabhain@UTSouthwestern.edu

BACKGROUND: Excessive daytime somnolence is a common report among patients who 
have Parkinson disease (PD). The relative contributions of disease severity and 
of the various dopaminergic drugs are unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To separate and quantify the contributions of disease markers and 
drug doses.
METHODS: Patients seen during a 7-month period at a center for movement 
disorders completed the Epworth Sleepiness Scale. Treatment subgroups were 
compared. The relationship to sedation of age; dopaminergic drug classes and 
doses; Hoehn and Yahr stage; duration of disease; total score on the motor 
subsection of the Unified Parkinson Disease Rating Scale; and the presence or 
absence of dementia, depression, or hallucinations was calculated using simple 
and multiple regression and t tests.
RESULTS: The Epworth Sleepiness Scale scores were higher among patients with PD 
(mean [SD], 10.8 [5.3]; n = 368) compared with patients with other neurological 
disorders (mean, 8.5 [5.1]; n = 243; P<.001). A model containing the Hoehn and 
Yahr stage, levodopa dose, and use of a dopamine agonist was the best at 
predicting the total score of Epworth Sleepiness Scale in patients who have PD, 
but accounted for only 9% of the interindividual variance. The parameter 
estimates (SE) corresponded to a 1.02 (0.03)-point increase per Hoehn and Yahr 
stage, a 0.14 (0.06)-point increase per 100-mg increase in levodopa dose over 24 
hours, and a 2.33 (0.57)-point increase with use of an agonist. There was no 
statistically significant dose response for agonists. No statistically 
significant difference in sedation among the commonly used dopamine agonists was 
found.
CONCLUSIONS: Somnolence in patients with PD, which is on average 25% higher than 
in other neurological diseases, is related to PD stage, levodopa dose, and the 
use of a dopamine agonist. However, most of the variability in sedation levels 
in patients with PD as well as in controls is the result of, as yet, 
unidentified factors.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.59.6.986
PMID: 12056935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


840. Acta Neuropathol. 2002 Jul;104(1):72-8. doi: 10.1007/s00401-002-0529-5. Epub 
2002 Mar 22.

Consensus neuropathological diagnosis of common dementia syndromes: testing and 
standardising the use of multiple diagnostic criteria.

Halliday G(1), Ng T, Rodriguez M, Harding A, Blumbergs P, Evans W, Fabian V, 
Fryer J, Gonzales M, Harper C, Kalnins R, Masters CL, McLean C, Milder DG, 
Pamphlett R, Scott G, Tannenberg A, Kril J.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, High Street, Randwick, 2031 New 
South Wales, Australia. G.Halliday@unsw.edu.au

The aim of this study was to assess the variation between neuropathologists in 
the diagnosis of common dementia syndromes when multiple published protocols are 
applied. Fourteen out of 18 Australian neuropathologists participated in 
diagnosing 20 cases (16 cases of dementia, 4 age-matched controls) using 
consensus diagnostic methods. Diagnostic criteria, clinical synopses and slides 
from multiple brain regions were sent to participants who were asked for case 
diagnoses. Diagnostic sensitivity, specificity, predictive value, accuracy and 
variability were determined using percentage agreement and kappa statistics. 
Using CERAD criteria, there was a high inter-rater agreement for cases with 
probable and definite Alzheimer's disease but low agreement for cases with 
possible Alzheimer's disease. Braak staging and the application of criteria for 
dementia with Lewy bodies also resulted in high inter-rater agreement. There was 
poor agreement for the diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia and for identifying 
small vessel disease. Participants rarely diagnosed more than one disease in any 
case. To improve efficiency when applying multiple diagnostic criteria, several 
simplifications were proposed and tested on 5 of the original 20 cases. 
Inter-rater reliability for the diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and dementia 
with Lewy bodies significantly improved. Further development of simple and 
accurate methods to identify small vessel lesions and diagnose frontotemporal 
dementia is warranted.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-002-0529-5
PMID: 12070667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


841. Nihon Ronen Igakkai Zasshi. 2002 May;39(3):275-8. doi: 
10.3143/geriatrics.39.275.

[Trends geriatric disease research evaluated by long-term longitudinal study].

[Article in Japanese]

Shimokata H(1), Ando F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology, National Institute for Longevity Sciences.

The number of patients with geriatric diseases will rapidly increase in our 
aging society. Geriatric diseases tend to progress chronically and disturb the 
daily activity of the elderly patients. Care for the elderly patients requires a 
great deal of manpower. The prevention and treatment of geriatric disease are 
urgent issues that must be addressed. A comprehensive longitudinal study of 
aging and geriatric disease was started at the National Institute for Longevity 
Sciences (NILS) in 1997. The participants of the NILS longitudinal study of 
aging (NILS-LSA) were 2,267 men and women from a local community population. The 
participants are examined at the NILS and followed up every two years. An 
outline of the system and examinations of the NILS-LSA is shown. The latest 
results from the NILS-LSA research including geriatric disease-related genotypes 
and risk factors for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) are also presented.

DOI: 10.3143/geriatrics.39.275
PMID: 12073586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


842. J Neurol Sci. 2002 Jul 15;199(1-2):67-71. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00102-8.

Voxel-based comparison of regional cerebral glucose metabolism between PSP and 
corticobasal degeneration.

Hosaka K(1), Ishii K, Sakamoto S, Mori T, Sasaki M, Hirono N, Mori E.

Author information:
(1)Division of Imaging Research, Hyogo Institute for Aging Brain and Cognitive 
Disorders, 520 Saisho-Ko, Himeji, Hyogo 670-0981, Japan.

OBJECTIVES: Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and corticobasal degeneration 
(CBD) are neurodegenerative disorders that may be accompanied by dementia and 
parkinsonism as clinical symptoms. The purpose of this study was to elucidate 
cerebral metabolic differences of these two diseases with cognitive impairments 
by [18F] fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) and positron emission tomography (PET).
METHODS: A total of 12 patients with PSP (age: 62.8+/-6.0 years old, m: 7, f: 5, 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE): 23.4+/-2.6), 12 patients with CBD (age: 
64.8+/-6.3 years old, m: 6, f: 6, MMSE: 22.9+/-4.5), and age-matched healthy 
subjects (normal control (NC)) (age: 63.8+/-7.7 years old, m: 7, f: 5) were 
subjected to FDG-PET to obtain glucose metabolic images. We compared regional 
cerebral metabolic images by a voxel-by-voxel analysis with statistical 
parametric mapping (SPM) among PSP, CBD, and NC subjects, and evaluated 
differences of hypometabolic regions.
RESULTS: The patients with PSP showed reduced cerebral glucose metabolism in the 
medial and lateral frontal gyri, basal ganglia, and midbrain compared with NC, 
whereas the patients with CBD showed significant reduction in the parietal lobes 
(p<0.001). SPM also revealed parietal hypometabolism in CBD patients compared 
with PSP patients (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The predominant parietal glucose metabolic reduction in CBD 
patients was different from previously reported findings. This finding would be 
the characteristic substance of patients with CBD accompanying cognitive 
impairments. Our findings suggest that measurement of glucose metabolism by PET 
and a voxel-based analysis is useful to understand the pathophysiology of these 
two diseases with cognitive impairments.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(02)00102-8
PMID: 12084445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


843. Neurology. 2002 Jun 25;58(12):1815-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.58.12.1815.

Progression of gait disorder and rigidity and risk of death in older persons.

Wilson RS(1), Schneider JA, Beckett LA, Evans DA, Bennett DA.

Author information:
(1)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center and Rush Institute for Healthy Aging, 
Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical 
Center, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. rwilson@rush.edu

BACKGROUND: Bradykinesia, gait disturbance, rigidity, and tremor are common 
motor signs in old age. All of these signs are associated with increased 
morbidity and mortality, but the extent to which they are progressive is 
unknown.
METHODS: Study participants were 787 older Catholic clergy members without 
clinically diagnosed PD, related conditions, or dementia at baseline. They were 
evaluated annually for up to 7 years, with >95% follow-up participation by 
survivors. Evaluations included administration of a modified version of the 
motor portion of the Unified PD Rating Scale (UPDRS), from which previously 
established measures of the global UPDRS and four specific motor signs were 
derived. Scores represent the percent of the total possible UPDRS score 
obtained.
RESULTS: At baseline, the global UPDRS score ranged from 0 to 36.3 (mean +/- SD, 
7.3 +/- 6.4). It increased by an average of 0.69 unit per year during follow-up, 
with more rapid progression in older persons, but there was wide variability 
with no progression in 21% of subjects and annual increases of up to 8.23 units 
in the remaining 79%. Of 129 persons who died, 106 had follow-up UPDRS data. In 
a proportional hazards model, risk of death was associated with both the level 
of the global UPDRS score at baseline and the annual rate of progression (both p 
< 0.001). Overall, risk of death in subjects who had some worsening of the 
global UPDRS score was 2.93 times the rate among those without progression (95% 
CI, 1.32-6.50). Gait disorder/postural reflex impairment and rigidity worsened, 
but bradykinesia and tremor did not. Risk of death was associated with worsening 
of gait/posture but not with the other signs.
CONCLUSION: Gait disorder and rigidity, as assessed with the modified UPDRS, are 
usually progressive in old age. Both the severity of the gait disorder and its 
rate of progression are strongly associated with risk of death.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.58.12.1815
PMID: 12084882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


844. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2002 May;3(5):794-7.

Rasagiline. Teva Pharmaceutical.

Kupsch A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Charite-Virchow, Berlin, Germany. 
andreas.kupsch@charite.de

Rasagiline is a selective and potent irreversible MAO(B) inhibitor which is 
under development by Teva for the treatment of neurological diseases. Rasagiline 
is in phase III trials in the US, Canada and Europe for Parkinson's disease (PD) 
and has completed phase II trials in Israel and Hungary. Teva planned to submit 
a filing in 2002 and expected to launch rasagiline in 2003. Lundbeck acquired 
European development and commercialization rights to rasagiline in November 1999 
and, in September 2001, the company reported that it planned to file an NDA in 
2003. In March 2002, analysts at Morgan Stanley Dean Witter predicted that H 
Lundbeck would make sales of rasagiline of DKr 100 million in 2003, rising to 
DKr 300 million in 2008. In the same month, launch was predicted in 2004/2005 
for the PD indication, and 2005/2006 for the AD indication, by analysts at 
Deutsche Banc Alex Brown.

PMID: 12090555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


845. Drug Saf. 2002;25(7):511-23. doi: 10.2165/00002018-200225070-00005.

Benefit-risk considerations in the treatment of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Swanberg MM(1), Cummings JL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California 
90095-1769, USA.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is a relatively recently characterised syndrome 
with clinical and pathological features that distinguish it from classical 
Alzheimer's disease. These characteristics include more rapid decline, 
spontaneous features of parkinsonism, visual hallucinations and fluctuating 
cognition. This article reviews the clinical syndrome of DLB and the agents used 
to treat its cognitive, motor and behavioural manifestations. Benefit-risk 
issues regarding the treatment of DLB are discussed based upon limited 
randomised, controlled clinical trials with some speculative conclusions being 
drawn from case reports and case series. We conclude that patients with DLB may 
respond better to cholinesterase inhibitors than patients with Alzheimer's 
disease on both cognitive and behavioural measures. Cholinesterase inhibitor 
therapy may result in reduced caregiver burden and less time institutionalised. 
These agents are well tolerated with the majority of adverse effects being 
gastrointestinal in nature. Although neuropsychiatric manifestations are 
numerous in patients with DLB, antipsychotics should be used infrequently and 
with caution, although atypical antipsychotics are better tolerated than 
conventional antipsychotics. Physicians should exhibit caution when prescribing 
these agents because of the increased risk of extrapyramidal adverse effects. 
Limited data suggest that the use of levodopa or other dopaminergic agents may 
be of benefit for the treatment of the parkinsonism that is associated with DLB. 
However, the increased risk of hallucinations and neuropsychiatric symptoms may 
negate the potential benefits of increased mobility. There is insufficient 
evidence to draw conclusions about the use of antidepressants; however, 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors may be of benefit.

DOI: 10.2165/00002018-200225070-00005
PMID: 12093309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


846. Curr Med Res Opin. 2002;18(3):156-71. doi: 10.1185/030079902125000561.

Understanding and managing behavioural symptoms in Alzheimer's disease and 
related dementias: focus on rivastigmine.

Robert P(1).

Author information:
(1)Memory Centre UEC, Centre Hospitalier universitaire de Nice, France.

Behavioural and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD) are among the most 
distressing manifestations of dementia and result in considerable social and 
economic costs. Practical, non-pharmacological approaches such as environmental 
and behavioural changes may provide some benefit for patients in managing mild 
BPSD. In addition, various pharmacological approaches to treatment have been 
employed, such as neuroleptics and atypical antipsychotics, which differ in 
neurochemical target and clinical effectiveness. Growing evidence suggests that 
the neurobiological basis of BPSD in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and related 
dementias is a loss of cholinergic neurones and a resultant decline in 
acetylcholine (ACh) in brain regions which regulate behavioural and emotional 
responses, such as the limbic system. This cholinergic deficit can be partly 
corrected by inhibiting cholinesterase enzymes (ChEs). Studies of ChE inhibitors 
have shown positive effects to improve or stabilise existing BPSD and delay the 
emergence of new behavioural symptoms. In placebo-controlled studies, donepezil 
has reported efficacy in non-institutionalised moderate to moderately severe 
patients over a period of 24 weeks, but has failed to demonstrate efficacy in 
mild to moderate AD and in institutionalised patients with severe disease. 
Galantamine has been shown to delay the onset of BPSD in mild to moderate AD 
patients in one placebo-controlled study, and improve BPSD in a similar study of 
patients with cerebrovascular disease or probable vascular dementia. Studies 
with rivastigmine have shown efficacy in placebo-controlled studies of mild to 
moderately severe AD and in patients with Lewy body variant AD. 
Institutionalised patients with severe disease also show symptomatic benefits in 
BPSD with rivastigmine, resulting in a reduction in concomitant psychoactive 
medication use. Symptom complexes responding to ChE inhibitors appear to differ 
- all agents improve apathy, depression and anxiety, while rivastigmine 
additionally improves hallucinations and delusions, possibility as a result of 
dual inhibition of acetylcholinesterase and butyrylcholinesterase. The presence 
of hallucinations has been shown to predict response to rivastigmine. 
Accumulating data from studies of ChE inhibitors suggest that early intervention 
and long-term treatment, in addition to providing cognitive benefits, improves 
BPSD and offers potential to enhance quality of life. Differences seen between 
the agents in terms of efficacy in BPSD, tolerability and safety profiles may be 
the result of differences in neuropharmacological profiles.

DOI: 10.1185/030079902125000561
PMID: 12094826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


847. Neuromolecular Med. 2002;1(3):207-21. doi: 10.1385/NMM:1:3:207.

Behavioral and neurological correlates of ALS-parkinsonism dementia complex in 
adult mice fed washed cycad flour.

Wilson JM(1), Khabazian I, Wong MC, Seyedalikhani A, Bains JS, Pasqualotto BA, 
Williams DE, Andersen RJ, Simpson RJ, Smith R, Craig UK, Kurland LT, Shaw CA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada.

Consumption of cycad seed products (Cycas circinalis) is one of the strongest 
epidemiological links to the Guamian neurological disorder amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis-parkinsonism-dementia complex (ALS-PDC), however, the putative toxin 
which causes neurodegeneration has never been identified definitively. To 
reexamine this issue, 6-7-mo-old, male CD-1 mice were assessed for motor and 
cognitive behaviours during and following feeding with pellets made from washed 
cycad flour. Cycad-fed animals showed early evidence of progressive motor and 
cognitive dysfunctions. Neurodegeneration measured using TUNEL and caspase-3 
labeling was found in neocortex, various hippocampal fields, substantia nigra, 
olfactory bulb, and spinal cord. In vitro studies using rat neocortex have 
identified toxic compounds in washed cycad flour that induce depolarizing field 
potentials and lead to release of lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), both blocked by 
AP5. High-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC)/mass spectrometry of cycad 
flour samples failed to show appreciable amounts of other known cycad toxins, 
cycasin, MAM, or BMAA; only trace amounts of BOAA were present. Isolation 
procedures employing these techniques identified the most toxic component as 
beta-sitosterol beta-D-glucoside (BSSG). The present data suggest that a 
neurotoxin, or a toxic metabolite, not previously identified in cycad, is able 
to gain access to central nervous system (CNS) resulting in neurodegeneration of 
specific neural populations and in motor and cognitive dysfunctions. These data 
are consistent with a number of major features of ALS-PDC in humans.

DOI: 10.1385/NMM:1:3:207
PMID: 12095162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


848. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2002 Jun;50(6):1165-6. doi: 10.1046/j.1532-5415.2002.50281.x.

Risk of delirium with concomitant use of tolterodine and acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors.

Edwards KR, O'Connor JT.

Comment on
    J Am Geriatr Soc. 2001 Jun;49(6):700-5.

DOI: 10.1046/j.1532-5415.2002.50281.x
PMID: 12110086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


849. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2002 May;109(5-6):767-75. doi: 10.1007/s007020200063.

Parkinsonism in HIV dementia.

Koutsilieri E(1), Sopper S, Scheller C, ter Meulen V, Riederer P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Virology and Immunobiology, Würzburg, Federal Rebublic of 
Germany. eleni.koutsilieri@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de

A great number of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-infected patients develop a 
central nervous system disorder, commonly called HIV dementia or AIDS dementia 
complex (ADC). HIV dementia is independent of opportunistic infections and is 
due to the virus itself. Symptoms include psychomotor slowing, apathy and motor 
disorders similar to the bradykinesia and postural and gait abnormalities 
observed in late Parkinson's disease. Consequently, HIV has been discussed 
during the last few years as an additional cause for parkinsonism, and 
parkinsonian syndromes as manifestations of HIV dementia. Moreover, the early 
phase of HIV infection gains increasing interest because of studies which report 
subtle neurological symptoms at this stage. Accordingly, we found in 
SIV-infected monkeys that dopamine is reduced by 44% within as few as two months 
of infection, indicating that changes during early infection must be thoroughly 
evaluated. In this short review, we discuss alterations in the nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic system during early and late immunodeficiency virus infection and 
the common clinical and biochemical features shared by HIV dementia and 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s007020200063
PMID: 12111466 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


850. Neurol Sci. 2002 Apr;23(1):11-4. doi: 10.1007/s100720200017.

A case-control study on Alzheimer's disease and exposure to anesthesia.

Gasparini M(1), Vanacore N, Schiaffini C, Brusa L, Panella M, Talarico G, Bruno 
G, Meco G, Lenzi GL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Sciences, La Sapienza University of Rome, Viale 
dell'Università 30, I-00185 Roma, Italy.

Aretrospective hospital-based case-control study was performed with the aim to 
evaluate the association between exposure to anesthesia and Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). A total of 115 AD patients, 230 Parkinson's disease (PD) patients and 230 
patients with non-degenerative neurological disease were studied. Each AD case 
was matched for sex, age (+/-3 years) and geographic area of residence with four 
controls (2 PD patients and 2 with other neurological disease). Information 
about exposure to general anesthesia and other variables was gathered through 
hospital records. No associations were found between the risk of AD and the 
exposure to anesthesia in the 1 and 5 years preceding disease onset, nor between 
the risk of AD and the number of surgical operations. A significant difference 
was observed between the mean age of AD patients and controls undergoing 
surgical procedures. The present study reveals a lack of association between 
exposure to general anesthesia and AD. Prospective epidemiological studies are 
needed in order to investigate levels of exposure to anesthesia, as well as any 
possible relationships between anesthetic exposure and genetic factors (e. g. 
APOEepsilon4 genotype).

DOI: 10.1007/s100720200017
PMID: 12111615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


851. Ann Neurol. 2002 Jun;51(6):722-9. doi: 10.1002/ana.10219.

Combined effect of age and severity on the risk of dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Levy G(1), Schupf N, Tang MX, Cote LJ, Louis ED, Mejia H, Stern Y, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Columbia University, 630 West 168th Street, 
New York, NY 10032, USA.

Age and severity of extrapyramidal signs have been consistently associated with 
incident dementia in Parkinson's disease. We evaluated the separate and combined 
effects of age and severity of extrapyramidal signs on the risk of incident 
dementia in Parkinson's disease in the setting of a population-based prospective 
cohort study. Age and the total Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor 
score at baseline evaluation were dichotomized at the median. Four groups of 
Parkinson's disease patients were defined: younger age/low severity (reference), 
younger age/high severity, older age/low severity, and older age/high severity. 
Risk ratios for incident dementia were calculated with Cox proportional hazards 
models controlling for gender, education, ethnicity, and duration of Parkinson's 
disease. Of 180 patients, 52 (28.9%) became demented during a mean follow-up 
period of 3.6 +/- 2.2 years. The median age at baseline of the Parkinson's 
disease patients was 71.8 years (range, 38.5-95.9 years), and the median total 
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale motor score was 24 (range, 2-65). The 
group with older age/high severity had a significantly increased risk of 
incident dementia (relative risk, 9.7; 95% confidence interval, 3.9-24.4) 
compared with the group with younger age/low severity (reference), whereas the 
groups with older age/low severity (relative risk, 1.6; 95% confidence interval, 
0.5-4.8) and younger age/high severity (relative risk, 1.2; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.5-3.2) did not. These findings suggest that the increased risk of 
incident dementia in Parkinson's disease associated with age and severity of 
extrapyramidal signs is related primarily to their combined effect rather than 
separate effects.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.10219
PMID: 12112078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


852. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002 Jun;17(6):503-9. doi: 10.1002/gps.550.

The Mini-Mental State exam may help in the differentiation of dementia with Lewy 
bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Ala TA(1), Hughes LF, Kyrouac GA, Ghobrial MW, Elble RJ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alzheimer Disease and Related Disorders, Department of Neurology, 
Southern Illinois University School of Medicine, PO Box 19643, Springfield, IL 
62794-9643, USA. tala@siumed.edu

Comment in
    Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2003 Sep;18(9):855-6.

OBJECTIVE: Since patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) tend to have 
greater impairment of attention and construction and better memory ability on 
neuropsychological tests than patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), we 
determined if the items that measure attention, memory, and construction in the 
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) help to distinguish DLB from AD early in 
the course of the dementia.
DESIGN: We retrospectively studied the first available MMSE exam for each of our 
patients with DLB or AD and compared their MMSE subscores for attention, memory, 
and construction.
SETTING: A university dementia brain bank in central Illinois, USA.
PATIENTS: All patients with neuropathologically-proven DLB or AD with MMSE 
scores > or =13.
RESULTS: We identified 17 DLB and 27 AD patients for whom we had MMSE exams. The 
attention and construction subtest scores of the DLB group were worse (p=0.0071 
and p=0.0038, respectively) than those of the AD group. The memory subscores of 
the DLB group were better, although the difference did not reach statistical 
significance (p=0.22). When a mathematical equation was used to combine the 
three subscores with equal weighting (Attention-5/3Memory+5.Construction), the 
scores of the DLB group were worse (p=0.00007). Using this equation, a score 
less than 5 points was associated with DLB with a sensitivity of 0.82 (95% 
Confidence Interval (CI)=0.57-0.96) and a specificity of 0.81 (95% 
CI=0.62-0.94).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings support the work of others regarding the relative 
neuropsychological impairments of DLB and AD and indicate that the MMSE may be 
helpful in the differentiation of DLB and AD.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.550
PMID: 12112173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


853. Mov Disord. 2002 May;17(3):482-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.10104.

Autosomal dominant adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis: parkinsonism due to 
both striatal and nigral dysfunction.

Nijssen PC(1), Brusse E, Leyten AC, Martin JJ, Teepen JL, Roos RA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Elisabeth Hospital, Tilburg, The Netherlands. 
p.nijssen@elisabeth.nl

We describe a family with adult neuronal ceroid lipofuscinosis, with apparent 
autosomal dominant inheritance, observed in six affected individuals in three 
generations. Disease onset was usually in the fifth decade, but was earlier in 
the youngest generation. Early symptoms consisted of myoclonus in face and arms, 
epilepsy, auditory symptoms, cognitive decline, or depression. Parkinsonism 
occurred a few years after disease onset, with stooped posture, shuffling gait, 
bradykinesia, and mask face. Four subjects deteriorated to a state of severe 
handicap, with severe dementia, contractures, dysphagia, and dysarthria. Leg 
weakness evolved to flaccid paraparesis in two patients. Diagnosis was confirmed 
by brain biopsy in one patient and full autopsy in two patients. Abundant 
intraneuronal storage of autofluorescent material was found throughout the 
brain. Electron microscopy showed granular osmiophilic deposits and scarce 
fingerprint profiles. Striking loss of neurons in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta and reticulata was found. (123)I-IBZM Single photon emission computed 
tomography in two patients showed loss of postsynaptic D2 receptor binding in 
the striatum. We conclude that parkinsonism in ANCL is likely to be caused by 
both presynaptic nigral cell loss and postsynaptic striatal degeneration.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10104
PMID: 12112194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


854. Mov Disord. 2002 May;17(3):550-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.10076.

Further extension of the H1 haplotype associated with progressive supranuclear 
palsy.

Pastor P(1), Ezquerra M, Tolosa E, Muñoz E, Martí MJ, Valldeoriola F, Molinuevo 
JL, Calopa M, Oliva R.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, Institut 
Clínic de Malalties del Sistema Nerviós. Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, 
Spain. pastorp@icarus.wustl.edu

The recent finding of disequilibrium among several polymorphisms along the tau 
gene and the strong association of one of the two haplotypes formed by these 
polymorphisms (H1) with progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) suggests that a 
single allele in or near the tau gene at 17q21 is responsible for increased risk 
in most of the PSP cases. We sought to determine whether mutations in the tau 
gene are responsible for the disease in 45 sporadic PSP patients. Furthermore, 
we analyzed some markers located in the common region of linkage 
(D17S800-D17S791), associated with some cases of familial frontotemporal 
dementia (FTDP-17), and the SNPs rs1816 and rs937 close to the tau gene, to 
determine their possible association with sporadic PSP. We did not find 
pathogenic mutations in exons 9, 10, 12, or 13 of the tau gene, indicating that 
tau mutations in both the splice-site region of the exon 10 and in the 
microtubule-binding region of tau gene are not a cause of PSP in this study 
group. We found significant overrepresentation of the haplotypes H1, extended up 
to the promoter of the tau gene (H1P), in PSP patients as compared with 
controls. In addition, a significant overrepresentation of the D17S810 2/2 and 
3/2 genotypes, of the SNP rs1816 A/A, and of the SNP rs937 delG/delG genotypes 
was detected in PSP, further extending the haplotype described previously. These 
results are consistent with the hypothesis that a change either in the 5' or in 
the 3' flanking regions of the tau gene, or even other genes contained in the 
H1E haplotype, could increase the genetic susceptibility to PSP.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10076
PMID: 12112206 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


855. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2002 Aug;73(2):126-33. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.73.2.126.

Visual association test to detect early dementia of the Alzheimer type.

Lindeboom J(1), Schmand B, Tulner L, Walstra G, Jonker C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Psychology, Vrije Universiteit Medical Centre, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. j.lindeboom.psychol@med.vu.nl

BACKGROUND: The visual association test (VAT) is a brief learning task based on 
imagery mnemonics. The test materials consist of six line drawings of pairs of 
interacting objects or animals-for example, an ape holding an umbrella. The 
person is asked to name each object and, later, is presented with one object 
from the pair and asked to name the other.
OBJECTIVE: To verify that the task induces robust incidental or effortless 
learning (study 1), and to study the efficiency of the test as a discriminator 
between early dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT) and non-demented people 
(study 2) and non-DAT types of dementia (study 3).
METHODS: Study 1: two groups of elderly volunteers were administered the VAT. 
The stimuli were presented in the interactive fashion to group A-for example, a 
monkey carrying an umbrella (n=83)-and side by side to group B-for example, 
separate pictures of a monkey alone and an umbrella alone (n=79). Group B 
received learning instructions, but group A did not. Study 2: three groups of 
subjects were selected from a population based follow up study: incident DAT 
cases (n=24), cognitively declining subjects not diagnosed with dementia (n=21), 
and stable non-demented subjects (n=204). Test performance of the non-demented 
group at baseline was compared with that of patients with DAT at the time of 
their diagnosis, of patients with DAT a year before their diagnosis, and of 
non-demented declining subjects at baseline. Study 3: subjects were patients 
referred for neuropsychological assessment because of suspected dementia. They 
were diagnosed by consensus criteria of various dementia syndromes.
RESULTS: Study 1: recall was more than twice as high in group A as in group B. 
Thus interactive presentation, even in the absence of learning instructions, 
enhances learning. Study 2: at a level of 97.5% specificity, the VAT had a 
sensitivity of 87.5% for DAT cases at the time of diagnosis and 66.7% one year 
before diagnosis. The cognitively declining group scored significantly lower on 
the VAT at baseline than the non-demented group. The VAT discriminated more 
effectively than both the MMSE and the six item picture learning task from the 
CAMCOG. Study 3: VAT scores were significantly lower in patients with DAT (n=48) 
than in patients with vascular dementia (n=37), frontotemporal dementia (n=9), 
or subcortical dementia (n=15), but not lower than in patients with Lewy body 
dementia (n=7). Mean mini mental state examination scores of these groups were 
not significantly different. The VAT discriminated patients with DAT from 
patients with other types of dementia more effectively than a prose recall test. 
Sensitivity was 79% and specificity 69%.
CONCLUSIONS: The VAT detects with high specificity a sizeable proportion of 
patients with DAT a year before the diagnosis, and a low VAT score is relatively 
uncommon in patients with non-DAT dementia.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.73.2.126
PMCID: PMC1737993
PMID: 12122168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


856. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Aug 9;328(2):195-7. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(02)00430-5.

Alpha-2 macroglobulin I1000 V polymorphism in Chinese sporadic Alzheimer's 
disease and Parkinson's disease.

Tang G(1), Zhang M, Xie H, Jiang S, Wang Z, Xu L, Hao Y, Lin D, Lan H, Wang Y, 
Chen L, Ren D.

Author information:
(1)State Key Lab of Genetic Engineering, Institute of Genetics, Fudan 
University, Shanghai 200433, PR China.

Several lines of evidence have revealed some overlapping pathologies in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). Although the alpha-2 
macroglobulin gene (A2M) might be a risk factor of these two neurodegenerative 
diseases, conclusions from different studies have remained conflicting. Here we 
studied the role of A2M I1000 V polymorphism in both AD and PD in a Chinese Han 
population. We found that the A2M I/V genotype is associated with both AD (odds 
ratio (OR)=2.55, 95% confidential interval (95% CI): 1.20-5.43, attributable 
fraction (AF)=13.65%) and PD (OR=3.03, 95% CI: 1.30-7.02, AF=16.51%). After 
classifying according to the age of onset, this association is only detected in 
early-onset AD patients (OR=3.96, 95% CI: 1.28-12.26) and late-onset PD patients 
(OR=2.61, 95% CI: 0.97-7.09). Therefore, we conclude that in our samples, the 
A2M I/V genotype might be a susceptibility variant, even with minor effect, for 
both sporadic AD and PD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(02)00430-5
PMID: 12133586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


857. Eur Neurol. 2002;48(1):34-6. doi: 10.1159/000064955.

Mitochondrial DNA A4336G mutation in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases.

García-Lozano JR(1), Mir P, Alberca R, Aguilera I, Gil Néciga E, Fernández-López 
O, Cayuela A, Núñez-Roldan A.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Servicio 
Andaluz de Salud, Sevilla, España. rglozano@hvr.junta-andalucia.es

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) A4336G mutation 
represents a risk factor for Spanish patients with both Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
and Parkinson's disease (PD).
MATERIAL AND METHODS: One hundred and sixty-one AD and 106 PD unrelated patients 
were included in the study. Seventy-eight age-matched and 144 randomly chosen 
healthy subjects served as controls. The frequency of the A4336G mutation in 
these groups was compared using the chi(2) and Fisher's exact tests. p < 0.05 
was established as a statistically significant differential value.
RESULTS: The mtDNA A4336G mutation was present in 1/161 of AD patients (0.6%), 
in 3/106 of PD patients (2.8%), in 1/78 of age-matched controls (1.3%) and in 
2/144 of the randomly chosen controls (1.4%). These differences were not 
statistically significant.
CONCLUSION: Our results do not support the hypothesis that this mutation 
represents a risk factor for either AD or PD patients, at least in the case of 
this Spanish sample.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000064955
PMID: 12138308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


858. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2002 Aug;57(8):M532-8. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/57.8.m532.

Prevalence of dementia in users of hormone replacement therapy as defined by 
prescription data.

Petitti DB(1), Buckwalter JG, Crooks VC, Chiu V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Research and Evaluation, Kaiser Permanente Southern California, 
Pasadena, USA. diana.b.petitti@kp.org

BACKGROUND: Studies of hormone replacement therapy (HRT) and dementia and 
cognitive impairment show mixed results. This study assessed the prevalence of 
dementia and cognitive impairment in users and nonusers of HRT defined using 
computer-stored prescription information.
METHODS: The study involved 3924 women 75 years of age and older who were 
members of the Southern California Kaiser Permanente Medical Care Program in 
1998. HRT use was determined based on prescription data for 1992-1998. Cognitive 
function and dementia were assessed using the Telephone Interview of Cognitive 
Status supplemented by the Telephone Dementia Questionnaire and medical record 
review.
RESULTS: Odds ratios (ORs) for cognitive impairment/dementia showed expected 
associations with age, education, ethnicity, and a history of stroke or 
Parkinson's disease. After adjustment, the OR for cognitive impairment or 
dementia in HRT users compared with HRT nonusers was 0.91 (95% confidence 
interval 0.75-1.10). The adjusted ORs for all dementia and dementia without 
cause in HRT users compared with nonusers were 0.77 (95% confidence interval 
0.59- 1.00) and 0.78 (0.58-1.05), respectively. Twenty percent of women with 
cognitive impairment or dementia who had been classified as HRT users by 
prescription (one prescription each year from 1992-1998) denied hormone use 
compared with 8.8% of women without impairment. Medical record review validated 
prescription information for the impaired women.
CONCLUSIONS: The study identified an important methodologic problem in studies 
of HRT and cognitive impairment and dementia that depend on recalled information 
about drug exposure. A protective effect of HRT for cognitive impairment and 
dementia was neither established nor ruled out based on the prescription data.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/57.8.m532
PMID: 12145368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


859. Curr Opin Neurol. 2002 Aug;15(4):445-50. doi: 10.1097/00019052-200208000-00007.

Neuropsychiatric symptoms in the dementias.

Assal F(1), Cummings JL.

Author information:
(1)UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1769, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Neuropsychiatric, or non-cognitive symptoms are increasingly 
recognized as manifestations of dementias.
RECENT FINDINGS: In Alzheimer's disease, recent advances have included the 
identification of behavioral profiles, differentiation of apathy and depression, 
characterization of risk factors for psychosis and its links to agitation and 
aggression, and an analysis of depressive symptoms in the absence of major 
depression. Functional neuroimaging data mainly supported the role of the 
anterior cingulate in apathy. The orbitofrontal and anterior cingulate tangle 
burden were associated with agitation, and increased orbitofrontal and 
mid-temporal muscarinic M2 receptors with psychosis and hallucinations. Selected 
genetic polymorphisms of dopamine and serotonin receptors or transporters were 
linked with aggression, hallucinations or psychosis. When compared with other 
dementias, individuals with frontotemporal dementia disclosed, as expected, 
different behaviors and particularly aberrant social behavior. The frequency of 
delusions and visual hallucinations was increased in Parkinson's disease, 
Parkinson's disease with dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies, suggesting 
common mechanisms such as Lewy body pathology and cholinergic deficiency. The 
latter was supported by an improvement of these symptoms by cholinesterase 
inhibitors.
SUMMARY: Future research directions include both clinical and basic neuroscience 
investigations. The detection of early neuropsychiatric symptoms might be a 
marker for dementia, and the possible existence of a mild neuropsychiatric 
impairment syndrome should be explored. More longitudinal studies with 
pathological confirmation will facilitate correlations with neuropsychiatric 
symptoms. Functional neuroimaging and behavioral neurogenetics will permit 
in-vivo correlations and consequently help patient management and care.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-200208000-00007
PMID: 12151841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


860. Med Clin North Am. 2002 May;86(3):591-614. doi: 10.1016/s0025-7125(02)00003-2.

Genetics of dementia.

Tsuang DW(1), Bird TD.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences and Epidemiology, 
University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA. dwt1@u.washington.edu

Many neurodegenerative diseases are exceedingly complex disorders (Fig. 6). In 
the past decade, we have made tremendous advances in our understanding [figure: 
see text] of the genetic basis of these disorders. One common characteristic of 
these disorders is the existence of rare families in which a given disease is 
inherited as a Mendelian trait. In this article, we have reviewed the genetics 
of several common neurodegenerative disorders that are associated with cognitive 
disturbances and for which causative genes have been identified. Further genetic 
analysis should clarify the roles of known genes in the pathogenesis of common 
sporadic forms of these various diseases. Investigation of the normal and 
aberrant functions of these genes should provide insight into the underlying 
mechanisms of these disorders. Such research should facilitate new strategies 
for therapeutic interventions. Although molecular genetics has helped to clarify 
the etiology of these disorders, clinicians have played a critical role in the 
careful identification and classification of many families who were involved in 
the eventual mapping and cloning of causative mutations. The role of the 
clinician should not be underestimated. Future clinical and molecular genetics 
findings hold many clinical implications. It is likely that new diagnostic and 
therapeutic strategies for dementing disorders are just on the horizon.

DOI: 10.1016/s0025-7125(02)00003-2
PMID: 12171060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


861. Acta Neurol Scand. 2002 Sep;106(3):128-30. doi: 
10.1034/j.1600-0404.2002.01331.x.

Lack of association between an estrogen receptor 1 gene polymorphism and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia.

Mattila KM(1), Rinne JO, Röyttä M, Laippala P, Lehtimäki T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Centre for Laboratory Medicine, Tampere 
University Hospital, Finland. kari.m.mattila@uta.fi

OBJECTIVE: To test for an association between an estrogen receptor 1 (ESR1) gene 
polymorphism and Parkinson's disease with dementia (PDD) in Finnish subjects.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Forty-one clinically demented and pathologically confirmed 
PDD patients and 59 cognitively intact aged individuals with normal 
neuropathology were genotyped for the ESR1 PvuII polymorphism.
RESULTS: We found no significant differences in the genotype or allele 
frequencies when the PDD patients were compared with the controls. Nor were 
there any significant differences in these frequencies when the PDD patients 
with coexisting Alzheimer's disease pathology were compared with the control 
group.
CONCLUSION: We failed to demonstrate an association between dementia-associated 
PD and the ESR1 PvuII polymorphism in Finnish subjects.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1600-0404.2002.01331.x
PMID: 12174171 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


862. Am J Med Sci. 2002 Aug;324(2):84-95. doi: 10.1097/00000441-200208000-00007.

Dementia: when is it not Alzheimer disease?

Vicioso BA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas 
75390-8889, USA. belinda.vicioso@utsouthwestern.edu

The advent of symptomatic therapies for Alzheimer disease has placed increasing 
emphasis on early diagnosis of the dementia syndrome and its various types. This 
article reviews the definition and epidemiology of the condition that affects up 
to 50% of all Americans over the age of 80. Also discussed are the main causes 
of dementia, focusing on those that are not Alzheimer disease and a diagnostic 
approach that is based on guidelines recently published by the American Academy 
of Neurology.

DOI: 10.1097/00000441-200208000-00007
PMID: 12186112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


863. Neurol Neurochir Pol. 2002;36 Suppl 1:107-17.

[Stem cells--potential therapeutic use in neurological diseases].

[Article in Polish]

Domańska-Janik K.

There is a growing interest in medical potential of stem cells which may be used 
someday to create new tissue. Suggested applications involve a board spectrum 
ranging from the replacement for cells destroyed by diseases to even organ 
transplants. As ethical and legal controversy makes uncertain the future of 
embryonic stem cells research, attention has been recently turned to adult stem 
cells to discover whether they also can serve to transplantation. In this 
article we present data indicating that adult stem cells found in areas of the 
body like blood, skin, lymph and nervous systems, may be more versatile than 
previously assumed and in certain conditions can broke tissue barriers for 
differentiation. Thus, in this respect they can behave like their own 
pluripotent ancestors, although underlying mechanisms for this phenomena are 
still not clear. Furthermore, the following issues are shortly discussed: What 
are the characteristics of the different stem cells and where they can be found. 
What are experimental evidences that stem cells can be used for brain repair. 
What are the main problems must be solved before their clinical application and 
the risk-benefit assessment. The possible strategies and targets for stem cell 
therapies of neurological diseases.

PMID: 12189682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


864. Biochem Soc Trans. 2002 Aug;30(4):559-65. doi: 10.1042/bst0300559.

Aggregation and neurotoxicity of alpha-synuclein and related peptides.

el-Agnaf OM(1), Irvine GB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Lancaster University, Lancaster LA1 4YQ, 
UK. o.el-agnaf@lancaster.ac.uk

Fibrillar deposits of alpha-synuclein occur in several neurodegenerative 
diseases. Two mutant forms of alpha-synuclein have been associated with 
early-onset Parkinson's disease, and a fragment has been identified as the 
non-amyloid-beta peptide component of Alzheimer's disease amyloid (NAC). Upon 
aging, solutions of alpha-synuclein and NAC change conformation to beta-sheet, 
detectable by CD spectroscopy, and form oligomers that deposit as amyloid-like 
fibrils, detectable by electron microscopy. These aged peptides are also 
neurotoxic. Experiments on fragments of NAC have enabled the region of NAC 
responsible for its aggregation and toxicity to be identified. NAC(8-18) is the 
smallest fragment that aggregates, as indicated by the concentration of peptide 
remaining in solution after 3 days, and forms fibrils, as determined by electron 
microscopy. Fragments NAC(8-18) and NAC(8-16) are toxic, whereas NAC(12-18), 
NAC(9-16) and NAC(8-15) are not. Hence residues 8-16 of NAC comprise the region 
crucial for toxicity. Toxicity induced by alpha-synuclein, NAC and NAC(1-18) 
oligomers occurs via an apoptotic mechanism, possibly initiated by oxidative 
damage, since these peptides liberate hydroxyl radicals in the presence of iron. 
Molecules with anti-aggregational and/or antioxidant properties may therefore be 
potential therapeutic agents.

DOI: 10.1042/bst0300559
PMID: 12196137 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


865. Depress Anxiety. 2002;16(1):39-48. doi: 10.1002/da.10057.

Depression and Parkinson's disease: a new look at an old problem.

Edwards E(1), Kitt C, Oliver E, Finkelstein J, Wagster M, McDonald WM.

Author information:
(1)National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.

A National Institutes of Health (National Institute of Neurological Disorders 
and Stroke; National Institute of Mental Health; National Institute on Aging) 
working group meeting focused on the non-motor aspects of Parkinson's disease 
(PD). Below is the summary of the meeting presentations and recommendations for 
a research agenda on the epidemiology, assessment, circuitry, therapeutic 
approaches, and clinical trials of Parkinson's disease co-morbid with 
depression. A second summary will focus on PD and dementia.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/da.10057
PMID: 12203670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


866. J Neurosci Res. 2002 Sep 1;69(5):567-77. doi: 10.1002/jnr.10328.

Paradigm shifts in Alzheimer's disease and other neurodegenerative disorders: 
the emerging role of oligomeric assemblies.

Kirkitadze MD(1), Bitan G, Teplow DB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is a progressive, neurodegenerative disorder 
characterized by amyloid deposition in the cerebral neuropil and vasculature. 
These amyloid deposits comprise predominantly fragments and full-length (40 or 
42 residue) forms of the amyloid beta-protein (Abeta) organized into fibrillar 
assemblies. Compelling evidence indicates that factors that increase overall 
Abeta production or the ratio of longer to shorter forms, or which facilitate 
deposition or inhibit elimination of amyloid deposits, cause AD or are risk 
factors for the disease. In vitro studies have demonstrated that fibrillar Abeta 
has potent neurotoxic effects on cultured neurons. In vivo experiments in 
non-human primates have demonstrated that Abeta fibrils directly cause 
pathologic changes, including tau hyperphosphorylation. In concert with 
histologic studies revealing a lack of tissue injury in areas of the neuropil in 
which non-fibrillar deposits were found, these data suggested that fibril 
assembly was a prerequisite for Abeta-mediated neurotoxicity in vivo. Recently, 
however, both in vitro and in vivo studies have revealed that soluble, 
oligomeric forms of Abeta also have potent neurotoxic activities, and in fact, 
may be the proximate effectors of the neuronal injury and death occurring in AD. 
A paradigm shift is thus emerging that necessitates the reevaluation of the 
relative importance of polymeric (fibrillar) vs. oligomeric assemblies in the 
pathobiology of AD. In addition to AD, an increasing number of neurodegenerative 
disorders, including Parkinson's disease, familial British dementia, familial 
amyloid polyneuropathy, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, and prion diseases, are 
associated with abnormal protein assembly processes. The archetypal features of 
the assembly-dependent neuropathogenetic effects of Abeta may thus be of 
relevance not only to AD but to these other disorders as well.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jnr.10328
PMID: 12210822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


867. Mov Disord. 2002 Jul;17(4):645-56. doi: 10.1002/mds.10173.

Genetics of parkinsonism.

Gwinn-Hardy K(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Intramural Research, Neurogenetics Laboratories, National 
Institute of Neurological Disease and Stroke, National Institutes of Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. gwinnk@ninds.nih.gov

Parkinson's disease (PD) was noted to have a familial component as early as 1880 
(Leroux, 1880). More recently, the discovery of several genetic factors 
influencing parkinsonism has emphasized the importance of heredity in PD. The 
clinical spectrum of familial parkinsonism is wide; it includes not only PD, but 
also dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
essential tremor, and other disorders. In the general population, it is likely 
that PD results from combined genetic and environmental factors, most of which 
are not yet known. The discovery of causal mutations in the gene for 
alpha-synuclein, parkin, and of genetic linkages to chromosomes 2p4, 4p5, and 
three loci on 1q6-8 have revolutionized PD research. This review focuses on 
recent progress in the Mendelian genetics of PD and those diseases in which 
parkinsonism is a prominent feature, and considers how these discoveries modify 
our beliefs regarding the etiology and pathogenesis of these disorders.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10173
PMID: 12210852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


868. J Alzheimers Dis. 2001 Dec;3(6):553-562. doi: 10.3233/jad-2001-3606.

Dementia, depression and parkinsonism: A frequent association in the elderly.

Polidori MC(1), Menculini G, Senin U, Mecocci P.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie I, Heinrich-Heine Universität, Düsseldorf, 
Germany.

Depression and parkinsonism constitute two frequent findings in elderly demented 
patients. A large body of research, including epidemiological, retrospective, 
and prospective studies have contributed to the understanding of complex and 
common situations in the elderly, in which depression, parkinsonian signs, and 
cognitive impairment coexist. Many aspects regarding the "associated syndromes 
of dementia", however, are still object of debate as well as under current 
active investigation. The recent dramatic aging of the population is leading to 
an increasing prevalence of neuropsychiatric comorbidities. This is a problem of 
great clinical and socio-economical interest, because, when present in the same 
subject, depression, parkinsonism-related motor impairment and cognitive 
impairment may not only act additively or synergistically in deteriorating the 
functional outcome of the patient, but also lead to their institutionalization. 
We observed that one half of institutionalized subjects in two nursing homes of 
Central Italy suffer from an associated syndrome dementia / parkinsonism / 
depression, that these subjects are significantly more dependent than subjects 
hospitalized for the same reasons, and that their grade of depression or 
cognitive impairment is independent of which disease is diagnosed first. 
Depressed mood, memory impairment and motor difficulties, however, are often 
underestimated in the elderly, being considered as "normal" aspects of the aging 
process. The aim of this review is to highlight the clinical relevance of the 
associated syndromes of dementia, in a way that early diagnosis and treatment of 
these pathologies are attempted.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2001-3606
PMID: 12214022


869. J Alzheimers Dis. 2001 Feb;3(1):31-40. doi: 10.3233/jad-2001-3106.

Problems of cell death in neurodegeneration and Alzheimer's Disease.

Jellinger KA(1), Stadelmann C.

Author information:
(1)Ludwig Boltzmann Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Vienna, Austria.

Progressive cell loss in specific neuronal populations is a pathological 
hallmark of neurodegenerative diseases, but its mechanisms remain unresolved. 
Apoptosis or alternative pathways of neuronal death have been discussed in 
Alzheimer disease (AD) and other disorders. However, DNA fragmentation in human 
brain as a sign of neuronal injury is too frequent to account for the continuous 
loss in these slowly progressive diseases. In autopsy cases of AD, Parkinson's 
disease (PD), related disorders, and age-matched controls, DNA fragmentation 
using the TUNEL method and an array of apoptosis-related proteins (ARP), 
proto-oncogenes, and activated caspase 3, the key enzyme of late-stage 
apoptosis, were examined. In AD, a considerable number of hippocampal neurons 
and glial cells showed DNA fragmentation with a 3- to 6-fold increase related to 
amyloid deposits and neurofibrillary tangles, but only one in 2.600 to 5.650 
neurons displayed apoptotic morphology and cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for 
activated caspase~3, whereas no neurons were labeled in age-matched controls. 
Caspase~3 immunoreactivity was seen in granules of cells with granulovacuolar 
degeneration, in around 25% In progressive supranuclear palsy, only single 
neurons but oligodendrocytes in brainstem, around 25% TUNEL-positive and 
expressed both ARPs and activated caspase 3. In PD, dementia with Lewy bodies, 
and multisystem atrophy (MSA), TUNEL-positivity and expression of ARPs or 
activated caspase~3 were only seen in microglia and oligodendrocytes with 
cytoplasmic inclusions in MSA, but not in neurons. These data provide evidence 
for extremely rare apoptotic neuronal death in AD and PSP compatible with the 
progression of neuronal degeneration in these chronic diseases. Apoptosis mainly 
involves reactive microglia and oligodendroglia, the latter occasionally 
involved by deposits of insoluble fibrillary proteins, while alternative 
mechanisms of neuronal death may occur. Susceptible cell populations in a 
proapoptotic environment, particularly in AD, show increased vulnerability 
towards metabolic or other noxious factors, with autophagy as a possible 
protective mechanism in early stages of programmed cell death. The intracellular 
cascade leading to cell death still awaits elucidation.

DOI: 10.3233/jad-2001-3106
PMID: 12214070


870. Nervenarzt. 2002 Sep;73(9):879-82. doi: 10.1007/s00115-002-1289-0.

[Presenile dementia in polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia].

[Article in German]

Schäfer C(1), Klünemann HH, Ibach B, Mueller J, Putzhammer A, Trender-Gerhard I, 
Schuierer G, Klein HE.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatrische Klinik Sonnenhalde, CH-Riehen, Germany.

We present a 36-year-old woman with a 3-year history of cognitive decline 
followed by development of a small stepped gait and urinary and fecal 
incontinence. Workup revealed multiple bone cysts documented by X-ray and 
idiopathic hyperprolactinoma. An MRI confirmed the CT finding of massive 
bilateral basal ganglia calcification. This is the first case of polycystic 
lipomembranous osteodysplasia described in Germany. We conclude that patients 
with presenile dementia, psychosis, or early-onset Parkinsonism associated with 
basal ganglia calcification should undergo X-rays of hand and feet to rule out 
polycystic lipomembranous osteodysplasia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-002-1289-0
PMID: 12215881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


871. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 2002 Sep;70(9):476-94. doi: 10.1055/s-2002-33858.

[Dementias with Lewy bodies].

[Article in German]

Lang CJ(1), Bergmann M.

Author information:
(1)Neurologische Klinik, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen. 
christoph.lang@neuro.imed.uni-erlangen.de

Dementias with Lewy bodies are no rare cause of cognitive and motor impairments 
in old age. Neuropathologically, they must be distinguished into diffuse Lewy 
body disease resp. dementia with Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease with 
concomitant Alzheimer's pathology, and the Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's 
disease according to extent and concomitant pathology. The most reliable 
diagnostic features of dementia with Lewy bodies are fluctuating disturbances of 
cognition and consciousness, visual disorders (hallucinations, visuoperceptive 
and visuoconstructive impairments), and early extrapyramidal signs of the 
hypokinetic-rigid type with a propensity to frequent falls. The pertinent 
diagnostic criteria are the consensus criteria according to McKeith et al. 
Additional contributions are to be expected by functional neuroimaging (SPECT, 
PET) and CSF examination (homovanillic acid). However, even assuming the most 
favorable conditions a diagnostic accuracy of 85 % is presently hard to achieve. 
Particularly, as is demonstrated using a case example, reliable antemortem 
diagnosis of Lewy body variant of Alzheimer's disease is hardly possible. 
Clinically, this group of diseases is important, since increased neuroleptic 
sensitivity must be taken into account and modern central cholinergic agents 
seem to be a promising therapeutic option.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2002-33858
PMID: 12215920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


872. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2002 Sep;17(9):859-64. doi: 10.1002/gps.723.

Homocysteine in neuropsychiatric disorders of the elderly.

Reutens S(1), Sachdev P.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychiatric Institute, Prince of Wales Hospital, Sydney, Australia. 
sreutens@unsw.edu.au

OBJECTIVE: There is increasing interest in homocysteine as a risk factor for 
neuropsychiatric disorders such as stroke, dementia, depression and Parkinson's 
disease. This article reviews the current literature on the relationship between 
homocysteine and these disorders to ascertain if any clinical recommendations 
can be made.
METHOD: A MEDLINE and EMBASE search was made for English language publications 
between 1966 and 2002 using the search terms 'Homocysteine' and 'Stroke', 
'Dementia', 'Vascular Dementia', 'Alzheimer's dementia', 'Cognition disorders or 
cognitive decline or memory disorders', 'Depression or depressive disorders' or 
'Parkinson's disease'. In addition, individual articles were hand searched for 
relevant references.
RESULTS: Cross-sectional studies consistently suggest that elevated homocysteine 
increases the risk of stroke, and may also increase the risk of leukoariosis, 
vascular dementia (VaD), cognitive impairment and Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
Longitudinal studies of homocysteine as a risk factor are few and inconsistently 
supportive of these associations. No intervention trials to determine the effect 
of lowering homocysteine levels have yet been published. The pathological 
mechanisms for homocysteine-mediated disease await complete elucidation. Mild 
hyperhomocysteinemia is common in the elderly population, and folate 
supplementation can decrease homocysteine levels.
CONCLUSION: The epidemiological evidence for homocysteine as a risk factor for 
neuropsychiatric disease is an emerging area of great interest. Screening the 
population for hyperhomocysteinemia cannot be recommended at this stage, but 
individuals at increased risk of cerebrovascular disease or cognitive impairment 
should be investigated and treated for elevated homocysteine levels.

Copyright 2002 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.723
PMID: 12221661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


873. Pharmacol Rev. 2002 Sep;54(3):469-525. doi: 10.1124/pr.54.3.469.

Amyloid precursor protein, presenilins, and alpha-synuclein: molecular 
pathogenesis and pharmacological applications in Alzheimer's disease.

Suh YH(1), Checler F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Creative Research 
Initiative Center for Alzheimer's Dementia and Neuroscience Research Institute, 
MRC, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea. yhsun@plaza.snu.ac.kr

Erratum in
    Pharmacol Rev. 2006 Jun;58(2):280.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the most common cause of dementia that arises on a 
neuropathological background of amyloid plaques containing beta-amyloid (A beta) 
derived from amyloid precursor protein (APP) and tau-rich neurofibrillary 
tangles. To date, the cause and progression of both familial and sporadic AD 
have not been fully elucidated. The autosomal-dominant inherited forms of 
early-onset Alzheimer's disease are caused by mutations in the genes encoding 
APP, presenilin-1 (chromosome 14), and presenilin-2 (chromosome 1). APP is 
processed by several different proteases such as secretases and/or caspases to 
yield A beta and carboxyl-terminal fragments, which have been implicated in the 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease. Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease 
are associated with the cerebral accumulation of A beta and alpha-synuclein, 
respectively. Some patients have clinical and pathological features of both 
diseases, raising the possibility of overlapping pathogenic pathways. Recent 
studies have strongly suggested the possible pathogenic interactions between A 
beta, presenilins, and/or alpha-synuclein. Therefore, treatments that block the 
accumulation of A beta and alpha-synuclein might benefit a broad spectrum of 
neurodegenerative disorders. This review covers the trafficking and processing 
of APP, amyloid cascade hypothesis in AD pathogenesis, physiological and 
pathological roles of presenilins, molecular characteristics of alpha-synuclein, 
their interactions, and therapeutic strategies for AD.

DOI: 10.1124/pr.54.3.469
PMID: 12223532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


874. Mayo Clin Proc. 2002 Sep;77(9):918-25. doi: 10.4065/77.9.918.

Medical services utilization and prognosis in Parkinson disease: a 
population-based study.

Parashos SA(1), Maraganore DM, O'Brien PC, Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn 55905, USA.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate prognostic outcomes and utilization of medical 
services by patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and to identify predictors of 
such use.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Using the medical records linkage system of the Rochester 
Epidemiology Project, we identified an incidence cohort of 89 PD cases (Olmsted 
County, Minnesota, 1979-1988) and a reference group of 89 subjects without PD of 
the same age and sex and from the same population. Both patients with PD and 
reference subjects were followed up historically by medical record review from 
onset of PD (or index year) through death, last contact with the system, or end 
of study.
RESULTS: Patients with PD had significantly more physician consultations per 
year (median, 7.9 vs 5.9; P=.001) and more emergency department visits per year 
(median, 0.6 vs 0.4; P=.05) than did reference subjects. Response to 
dopaminergic medications and higher education predicted more physician 
consultations among patients. The PD patients used neuroleptics and 
antidepressants significantly more frequently than reference subjects. The risk 
of nursing home placement was significantly increased for PD patients compared 
with reference subjects (relative risk, 6.7; 95% confidence interval, 3.7-12.1; 
P<.001). Poor response to dopaminergic medications, lower education level, older 
age at onset of PD, and dementia predicted a shorter time between onset and 
nursing home placement among PD patients. Survival was significantly reduced in 
PD patients compared with reference subjects (relative risk, 2.2; 95% confidence 
interval, 1.4-3.4; P<.001). Good response to dopaminergic medications, higher 
education, younger age at onset of PD, and absence of dementia predicted better 
survival among PD patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with PD used outpatient and nursing home services more 
often than subjects without PD. Patients with PD also experienced a reduced 
survival time. Demographic and clinical characteristics influenced utilization 
patterns and outcomes.

DOI: 10.4065/77.9.918
PMID: 12233925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


875. J Gerontol A Biol Sci Med Sci. 2002 Oct;57(10):M640-4. doi: 
10.1093/gerona/57.10.m640.

End-of-life care of persons with dementia.

Michel JP(1), Pautex S, Zekry D, Zulian G, Gold G.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Department, Geneva University Hospitals, Switzerland. 
jean-peirre.michel@Hcuge.ch

Many clinicians with different training and practice are involved in the care of 
persons with dementia. Whereas neurologists and psychiatrists focus their 
attention on the early phase of dementia, geriatricians and palliative care 
specialists are particularly involved at the end of demented patients' lives. To 
summarize the progress of knowledge in this field, it seems possible to answer 
four fundamental questions. When? Several longitudinal studies of cohorts of 
demented and nondemented patients showed clearly that dementia is a risk factor 
for early death. There are no survival differences between Alzheimer's and Lewy 
body disease patients. Patients with vascular dementia have the worst prognosis. 
These results need to be analyzed with consideration of associated comorbidity, 
types and intensity of care, and dementia treatment. Why? Studies conducted on 
the basis of death certificates appear to be biased. A large autopsy study 
performed in the geriatric department of Geneva University Hospital showed no 
difference existed in immediate causes of death between demented and nondemented 
hospitalized old patients. On the other hand, cardiac causes are significantly 
more frequent in vascular dementia than in Alzheimer's disease or mixed dementia 
patients. How? Deaths of demented patients raise a lot of ethical 
considerations. It is always difficult to know demented patients' awareness of 
the end of life. It is really difficult to accompany these patients, with whom 
communication is essentially nonverbal. During this delicate phase of the end of 
life, how can formal health professionals help the family members who are afraid 
of both death and dementia? And after? Suffering of family members and 
caregivers has to be strongly considered. This goal includes the improvement of 
our communication skills with the patient, and the facilitation of 
interdisciplinary exchanges with the caregiver's team and with the family 
members to allow acceptance of the death.

DOI: 10.1093/gerona/57.10.m640
PMID: 12242316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


876. Rev Gastroenterol Peru. 1998;18 Suppl 1:56-61.

[PERCUTANEOUS ENCOSCOPIC GASTROSTOMY].

[Article in Spanish]

Tagle A M.

Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy is an increasingly utilized method of 
enteral nutrition in patients who for a variety of reasons, are unable to 
swallow or possess a high risk of aspiration. This method has replaced both 
surgical gastrostomy and the prolonged used of nasogastric tubes since its 
creation, in 1980. The most frequent indications are severe neurological 
diseases such as cerebrovascular accidents, Parkinson's, multiple sclerosis and 
other processes such as severe trauma, multi-infarct dementia or diverse head 
and neck tumors. The procedure involves the performance of an upper endoscopy in 
the usual manner, followed by an insertion of a plastic catheter percutaneously 
in the area of maximum contact between the gastric and abdominal walls, under 
direct endoscopic view. Then, a guidewire is introduced through the lumen of the 
catheter and is enlaced by a polypectomy snare passed through the working 
channel of the endoscope, utilizing the guidewire to tie the distal portion of 
the feeding tube, which will be pulled to its final position. The complications 
associated to this procedure are minimal, most of them related to the endoscopy 
itself, like reactions to sedation, aspiration of oropharyngeal secretions, etc. 
There is also a possibility of local infection at the insertion site, 
perforation of the colon and excessive leaking of gastric contents around the 
tube, and for these reasons the procedure should only be performed by trained 
physicians, familiarized with the management of these events. The goal of this 
review is to illustrate the reader about the indications, contral indications, 
complications and general considerations in the patients who will have a 
percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy.

PMID: 12271336


877. Int J Clin Pract. 2002 Sep;56(7):515-25.

Atypical antipsychotics: experience and use in the elderly.

Bullock R(1), Saharan A.

Author information:
(1)Kingshill Research Centre, Victoria Hospital, Swindon, Wilts.

The use of antipsychotics is common in the elderly Typical antipsychotics are 
not without risk, especially in tardive dyskinesia, which, when balanced against 
relatively low efficacy, make their use debatable. Atypical antipsychotics have 
much less in the way of side-effects and are much less likely to induce tardive 
dyskinesia. However, there is much less in the published literature about the 
efficacy of these drugs in the elderly and how best to use them in primary 
psychosis, Parkinson's disease and the behavioural and psychological symptoms of 
dementia. This review attempts to summarise the current literature and make some 
tentative recommendations for each of the commonest atypicals, based on the 
current evidence.

PMID: 12296614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


878. Acta Neuropsychiatr. 2002 Oct;14(5):207-15. doi: 
10.1034/j.1601-5215.2002.140502.x.

Influence of cognitive reserve on neuropsychological functioning in Parkinson's 
disease.

Sánchez JL(1), Rodríguez M(2), Carro J(1).

Author information:
(1)1Department of Basic Psychology, Psychobiology and Methodology. Faculty of 
Psychology. University of Salamanca.
(2)2Department of Clinical Psychology and Psychobiology, Faculty of Psychology, 
University of Santiago de Compostela, Spain.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, attention has been drawn to the association between 
a low level of education and dementia, an almost generalized finding in the 
majority of studies on the prevalence of dementia where the level of education 
of the population was highly diversified. The protective effect of education is 
not limited to Alzheimer's disease but is also seen in other types of dementia, 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and even in the cognitive deterioration linked to 
aging Objective: To evaluate neuropsychological performance in (PD) subjects and 
to evaluate the influence of cognitive reserve (RC) on their neuropsychological 
performance.
SUBJECTS: An extensive neuropsychological battery of tests was applied to a 
total of 79 subjects, 33 of whom were diagnosed with PD.
MEASURES: RC scores were based on a combination of years of education, a measure 
of occupational attainment, and an estimate of premorbid intelligence.
RESULTS: As regards the specific disturbances found in the clinical group 
subjects, a lower performance in memory, attention, visuospatial, 
visuoconstructive, and perceptive skills was seen. With respect to our second 
objective, our results showed that patients diagnosed with PD who had a high RC 
reached a higher neuropsychological level of performance than those subjects 
with a low reserve.
CONCLUSIONS: Early neuropsychological impairments in PD are most evident in 
individuals with lower RC. As has been found in other neurological disorders, 
individuals with greater RC may be less sensitive to the initial clinical 
effects of the underlying neuropathological process.

DOI: 10.1034/j.1601-5215.2002.140502.x
PMID: 26984458


879. No To Shinkei. 2002 Aug;54(8):667-72.

[Statistic rCBF study of extrapyramidal disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Kamei H(1), Nakajima T, Fukuhara N.

Author information:
(1)National Saigata Hospital, 468-1 Saigata, Ogata, Nakakubiki, Niigata 
949-3193, Japan.

We studied regional cerebral blood flow (rCBF) in 16 patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), 2 patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 2 patients with 
progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 2 patients with striatonigral 
degeneration, and 16 normal volunteers, using Three-dimensional stereotactic 
surface projections (3 D-SSP). Decreased rCBF in PD patients was shown in the 
posterior parietal and occipital cortex. Decreased rCBF in DLB was shown in the 
frontal, parietal and occipital cortex with relative sparing of the sensorimotor 
cortex. Decreased rCBF in PSP was shown in the frontal cortex. Decreased rCBF in 
SND was shown in the frontal cortex and cerebellum. Statistic rCBF analysis 
using 3 D-SSP was a useful measure for the early differential diagnosis of 
extrapyramidal disorders.

PMID: 12355877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


880. Mov Disord. 2002 Sep;17(5):910-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.10202.

Clinical correlates of the pathology underlying parkinsonism: a population 
perspective.

Bower JH(1), Dickson DW, Taylor L, Maraganore DM, Rocca WA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and Mayo Foundation, Rochester, 
Minnesota 55905, USA. jbower@mayo.edu

We correlated the clinical features with pathological findings in an autopsy 
series of cases of incident parkinsonism. We used the medical records-linkage 
system of the Rochester Epidemiology Project to identify all incident cases of 
parkinsonism in Olmsted County, MN, for the years 1976 to 1990. Medical 
histories were abstracted in a standardized manner. Included in this study were 
those incident cases who died and underwent autopsy. Brain sections were studied 
with routine histology and special stainings. A neuropathologist blinded to any 
clinical information assigned cases to neuropathological categories. We found 
364 incident cases of parkinsonism of which 235 were deceased at the time of 
this study; there were 39 autopsied brains available for analysis (17% of 
deceased cases). Of the 16 patients diagnosed pathologically with Lewy body 
disease, documentation indicated that 8 had an early dementia, 3 had prominent 
dysautonomia, and 2 had prominent ataxia. Of the 7 patients diagnosed 
pathologically with progressive supranuclear palsy, 4 had no documentation of 
supranuclear gaze palsy, and 3 had no documentation of early falls. Of the 3 
patients diagnosed pathologically with multiple system atrophy, none had 
prominent ataxia or dysautonomia documented. Of the 5 patients with vascular 
disease at pathology, none had been given the clinical diagnosis of vascular 
parkinsonism. Of the 8 cases given the clinical diagnosis of drug-induced 
parkinsonism, 6 were found to have basal ganglia pathology. The autopsied cases 
in this study were not representative of all patients with parkinsonism, because 
atypical cases are more likely to come to autopsy than typical ones. Despite 
this selection bias, the retrospective data collection, and the small sample 
size, we made several observations that illustrate the difficulty in achieving 
an accurate antemortem diagnosis of parkinsonism.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10202
PMID: 12360539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


881. Mov Disord. 2002 Sep;17(5):998-1003. doi: 10.1002/mds.10204.

Effect of an attentional strategy on movement-related potentials recorded from 
subjects with Huntington's disease.

Johnson KA(1), Cunnington R, Bradshaw JL, Chiu E, Iansek R.

Author information:
(1)Neuropsychology Research Unit, Department of Psychology, Monash University, 
Victoria, Australia.

Huntington's disease patients perform automatic movements in a bradykinetic 
manner, somewhat similar to patients with Parkinson's disease. Cortical activity 
relating to the preparation of movement in Parkinson's disease is significantly 
improved when a cognitive strategy is used. It is unknown whether patients with 
Huntington's disease can utilise an attentional strategy, and what effect this 
strategy would have on the premovement cortical activity. Movement-related 
potentials were recorded from 12 Huntington's disease patients and controls 
performing externally cued finger tapping movement, allowing an examination of 
cortical activity related to movement performance and bradykinesia in this 
disease. All subjects were tested in two conditions, which differed only by the 
presence or absence of the cognitive strategy. The Huntington's disease group, 
unlike controls, did not produce a rising premovement potential in the absence 
of the strategy. The Huntington's disease group did produce a rising premovement 
potential for the strategy condition, but the early slope of the potential was 
significantly reduced compared with the control group's early slope. These 
results are similar to those found previously with Parkinson's disease patients. 
The strategy may have put the task, which previously might have been under 
deficient automatic control, under attentional control.

Copyright 2002 Movement Disorder Society

DOI: 10.1002/mds.10204
PMID: 12360549 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


882. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2002 Oct;59(10):946-51. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.59.10.946.

Early and widespread cholinergic losses differentiate dementia with Lewy bodies 
from Alzheimer disease.

Tiraboschi P(1), Hansen LA, Alford M, Merdes A, Masliah E, Thal LJ, Corey-Bloom 
J.

Author information:
(1)Neurologia, Ospedale San Paolo, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Reductions in cholinergic function occur in Alzheimer disease (AD) 
and dementia with Lewy bodies and correlate with cognitive decline. However, 
whether such alterations appear in early-stage disease is unclear.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the timing of cholinergic deficits in AD and dementia with 
Lewy bodies.
METHODS: Autopsy series of 89 patients with AD and 50 patients with the Lewy 
body variant of AD (LBV). Stage of disease was stratified according to results 
of the last Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) before death as mild, moderate, 
severe, or very severe. We analyzed choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) activity in 
the midfrontal, superior temporal, and inferior parietal cortices.
RESULTS: Although compared with a normal control group ChAT activity was 
decreased in the AD and LBV cohorts, ChAT activity reduction for the LBV cohort 
was much greater. Moreover, although the decline in ChAT activity in the AD 
cohort compared with the normal control group was significant only for patients 
in later stages of the illness, the decline in the LBV cohort was significant 
for those who died with mild-stage disease. When less impaired patients in each 
cohort (MMSE, > or = 10) underwent separate analysis, the relationship of ChAT 
activity with the MMSE score was strong and significant for the LBV cohort 
alone.
CONCLUSIONS: Although cholinergic deficits are seen in both AD and LBV, loss of 
ChAT activity is less severe and occurs later in the clinical course of AD. 
Conversely, in LBV, loss of ChAT activity is already prominent in the earliest 
stages of the illness, suggesting that cholinergic replacement therapy may be 
more effective in LBV than in AD, especially in mild-stage disease.

DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.59.10.946
PMID: 12365882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


883. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Oct 15;99(21):13896-901. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.202205599. Epub 2002 Oct 4.

Tau filament formation and associative memory deficit in aged mice expressing 
mutant (R406W) human tau.

Tatebayashi Y(1), Miyasaka T, Chui DH, Akagi T, Mishima K, Iwasaki K, Fujiwara 
M, Tanemura K, Murayama M, Ishiguro K, Planel E, Sato S, Hashikawa T, Takashima 
A.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Alzheimer's Disease and Neural Architecture, Brain Science 
Institute, Institute of Physical and Chemical Research (RIKEN), 2-1 Hirosawa, 
Wako-shi, Saitama 351-0198, Japan.

The R406W tau mutation found in frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked 
to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) causes a hereditary tauopathy clinically resembling 
Alzheimer's disease. Expression of modest levels of the longest human tau 
isoform with this mutation under the control of the 
alpha-calcium-calmodulin-dependent kinase-II promoter in transgenic (Tg) mice 
resulted in the development of congophilic hyperphosphorylated tau inclusions in 
forebrain neurons. These inclusions appeared as early as 18 months of age. As 
with human cases, tau inclusions were composed of both mutant and endogenous 
wild-type tau, and were associated with microtubule disruption and flame-shaped 
transformations of the affected neurons. Straight tau filaments were recovered 
from Sarkosyl-insoluble fractions from only the aged Tg brains. Behaviorally, 
aged Tg mice had associative memory impairment without obvious sensorimotor 
deficits. Therefore, these mice that exhibit a phenotype mimicking R406W FTDP-17 
provide an animal model for investigating the adverse properties associated with 
this mutation, which might potentially recapitulate some etiological events in 
Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.202205599
PMCID: PMC129794
PMID: 12368474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


884. Eur Neurol. 2002;48(3):158-63. doi: 10.1159/000065520.

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Molina JA(1), García-Segura JM, Benito-León J, Gómez-Escalonilla C, del Ser T, 
Martínez V, Viaño J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital '12 de Octubre', Madrid, Spain.

Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H-MRS) provides a non-invasive, in 
vivo insight into the brain metabolism, and has been successfully used in 
several neurological conditions. Our objective was to characterise the cerebral 
metabolic changes in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) patients using (1)H-MRS. 
Single Voxel (1)H-MRS was performed in 12 DLB patients with mild to moderate 
symptoms and 11 age-matched healthy controls. Volumes of interest (VOI) were 
selected, including white matter (WM) in the centrum semiovale and grey matter 
(GM) in the parasagittal parietal cortex. Main metabolic peaks corresponding to 
N-acetylaspartate (NAA), glutamate/glutamine (Glx), choline-containing compounds 
(Cho), myo-inositol (Ins), and creatine plus phosphocreatine (Cr) were 
identified. These areas were measured and referred to that of the water. 
Metabolic ratios among the different peak areas were also calculated. In 
comparison with the control group, DLB patients showed significantly lower mean 
NAA/Cr, Glx1/Cr and Cho/Cr ratios in the WM, while their Ins/Cr and Ins/NAA 
ratios did not differ from those of the control group. In the GM, no significant 
differences were found between both groups. Correlations between age at onset, 
disease duration, Mini-Mental State Examination, the motor section of the 
Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale, Hoehn and Yahr staging and metabolic 
ratios, both for WM and GM, were not significant in DLB patients. Our 
spectroscopy data show WM involvement, along with GM preservation, in DLB 
patients with early or intermediate stages. Hence, (1)H-MRS may provide 
adjunctive information in the ante-mortem diagnosis of DLB.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000065520
PMID: 12373033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


885. Arch Neurol. 2002 Oct;59(10):1622-30. doi: 10.1001/archneur.59.10.1622.

Familial dementia with lewy bodies: a clinical and neuropathological study of 2 
families.

Tsuang DW(1), Dalan AM, Eugenio CJ, Poorkaj P, Limprasert P, La Spada AR, 
Steinbart EJ, Bird TD, Leverenz JB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Northwest Network Mental Illness Research, 
Education, and Clinical Center, VA Puget Sound Health Care System, 1660 S 
Columbian Way, Mailstop 116MIRECC, Seattle, WA 98108, USA. dwt1@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is characterized by early dementia 
and associated visual hallucinations, parkinsonism, and fluctuations in 
cognition. Few families with DLB have been described with detailed clinical, 
pathological, and genetic assessments.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the clinical, neuropathological, and genetic 
characteristics of families with 2 or more autopsy-proven cases of DLB.
DESIGN: Consecutive cases with the neuropathological diagnosis of DLB were 
reviewed as part of a case series. Families included in this study have 2 or 
more autopsy-proven cases of DLB available and a positive family history of 
dementia. We obtained clinical and neuropathological data on all first-degree 
relatives. Neuropathological evaluations included alpha-synuclein immunostaining 
for Lewy body detection. We conducted apolipoprotein E genotyping and sequenced 
the alpha-, beta-, gamma-synuclein, and parkin genes.
SETTING: Subjects were selected from the neuropathology core of the University 
of Washington's Alzheimer's Disease Research Center.
PATIENTS: The study investigated 2 families. Clinical information was obtained 
from 10 individuals in family 1 and 7 individuals in family 2. Neuropathological 
examinations were conducted in 3 individuals in family 1 and 2 individuals in 
family 2.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Each subject was examined for the presence of clinical 
symptoms and neuropathological findings consistent with DLB.
RESULTS: While all affected individuals presented with dementia in both 
families, only individuals in family 1 developed visual hallucinations and 
delusions. Parkinsonism, if present, occurred later in the course of illness. 
Neuropathological examination revealed Lewy bodies in all patients, while 1 
patient from each family also met the neuropathological criteria for Alzheimer 
disease. All affected individuals carried at least 1 APOE (apolipoprotein E) 
epsilon 4 allele, while there were no nucleotide alterations in the synuclein or 
parkin genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Familial DLB exists, although there is substantial clinical and 
neuropathological heterogeneity within and between families. Additional 
clinicopathologic and genetic studies are necessary to further our understanding 
of DLB.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.59.10.1622
PMID: 12374501 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


886. J Neurol. 2002 Oct;249(10):1423-32. doi: 10.1007/s00415-002-0861-7.

Mild cognitive impairment with subcortical vascular features: clinical 
characteristics and outcome.

Frisoni GB(1), Galluzzi S, Bresciani L, Zanetti O, Geroldi C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Epidemiology & Neuroimaging, IRCCS San Giovanni di Dio--FBF, 
via Pilastroni 4, 25125 Brescia, Italy. papers@centroAlzheimer.it

OBJECTIVES: To identify non-demented individuals with cognitive impairment due 
to a cerebrovascular etiology among those coming to observation of a memory 
clinic and to describe their clinical features and outcome.
METHODS: Patients were enrolled in a prospective study on early cognitive 
impairment carried out in a Memory Clinic. Mild cognitive impairment of the 
vascular type (MCI-V) was defined based on modified criteria for subcortical 
vascular dementia (SVD) by Erkinjuntti and colleagues. Twenty-nine patients with 
MCI-V (age 78 +/- 7, Mini Mental State Exam (MMSE) 24 +/- 3) were compared with 
14 with mild cognitive impairment of degenerative etiology (MCI) based on the 
Mayo Clinic criteria (age 72 +/- 9, MMSE 25 +/- 2), and to 21 patients with 
frank SVD (age 80 +/- 6, MMSE 21 +/- 3). Patients were followed over time for 32 
+/- 8 months.
RESULTS: MCI-V patients had a neuropsychological profile characterized by poor 
performance on frontal tests (Wisconsin card sorting and word fluency) and 
neurological features of parkinsonism without tremor (impairment of balance and 
gait). Of those followed for at least 40 months, 50 % of patients with MCI-V and 
SVD had died, while all MCI patients were still alive ( P = 0.03). Of those 
alive, 68 % of the MCI-V, 52 % of the SVD, and 17 % of the MCI patients had 
reached one of the following outcomes at 40 months: nursing home placement, 
functional loss, and cognitive deterioration ( P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with MCI-V have a distinctive clinical picture and can be 
identified in a clinical setting. Because of the high frequency of adverse 
outcomes, very early preventive measures need to be devised.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-002-0861-7
PMID: 12382161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


887. J Clin Neurosci. 2002 Sep;9(5):497-501. doi: 10.1054/jocn.2001.0991.

Does mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction have a role in common 
neurodegenerative disorders?

Byrne E(1).

Author information:
(1)Centre for Neurosciences, University of Melbourne.

Respiratory chain dysfunction has been established as having a primary 
pathoaetiological role in certain relatively rare multisystem disorders 
(typically encephalomyopathies) and postulated as having an important role in 
commoner neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer dementia and 
Parkinson's disease. In the latter conditions, there is considerable evidence 
that non-mitochondrial factors have a key role in causation, making it unlikely 
that respiratory chain failure is the central event in pathoaetiology. Evidence 
is presented in this paper suggesting a role for mitochondrial dysfunction in 
upstream events predisposing to neurodegeneration, and in downstream events 
accelerating cell dysfunction and loss. While probably not having a primary role 
in pathoaetiology, respiratory chain dysfunction may still be an important risk 
factor for development of late life neurodegenerative disease and an important 
effector mechanism in neuronal dysfunction, and therefore represents a 
legitimate therapeutic target.

DOI: 10.1054/jocn.2001.0991
PMID: 12383403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


888. Nutr Neurosci. 2002 Oct;5(5):291-309. doi: 10.1080/1028415021000033767.

Role of oxidative stress and antioxidants in neurodegenerative diseases.

Rao AV(1), Balachandran B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Ont., Canada. 
v.rao@utoronto.ca

Neurodegenerative diseases (NDD) are a group of illness with diverse clinical 
importance and etiologies. NDD include motor neuron disease such as amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS), cerebellar disorders, Parkinson's disease (PD), 
Huntington's disease (HD), cortical destructive Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 
Schizophrenia. Numerous epidemiological and experimental studies provide many 
risk factors such as advanced age, genetic defects, abnormalities of antioxidant 
enzymes, excitotoxicity, cytoskeletal abnormalities, autoimmunity, mineral 
deficiencies, oxidative stress, metabolic toxicity, hypertension and other 
vascular disorders. Growing body of evidence implicates free radical toxicity, 
radical induced mutations and oxidative enzyme impairment and mitochondrial 
dysfunction due to congenital genetic defects in clinical manifestations of NDD. 
Accumulation of oxidative damage in neurons either primarily or secondarily may 
account for the increased incidence of NDD such as AD, ALS and stroke in aged 
populations. The molecular mechanisms of neuronal degeneration remain largely 
unknown and effective therapies are not currently available. Recent interest has 
focused on antioxidants such as carotenoids and in particular lycopene, a potent 
antioxidant in tomatoes and tomato products, flavonoids and vitamins as 
potentially useful agents in the management of human NDD. The pathobiology of 
neurodegenerative disorders with emphasis on genetic origin and its correlation 
with oxidative stress of neurodegenerative disorders will be reviewed and the 
reasons as to why brain constitutes a vulnerable site of oxidative damage will 
be discussed. The article will also discuss the potential free radical 
scavenger, mechanism of antioxidant action of lycopene and the need for the use 
of antioxidants in the prevention of NDD.

DOI: 10.1080/1028415021000033767
PMID: 12385592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


889. Neurosignals. 2002 Jul-Aug;11(4):175-90. doi: 10.1159/000065431.

Involvement of cyclic GMP and protein kinase G in the regulation of apoptosis 
and survival in neural cells.

Fiscus RR(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Epithelial Cell Biology 
Research Center, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong 
Kong, China. ronfiscus@cuhk.edu.hk

Our current understanding of nitric oxide (NO), cyclic GMP (cGMP) and protein 
kinase G (PKG) signaling pathways in the nervous systems has its origins in the 
early studies conducted on vascular tissues during the late 1970s and early to 
mid-1980s. The pioneering research into the NO/cGMP/PKG pathway in blood vessels 
conducted by the laboratories of Drs. Ferid Murad, Louis Ignarro and Robert 
Furchgott ultimately led to the awarding of the 1998 Nobel Prize in Physiology 
or Medicine to these three scientists. On the basis of further pioneering 
studies by Drs. John Garthwaite, Solomon Snyder, Steven Vincent and many other 
neuroscientists during the late 1980s and throughout the 1990s, it became 
recognized that NO serves as a neurotransmitter/neuromodulator in the central 
and peripheral nervous systems and that certain neural cells possess a cGMP 
signaling pathway similar to that in vascular smooth muscle cells. Although NO 
(at high concentrations) is toxic and thought to participate in neuronal cell 
death during stroke and neurodegenerative diseases (e.g. amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis, Alzheimer's disease, HIV dementia and Parkinson's disease), recent 
evidence suggests that NO at low physiological concentrations can act as an 
antiapoptotic/prosurvival factor in certain neural cells (e.g. PC12 cells, motor 
neurons and neurons of dorsal root ganglia, hippocampus and sympathetic nerves). 
The antiapoptotic effects of NO are mediated, in part, by cGMP and a downstream 
target protein, PKG. Other cGMP-elevating factors (e.g. atrial and brain 
natriuretic peptides) and direct PKG activator (e.g. 8-bromo-cGMP) also have 
antiapoptotic effects which have been quantified by the new capillary 
electrophoresis with laser-induced fluorescence detector technology. Inhibition 
of soluble guanylyl cyclase and lowering of basal cGMP levels cause apoptosis in 
unstressed neural cells (NG108-15 and N1E-115 cells). The cGMP/PKG pathway 
appears to play an essential role in preventing activation of a proapoptotic 
pathway, thus promoting neural cell survival.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000065431
PMID: 12393944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


890. Neuroreport. 2002 Oct 7;13(14):1825-8. doi: 10.1097/00001756-200210070-00028.

Age at onset is associated with disease severity in Lewy body variant and 
Alzheimer's disease.

Ho GJ(1), Hansen LA, Alford MF, Foster K, Salmon DP, Galasko D, Thal LJ, Masliah 
E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA 
92093-0624, USA.

This study investigated the influence of age at onset on cognitive performance, 
neuropathological and neurochemical features in autopsy-confirmed sporadic Lewy 
body variant (LBV) and in Alzheimer's disease (AD). We compared 28 early-onset 
(< or = 70 years) LBV subjects with 28 matched late-onset (> 70 years) subjects. 
Similarly, we examined the same features in 89 early onset AD and 89 matched 
late onset AD patients. Patients with early onset LBV and early onset AD 
declined more rapidly, had more neuritic plaques, and greater neocortical 
cholinergic loss compared to late onset LBV and late onset AD subjects. Taken 
together, these results suggest that for both LBV and AD, earlier age at onset 
may predict a more aggressive disease course.

Copyright 2002 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-200210070-00028
PMID: 12395133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


891. Bone. 2002 Oct;31(4):508-14. doi: 10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00848-7.

Utility of medical and drug history in fracture risk prediction among men and 
women.

van Staa TP(1), Leufkens HG, Cooper C.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Environmental Epidemiology Unit, University of 
Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, Southampton, UK.

Preventive strategies against osteoporotic fracture depend, in part, on the 
availability of simple risk prediction tools whereby pharmacological therapy may 
be targeted to those at greatest risk. The objective of this study was to 
evaluate the performance of a series of risk factors routinely listed in primary 
care records for the prediction of future fracture. Information was obtained 
from the UK General Practice Research Database, which contains the general 
practitioner medical records of around 6% of the UK population. We performed a 
case-control study of all 231,778 adult patients with a recorded fracture 
between 1988 and 1999 and an equal number of controls, individually matched by 
age, gender, and medical practice to the cases. In addition to a previous 
history of fracture, 11 items were identified that independently predicted 
fracture risk (history of anemia, dementia, cerebrovascular disease, and chronic 
obstructive pulmonary disease; recent use of oral corticosteroids, 
anticonvulsants, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs [NSAIDs], antiarrythmics, 
hypnotics/anxiolytics, antidepressants, and anti-Parkinson drugs). Three or more 
of these medical risk factors increased the risk of a vertebral fracture 8.1 
times (95% confidence interval [CI] 7.0-9.4) and of hip fracture by 4.6 times 
(95% CI 4.3-5.0), when compared with subjects without these attributes. The 
optimum screening characteristics of the risk factors for prediction of 
vertebral fracture revealed a sensitivity 66%, and specificity 89%. These values 
were 61% and 68%, respectively, for hip fracture. The positive predictive value 
(PPV) for fracture over a 5 year period improved with the addition of age and 
previous fracture history to the number of medical risk factors. PPV rose from 
8.4% for women aged 65 years without risk factors or fracture history, compared 
with 26.8% if women had sustained a previous fracture and had three or more risk 
factors recorded. The data suggest that routinely recorded medical risk factors 
permit identification of groups of patients with a substantial increase in 
future risk of fracture. Further investigations, such as bone densitometry, 
might be conveniently targeted at this group of patients.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/s8756-3282(02)00848-7
PMID: 12398948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


892. Rev Neurol. 2002 Oct 16-31;35(8):767-77.

[Neuropharmacology and receptor studies in the elderly].

[Article in Spanish]

Meltzer CC(1).

Author information:
(1)University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA 15213-2582 USA. 
meltzer@radserv.arad.upmc.edu

Functional brain imaging has provided unique and exciting opportunities to 
strengthen our knowledge of the biological substrate of the aging brain and 
neuropsychiatric disorders. Positron emission tomography (PET) is a particularly 
powerful tool for quantifying the neurobiological correlates of cognition, mood 
and behavior. Initial PET studies of aging, psychiatric disorders and 
neurodegenerative disease focused primarily on generalized physiological 
parameters such as cerebral blood flow and metabolism, and early neuroreceptor 
imaging studies relied on relatively non selective markers. New, selective 
receptor radioligands now offer a previously inaccessible means to investigate 
the dynamic relationships among neurochemistry, aging and psychopathology in 
vivo. This approach has substantial advantages over peripheral (platelet and 
cerebrospinal fluid) markers, neuroendocrine challenge studies, animal models, 
and postmortem receptor binding assays. Advances in tracer kinetic modeling, 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to PET registration, radiochemistry techniques, 
instrumentation and image processing have helped pave the way for increased 
emphasis on functional imaging studies of neuropsychiatric disorders of the 
elderly. The capability to correct PET image data for the confounding effect of 
cerebral atrophy permits relationships among age related brain changes and 
neurobiological disease mechanisms to be more accurately examined in the course 
of normal aging and in elderly patient populations.

PMID: 12402232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


893. Vertex. 2002 Sep-Nov;13(49):184-8.

[Dementia and cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Gershanik OS(1).

Author information:
(1)Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de Buenos Aires, Argentina. 
gersh@movi.com.ar

Changes in cognitive function and disturbances in behavior are commonly seen in 
parkinsonian patients and they are inherent features of the disease. Estimates 
on the prevalence of dementia in this disorder are quite variable, ranging from 
15 to 25%. Advanced age, depression, severity of akinesia, and the presence of 
dopaminomimetic psychosis, are considered as risk factors in the development of 
cognitive deterioration within this patient population. Cognitive dysfunction 
may manifest as relatively circumscribed deficits or overt dementia. The finding 
of mild cognitive deficits is common in Parkinson's disease, such as reduced 
flexibility, psychomotor slowing, reduction in learning capacity and information 
retrieval, and disturbances in visuospatial tasks. The most prevalent cognitive 
disturbance is an impairment in visuospatial tasks, not necessarily related to 
the degree of motor disability. Dementia, when present early on in the course of 
the disease may suggest alternative diagnoses (Diffuse Lewy body dementia, 
Alzheimer's disease with extrapyramidal features, Fronto-temporal dementia, 
etc.), while in those cases in whom the dementing disorder develops at a later 
stage, it is assumed to be an integral part of the disease, albeit corresponding 
to variable pathogenetic mechanisms.

PMID: 12404019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


894. J Int Neuropsychol Soc. 2002 Nov;8(7):907-14. doi: 10.1017/s1355617702870047.

Dementia with Lewy bodies may present as dementia and REM sleep behavior 
disorder without parkinsonism or hallucinations.

Ferman TJ(1), Boeve BF, Smith GE, Silber MH, Lucas JA, Graff-Radford NR, Dickson 
DW, Parisi JE, Petersen RC, Ivnik RJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic and Foundation, 
Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA. ferman.tanis@mayo.edu

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a sleep disturbance 
that commonly occurs in Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). Retrospective 
examination of DLB course has shown that RBD and cognitive decline may precede 
the onset of parkinsonism and visual hallucinations. Therefore, some patients 
with DLB may initially present with dementia and RBD, but would not meet current 
formal criteria for probable DLB at that time. The purpose of this study is to 
determine whether patients with dementia and RBD, who do not have parkinsonism 
or visual hallucinations, have cognitive profiles that can be distinguished from 
autopsy-confirmed definite AD, but not from clinically probable DLB. If so, this 
would support the hypothesis that the presence of RBD and dementia, as the only 
presenting symptoms, reflects the early manifestation of DLB. Results show that 
early dementia in probable DLB and dementia with RBD are neuropsychologically 
indistinguishable. Both groups differ from definite AD of a similar early stage 
with significantly worse visual perceptual organization, sequencing and letter 
fluency but significantly better confrontation naming and verbal memory. In 
addition, follow-up data from a subset of patients with dementia and RBD reveal 
the subsequent development of parkinsonism or hallucinations 1 to 6 years later. 
Results indicate that the presentation of dementia and RBD is suggestive of 
underlying Lewy body disease and not Alzheimer's disease. This provides further 
evidence in support of including RBD as one of the core diagnostic features of 
DLB.

DOI: 10.1017/s1355617702870047
PMID: 12405541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


895. Expert Rev Neurother. 2002 Nov;2(6):819-34. doi: 10.1586/14737175.2.6.819.

Pharmacological approaches to disease-modifying therapies in Parkinson's 
disease.

O'Neill MJ(1), Siemers ER.

Author information:
(1)Eli Lilly & Co. Ltd, Lilly Research Centre, Erl Wood Manor, Windlesham, 
Surrey GU20 6PH, UK. oneill_michael_j@lilly.com

Parkinson's disease is a movement disorder resulting from neurodegeneration of 
the basal ganglia. Parkinson's disease is usually diagnosed at approximately 
55-60 years of age and affects approximately 1% of the population over 60 years. 
Dopaminergic cells located in the substantia nigra and whose terminals extend to 
the striatum degenerate slowly such that 60% of cells are already lost when 
clinical motor symptoms first become evident. In addition to the classic triad 
of Parkinson's disease symptoms, rest tremor, muscular rigidity and 
bradykinesia, abnormalities in postural reflexes, dementia and depression are 
important comorbid conditions. Current therapies are aimed primarily at 
replacing dopamine with the dopamine precursor L-dopa or by the use of direct 
acting dopamine receptor agonists. Adjunctive treatments with monoamine oxidase 
inhibitors, catechol-O-methyl transferase inhibitors and amantadine are also 
used. While providing very effective symptomatic therapy in early stages of the 
disease, these agents fail to halt disease progression. Thus, while these 
treatments generally provide excellent results for 2-5 years, quality of life 
for Parkinson's disease patients becomes increasingly poor 5-10 years after 
diagnosis. Symptoms that become increasingly problematic with disease 
progression include inconsistencies in motor control (response fluctuations), 
gait and balance abnormalities, cognitive loss, hypophonia and dysphagia. 
Therefore, in order to maintain an acceptable quality of life for patients with 
Parkinson's disease, therapies that provide not only symptomatic improvement, 
but also slow or stop disease progression are greatly needed. In this review, we 
will discuss possible mechanisms of cell death in Parkinson's disease and 
related potentially disease-modifying therapies. These therapies include 
dopaminergic cell tranplantation and the use of growth factors. Small molecules 
that may act as antioxidants, nicotinic receptor agonists, nitric oxide synthase 
inhibitors, immunophilins, excitatory amino acid-related (iGluR and mGluR 
agonists and antagonists) drugs and anti-inflammatory drugs will also be 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1586/14737175.2.6.819
PMID: 19810916


896. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2002;14(4):167-75. doi: 10.1159/000066022.

Clinical and neuropathological correlates of apolipoprotein E genotype in 
dementia with Lewy bodies.

Singleton AB(1), Wharton A, O'Brien KK, Walker MP, McKeith IG, Ballard CG, 
O'Brien J, Perry RH, Ince PG, Edwardson JA, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council/University of Newcastle upon Tyne, Centre 
Development in Clinical Brain Ageing, MRC Building, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) represents the second commonest cause of 
dementia in the elderly following Alzheimer's disease (AD). Whilst the presence 
of Lewy bodies is essential, DLB shares with AD the presence of senile plaques 
(SP), but neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) are not a necessary feature. The 
apolipoprotein E (APO E) epsilon4 allele is the most consistently associated 
genetic risk factor for AD and has also been shown to associate with DLB. We 
have therefore analysed the APO E epsilon4 allele in a large series of DLB cases 
coming to autopsy to: (1) determine if the epsilon4 allele describes a similar 
risk in DLB development as in AD and (2) determine how APO E epsilon4 allele 
status correlates with clinical and neuropathological findings in DLB, and in 
AD, as an indication of the role of APO E in underlying disease biology. Both 
DLB and AD share an increased epsilon4 allele frequency, though in DLB the 
epsilon2 allele frequency is not reduced and there is a relative lack of 
epsilon4 homozygotes. In contrast to previous studies, no association of the 
epsilon4 allele with age at onset or duration of disease was found in either 
disorders. In DLB cases, overall a significantly shorter duration of illness was 
observed when compared with AD cases, though no significant effect of the 
epsilon4 allele on disease onset or duration was seen. The survival rate was 
reduced by the presence of the epsilon4 allele in DLB, as with AD. No effect on 
SP or NFT counts was seen with the epsilon4 allele, though DLB cases showed a 
lower SP burden in addition to the expected lower NFT counts. This study 
demonstrates that DLB shares the APO epsilon4 allele with AD as a common risk 
factor, but that there are differences in the way the epsilon4 allele affects 
the phenotypic expression of disease.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1159/000066022
PMID: 12411758 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


897. Nucl Med Commun. 2002 Nov;23(11):1047-55. doi: 10.1097/00006231-200211000-00003.

The feasibility of statistical parametric mapping for the analysis of positron 
emission tomography studies using 
11C-2-beta-carbomethoxy-3-beta-(4-fluorophenyl)-tropane in patients with 
movement disorders.

Lucignani G(1), Gobbo C, Moresco RM, Antonini A, Panzacchi A, Bonaldi L, 
Carpinelli A, Caraceni T, Fazio F.

Author information:
(1)Università di Milano, Ospedale L. Sacco, Italy. giovanni.lucignani@unimi.it

Movement disorders, including Parkinson's disease and parkinsonian syndromes, 
e.g. progressive supranuclear palsy, multiple system atrophy, and Lewy body 
dementia, may be difficult to differentiate among each other at an early stage, 
since they may share similar clinical features and response to dopaminergic 
drugs. As new tracers for imaging the dopamine transporters become available, 
the use of positron emission tomography (PET) for the differential diagnosis of 
movement disorders is gaining clinical relevance. Visual interpretation is 
generally used for PET image analysis. However, the use of some form of less 
subjective analysis is desirable in order to detect subtle changes that may be 
difficult to identify by visual interpretation and to achieve an operator 
independent analysis. To this end this study was aimed at assessing the 
feasibility of using statistical parametric mapping (SPM) for the clinical 
evaluation of single PET scans performed with 
2-beta-carbomethoxy-3-beta-(4-fluorophenyl)-tropane ( C-beta-CIT-FE). Eleven 
healthy volunteers and five patients with movement disorders (Parkinson's 
disease, essential tremor, PSP and Lewy body dementia) were included in this 
study. Each subject underwent a PET study after i.v. injection of C-beta-CIT-FE. 
The PET images of C-beta-CIT-FE distribution acquired between 60 and 90 min were 
spatially fitted into the Talairach and Tournoux space. A template of normal 
C-beta-CIT-FE distribution was derived from studies in the 11 normal control 
subjects. Different patterns of reduction of the uptake of the tracer were 
detected in the basal ganglia of the five patients, in relation to each 
pathological condition. The patterns of distribution were all consistent with 
the severity and type of disease. The results of this study demonstrate the 
feasibility of differentiating among different states of dopaminergic 
impairment, due to Parkinson's disease and parkinsonian syndromes, by using PET 
scans with C-beta-CIT-FE and by using the SPM procedure for analysis of the 
data.

DOI: 10.1097/00006231-200211000-00003
PMID: 12411832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


898. Can J Psychiatry. 2002 Oct;47(8):715-22. doi: 10.1177/070674370204700802.

Cognitive pharmacotherapy of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias.

Herrmann N(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Division of Geriatric Psychiatry, Faculty of 
Medicine, University of Toronto Sunnybrook and Women's College Health Sciences 
Centre, 2075 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, ON M4N 3M5. nathan.herrmann@swchsc.on.ca

Comment in
    Can J Psychiatry. 2002 Oct;47(8):713-4.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this paper is to review the randomized controlled 
trials (RCTs) on the pharmacotherapy of Alzheimer's disease and other dementias 
and to provide evidence-based recommendations for treatment of the cognitive 
impairment associated with these disorders.
METHOD: A Medline search was conducted for RCTs, using the following key words: 
Alzheimer's disease, dementia, therapy, cholinesterase inhibitor, donepezil, 
rivastigmine, and galantamine. Studies were critically appraised, followed by a 
review of published major clinical practice guidelines. Recommendations for 
treatment were made based on best available evidence.
RESULTS: The pharmacotherapy of Alzheimer's disease should include the 
meticulous management of vascular risk factors (for example, hypertension, 
diabetes, cholesterol, and stroke prophylaxis) and consideration for 
supplementation with folate, vitamin B complex, and vitamin E. Patients should 
be offered at least 1 trial of a cholinesterase inhibitor, with the possibility 
of another trial if the first is poorly tolerated or ineffective. Patients with 
vascular dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies should also be offered treatment 
with cholinesterase inhibitors. At this time, we lack sufficient data to 
recommend the use of hormone replacement or antiinflammatory therapy for 
treatment of dementia as the primary indication.
CONCLUSION: Reasonable evidence exists to provide recommendations for the 
pharmacotherapy of dementia. Treatment will likely result in modest but 
important benefits to patients, caregivers, and society.

DOI: 10.1177/070674370204700802
PMID: 12420649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


899. Neurology. 2002 Nov 12;59(9):1320-4. doi: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000031426.21683.e2.

Cognitive impairments in advanced PD without dementia.

Green J(1), McDonald WM, Vitek JL, Evatt M, Freeman A, Haber M, Bakay RA, Triche 
S, Sirockman B, DeLong MR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Emory University School of Medicine, Emory 
University, Atlanta, GA, USA. jgreen@emory.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine the nature and frequency of cognitive impairments in 
nondemented patients with advanced PD and their relationship to other variables 
potentially predictive of neuropsychological performance.
METHODS: The neuropsychological performance of nondemented, nondepressed 
patients with idiopathic PD (n = 61) was quantified with respect to clinically 
available normative data. The relationship of neuropsychological measures to 
motor symptoms, age, years of education, disease duration, age at disease onset, 
disease deterioration rate, and dopaminergic therapy was assessed.
RESULTS: Impairment was most frequent on measures sensitive to frontal lobe 
function (67% on Wisconsin Card Sorting Test number of categories, 30% on letter 
fluency, 30% on verbal learning). Poorer performance on multiple 
neuropsychological measures was related to greater overall motor abnormality 
(total Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale score), increased bradykinesia 
on medication, older age, longer disease duration, and reduced education.
CONCLUSIONS: Even in the absence of dementia or depression, patients with 
advanced PD are likely to show clinically significant impairments on 
neuropsychological measures sensitive to changes in dorsolateral prefrontal 
regions participating in cognitive basal ganglia-thalamocortical circuits.

DOI: 10.1212/01.wnl.0000031426.21683.e2
PMID: 12427877 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


900. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2002 Oct 26;146(43):2047-50.

[Centenary of the Health Council of the Netherlands. VII. Influencing the human 
brain in the future].

[Article in Dutch]

de Neeling JN(1), Gersons-Wolfensberger DC, Hoogendijk WJ.

Author information:
(1)nico.de.neeling@gr.nl

On the occasion of its centenary, the Health Council of the Netherlands issued 
an advisory report on future possibilities for influencing the human brain. The 
Council foresees that, in the future, it will probably become possible to 
prevent or extensively delay diseases such as dementia and Parkinson's disease. 
The burden of many mental disorders will be markedly relieved by early detection 
and treatment. Developments are to be expected in the fields of function 
enhancement, pharmacotherapy, psychotherapy and electrostimulation. The 
promising developments aimed at the prevention of brain disorders have important 
ethical and societal implications which require uninterrupted attention.

PMID: 12428467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


