2701. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jan;18 Suppl 1:S171-3. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70053-0.

Tandem deep brain stimulation--challenging new structural targets for 
Parkinson's disease.

Uitti RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32256, USA.

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) targets for Parkinson's disease have been limited 
to neuronal regions wherein lesions have produced beneficial effects. 
Improvements in imaging allow placement in small and novel targets. 
Additionally, due to the ability of impulse generators to accommodate multiple 
electrodes, simultaneous stimulation in multiple neuronal regions is possible. 
Given that the two most disabling clinical features of Parkinson's disease, 
namely postural instability and dementia, have evaded effective treatment, 
consideration for new structural targets is warranted. Characteristics of 
dementia in parkinsonism include progressive deficits in attention and executive 
function. Additionally, many patients experience pronounced variability in 
cognition with profound fluctuations/variability in attention and alertness. 
Anecdotal and initial trial reports concerning DBS to the fornix/hypothalamus 
have been associated with improvement in memory function and reductions in 
expected cognitive decline in patients with early Alzheimer's disease. The 
fornix constitutes the major inflow and output pathway from the hippocampus and 
medial temporal lobe. I hypothesize that tandem DBS, targeting the STN/GPi and 
fornix/hypothalamus and/or hippocampus may have a positive impact on improving 
cognitive function and/or reducing risk for subsequent dementia with Lewy 
bodies/Parkinson dementia. Such targets also pose potential negative 
ramifications. Nevertheless, given the tremendous disability produced by 
dementia, new structural targets require systematic study.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70053-0
PMID: 22166425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2702. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jan;18 Suppl 1:S24-7. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70010-4.

Synucleinopathies from bench to bedside.

Puschmann A(1), Bhidayasiri R, Weiner WJ.

Author information:
(1)Department for Geriatric Psychiatry, Lund University, Sweden. 
andreas.puschmann@med.lu.se

Accumulation of alpha-synuclein is a pathological feature in several 
neurological diseases. Its characterization has allowed for a re-grouping of 
diseases according to the expected pathology. The clinical syndrome of PD can 
now be classified into forms with and without alpha-synuclein pathology. DLB and 
PDD are synucleinopathies, and MSA shows alpha-synuclein pathology with glial 
inclusions. ADHD symptoms commonly occur in persons that will subsequently 
develop DLB. A similar phenomenon may be the early personality changes and 
frontotemporal atrophy in patients with SNCA multiplication. RLS is not known to 
have alpha-synuclein pathology, but as PD and ADHD, involves a hypodopaminergic 
state. Furthermore, PD and RLS co-occur in families in a way that suggests 
common inheritance. A proportion of patients with ET have brainstem Lewy body 
pathology. Gaucher disease and other lysosomal storage disorders also have 
alpha-synuclein pathology. Alpha-synuclein is a naturally unfolded protein. 
Non-fibrillar oligomeres may be the toxic species, and Lewy body formation may 
in fact be protective. Inhibiting alpha-synuclein toxicity seems to be an 
attractive novel treatment strategy and several approaches are being developed. 
When such treatments become available, clinicians will need to be familiar with 
the clinical features that distinguish the synucleinopathies from their 
look-alikes.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70010-4
PMID: 22166445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2703. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jan;18 Suppl 1:S34-6. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70013-X.

Treatment of Parkinson's disease: focus on quality of life issues.

Uitti RJ(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL 32256, USA.

The vast majority of Parkinson's disease (PD) treatment discussions focus on two 
areas: pharmacotherapy and surgery. Why? These treatments produce relatively 
easily measurable outcomes concerning traditional diagnostic criteria: motor 
rating scores and "on" times. However, despite the expanding number of drugs and 
surgery, there is dwindling incremental improvement from the best motor outcomes 
available even 40 years ago. Over the same time period, recognition of the 
clinical scope of this syndrome has expanded tremendously. Much of this scope 
impacts on quality of life and is treatable. Two arenas with great potential 
impact on quality of life are mental health and activity/exercise. Early in the 
course of PD, depression and expectations about impending demise impact 
significantly on the quality of life of patients. Initial responses to medical 
therapy may also dictate patients' expectations. Later, the two most devastating 
features may be motor instability/falls/injury and dementia. Mounting evidence 
for the benefits of treatment aimed at these arenas is accumulating and revolves 
around recognition and facilitating healthy routines that may mitigate future 
negative clinical phenomenon. Keys concerning mental health include education 
with realistic expectations and identification/treatment of mood and sleep 
disorders. Effective pro-active treatment regimens for instability and dementia 
include activity/exercise advocacy.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70013-X
PMID: 22166448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2704. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jan;18 Suppl 1:S41-4. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70015-3.

Mild cognitive impairment associated with underlying Alzheimer's disease versus 
Lewy body disease.

Boeve BF(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Behavioral Neurology, Department of Neurology, and Center for 
Sleep Medicine, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, 
USA. bboeve@mayo.edu

The objective of this paper is to compare and contrast the clinical, 
neuropsychological, and neuroimaging findings in patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) associated with underlying Alzheimer's disease (AD) versus Lewy 
body disease (LBD) pathology. MCI refers to a clinical syndrome with impairment 
in one or more cognitive domains, with essentially normal performance of 
activities of daily living. Patients with the amnesic subtype of MCI often 
develop the dementia syndrome and neuroimaging findings characteristic of AD 
[e.g., hippocampal atrophy on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), temporoparietal 
and posterior cingulate hypometabolism on fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission 
tomography (FDG-PET), positive uptake on amyloid PET, normal striatonigral 
uptake on dopamine transporter scanning (DAT), etc.]. In contrast, the MCI 
syndrome associated with LBD pathology regardless of the coexisting presence or 
absence of parkinsonism is usually characterized by impairment in the executive 
and/or visuospatial domains, and the cognitive features are often preceded by 
REM sleep behavior disorder by many years. There is minimal hippocampal atrophy 
on MRI, minimal if any cortical uptake on amyloid-PET, and one would predict 
that hypometabolism would be maximal in the occipital cortex on FDG-PET and 
uptake would be decreased on DAT. The early data suggests that differentiating 
underlying AD vs LBD in the MCI phase will be feasible.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70015-3
PMID: 22166451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2705. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jan;18 Suppl 1:S60-2. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70020-7.

18F-FDG PET study on the idiopathic Parkinson's disease from several 
parkinsonian-plus syndromes.

Zhao P(1), Zhang B, Gao S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Second Hospital of Tianjin Medical University, 
Tianjin, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the difference in glucose metabolism on 
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography ((18)F-FDG PET) imaging 
for differential diagnosis of idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD) from several 
parkinsonian-plus syndromes using SPM2 approach.
METHODS: (18)F-FDG PET was performed for 18 IPD patients, 22 multiple system 
atrophy (MSA) patients, 13 progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) patients, 5 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) patients, 7 dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
patients and 1 normal pressure hydrocephalus (NPH) patient. Imaging-based 
diagnosis was obtained by statistical parametric mapping (SPM2) software to 
analyze the differences and overlaps among these groups.
RESULTS: The (18)F-FDG PET images analyzed with SPM2 demonstrated that a 
reduction in glucose metabolism occurred in bilateral parietal area for IPD, in 
bilateral putamen for MSA-P, in bilateral cerebellum for MSA-C, in midbrain and 
the middle frontal cortex for PSP, in asymmetrical metabolism of the cortex and 
the basal ganglia for CBD, in bilateral occipital and parieto-occipital areas 
for DLB. The metabolic reductions in a patient of NPH group were observed in the 
ventricular system.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies different patterns of glucose metabolism in 
parkinsonism. (18)F-FDG PET imaging may contribute to early differential 
diagnosis in clinically ambiguous cases of parkinsonism.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70020-7
PMID: 22166456 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2706. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2012 Jan;18 Suppl 1:S77-9. doi: 
10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70025-6.

Neuroimaging studies of different cognitive profiles in Parkinson's disease.

Monchi O(1), Degroot C, Mejia-Constain B, Bruneau MA.

Author information:
(1)Research Centre, Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, QC, Canada. 
oury.monchi@umontreal.ca

It is now clear that cognitive deficits exist even early in Parkinson's disease, 
having a significant impact on daily activities. However, the nature and the 
neural origins of cognitive dysfunction in PD are still under debate. 
Furthermore, a great heterogeneity seems to exist with respect to the cognitive 
profiles found in patients at the early stages of the disease, and these initial 
differences are likely predictive of distinct outcomes regarding the later 
occurrence of dementia. These include the early presence of Mild Cognitive 
Impairments, the nature and number of domains affected, as well as the 
occurrence of depression or apathy. Here, we will review studies involving 
anatomical and functional neuroimaging, and neuropsychological evaluation that 
have attempted to address these issues. Recommendations for future work will 
also be discussed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1353-8020(11)70025-6
PMID: 22166462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2707. Parkinsons Dis. 2011;2011:679283. doi: 10.4061/2011/679283. Epub 2011 Nov 29.

Dementia after DBS Surgery: A Case Report and Literature Review.

Rektorova I(1), Hummelova Z, Balaz M.

Author information:
(1)1st Department of Neurology, St. Anne's University Hospital, Medical School 
of Masaryk University, Pekarska 53, 656 91 Brno, Czech Republic.

We report the case history of a 75-year-old woman with Parkinson's disease who 
developed severe cognitive problems after deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the 
bilateral subthalamic nuclei (STN). After a brief cognitive improvement, the 
patient gradually deteriorated until she developed full-blown dementia. We 
discuss the case with respect to the cognitive effects of STN DBS and the 
possible risk factors of dementia after STN DBS surgery.

DOI: 10.4061/2011/679283
PMCID: PMC3236534
PMID: 22191066


2708. Parkinsons Dis. 2012;2012:561046. doi: 10.1155/2012/561046. Epub 2011 Dec 6.

Frontostriatal cognitive staging in Parkinson's disease.

de la Fuente-Fernández R(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Hospital A. Marcide, 15405 Ferrol, Spain.

Cognitive impairment and behavioural disorders are often encountered in subjects 
with Parkinson's disease (PD). A simple PD-related frontostriatal cognitive 
dysfunction (PDFCD) staging is proposed. Executive dysfunction and mental 
fatigue (stage I), depression/anxiety (stage IIa), apathy/pain (stage IIb), and 
dementia (stage III) reflect a sequential process of dopamine depletion 
occurring in different regions of the striatum (stages I and II) and the frontal 
cortex (stage III). In addition to these nonmotor manifestations present in the 
unmedicated (OFF) state, the PDFCD model also predicts a number of complications 
related to dopaminergic treatment (ON state), from impulse control disorders 
(stages I and IIa) to hallucinations (stage IIb) and psychosis (stage III). 
Although the model admittedly needs further refinements, it provides a framework 
for hypothesis testing and may help clinicians optimize therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1155/2012/561046
PMCID: PMC3236592
PMID: 22191070


2709. Minerva Med. 2011 Dec;102(6):441-59.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Goldman JG(1), Litvan I.

Author information:
(1)Section of Parkinson Disease and Movement Disorders, Department of 
Neurological Sciences, Rush University, Chicago, IL 60612, USA. 
jennifer_g_goldman@rush.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) traditionally has been defined by its characteristic 
motor hallmarks, but non-motor features such as cognitive impairment and 
dementia are increasingly recognized as part of PD. Mild cognitive impairment 
(MCI) is common in non-demented PD patients, occurring in about 20-50%. 
Frequency estimates and clinical features of mild cognitive impairment in PD 
(PD-MCI), however, vary across studies due to methodological differences and 
lack of uniform diagnostic criteria for PD-MCI. Overall, PD-MCI patients exhibit 
nonamnestic deficits in cognitive domains such as executive function, attention, 
and visuospatial function; however, the cognitive phenotype of PD-MCI is 
heterogeneous with some patients demonstrating greater amnestic deficits. PD-MCI 
patients, particularly those with posterior cortical profiles, may be at high 
risk for developing dementia. Various biomarkers studied in PD-MCI including 
cerebrospinal fluid, genetic analyses, and neuroimaging suggest that there may 
be distinct PD-MCI profiles. Future studies using uniform PD-MCI diagnostic 
criteria and incorporating biomarkers and longitudinal follow-up of PD-MCI 
cohorts are needed to understand PD-MCI as a transitional state between normal 
cognition and dementia.

PMCID: PMC3370887
PMID: 22193376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: None


2710. J Mol Neurosci. 2012 May;47(1):139-43. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9696-y. Epub 2011 
Dec 23.

Clinical and pathological characteristics of LRRK2 G2019S patients with PD.

Poulopoulos M(1), Cortes E, Vonsattel JP, Fahn S, Waters C, Cote LJ, Moskowitz 
C, Honig LS, Clark LN, Marder KS, Alcalay RN.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA.

The objective of this study is to describe the neuropathologic findings in three 
LRRK2 G2019S carriers with Parkinson's disease (PD). We cross-referenced a list 
of 956 PD individuals that had been previously genotyped in clinical studies at 
Columbia University, with 282 subjects with a parkinsonian syndrome who came to 
autopsy in our brain bank since 1991. We found three autopsies of G2019S 
mutation carriers. Pathological analyses of the samples were blind to the 
genetic findings. We retrospectively reviewed the clinical records of the three 
patients. All three had a clinical and pathological diagnosis of PD. Cognitive 
impairment was a late feature in two out of three patients. Cortical involvement 
varied significantly: one had diffuse Lewy body (LB) pathology, tau inclusions, 
and amyloid pathology consistent with advanced Alzheimer's disease; one had 
diffuse cortical LB; and one had only brainstem predominant LB pathology. 
Cognitive impairment may be a long-term complication in G2019S mutation 
carriers. However, the extent of cortical involvement is variable. Larger 
longitudinal follow-up of LRRK2 G2019S mutation carriers is required to assess 
for risk factors for cortical involvement and dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-011-9696-y
PMCID: PMC3335886
PMID: 22194196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2711. Front Biosci (Schol Ed). 2012 Jan 1;4(2):581-98. doi: 10.2741/S286.

Molecular mechanisms of the neuroprotective/neurorescue action of multi-target 
green tea polyphenols.

Mandel SA(1), Weinreb O, Amit T, Youdim MB.

Author information:
(1)Eve Topf Center for Neurodegenerative Diseases Research and Department of 
Molecular Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Technion, Haifa, Israel. 
mandel@tx.technion.ac.il

Mounting evidence suggests that lifestyle factors, especially nutrition are 
essential factor for healthy ageing. However, as a result of the increase in 
life expectance, neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's (AD 
and PD, respectively) are becoming an increasing burden, as aging is their main 
risk factor. Brain aging and neurodegenerative diseases of the elderly are 
characterized by oxidative damage, dysregulation of redox metals homeostasis and 
inflammation. Thus, it is not surprising that a large amount of drugs/agents in 
therapeutic use for these conditions are antioxidants/metal complexing, 
bioenergetic and anti-inflammatory agents. Natural plant polyphenols (flavonoids 
and non-flavonoids) are the most abundant antioxidants in the diet and as such, 
are ideal nutraceuticals for neutralizing stress-induced free radicals and 
inflammation. Human epidemiological and new animal data suggest that green and 
black flavonoids named catechins, may help protecting the aging brain and reduce 
the incidence of dementia, AD and PD. This review will present salient features 
of the beneficial multi-pharmacological actions of black and green tea 
polyphenols in aging and neurodegeneration, and speculate on their potential in 
drug combination to target distinct pathologies as a therapeutic disease 
modification approach.

DOI: 10.2741/S286
PMID: 22202078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2712. J Parkinsons Dis. 2012;2(3):199-205. doi: 10.3233/JPD-2012-012086.

Prevalence and clinical course of olfactory hallucinations in idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease.

McAuley JH(1), Gregory S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, King George Hospital, Barking Havering & Redbridge 
University Hospitals Trust, Romford, Essex, UK. john_m_30@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: Olfactory hallucinations are known to occur in idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (IPD) but are much less well-described than visual 
hallucinations.
OBJECTIVE: To report the prevalence, clinical features, response to treatment 
and prognosis of olfactory hallucinations in IPD.
METHODS: 205 consecutively reviewed IPD patients and 205 non-IPD control 
patients attending the local hospital were surveyed for the presence of 
olfactory hallucinations by specific questioning; the IPD patients were followed 
up for at least three years.
RESULTS: Of 188 patients who had a clinical course remaining consistent with 
IPD, four were initially found to have olfactory hallucinations, yielding a 
prevalence of 2.1% (95% confidence interval 0.4-5.4%). Two further patients 
developed such hallucinations later during the study. Olfactory hallucinations 
were not always accompanied by other hallucination modalities. The patients had 
a long duration of disease treated with dopaminergic medication, loss of sense 
of smell typical for IPD, no dementia or features suggestive of non-idiopathic 
PD after three years follow-up, a lack of insight into their hallucinations with 
consequent failure to report them spontaneously, and a good and lasting response 
to modest doses of atypical antipsychotics.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the significant prevalence of olfactory 
hallucinations, describes their clinical features and indicates that they may 
occur in isolation and not predict other psychotic or dementing features. The 
nuisance that such hallucinations cause, their ease of treatment and their 
failure to be volunteered as a symptom means that specific questioning for their 
presence should be included in routine assessment of patients with IPD.

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-2012-012086
PMID: 23938227 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2713. An R Acad Nac Med (Madr). 2012;129(1):319-40; discussion 340-1.

[Vitamin D. A geriatric updated perspective].

[Article in Spanish]

Ribera Casado JM.

The aim of this review is to offer an updated survey about the relationship 
between old age, vitamin D and different clinical conditions. Two third of 
people over 65 years has insufficient serum levels of vitamin D (<30 ng/ml). 
Almost half of them present deficiency (<20 ng/ml), severe in many cases (<15 
ng/ml). This proportion increases when we analyze non-white populations, women, 
and people with obesity, diabetes mellitus or diets poor in Vitamin D. Low serum 
vitamin D concentration has been linked to mortality, osteoporosis, falls 
propensity, fractures, frailty, and cardiovascular diseases, including 
hypertension. Several epidemiological studies open the possibility to a 
relationship between low levels of the vitamin D and many other diseases. Among 
them with different cancer, diabetes, some types of dementia, Parkinson's 
disease, macular degeneration or periodontitis. Also with muscle strength, 
mobility and physical performance. Vitamin D supplementation has beneficial 
clinical effects, with a significant reduction of risks, specially in subjects 
living in nursing-homes and in those treated with corticoids or antireabsortive 
drugs. These effects are doses dependent. Risk of intoxication is minimal, even 
with high doses of vitamin.

PMID: 24294732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2714. J Huntingtons Dis. 2012;1(1):3-4. doi: 10.3233/JHD-2012-129002.

Huntington's Disease - A Brief Historical Perspective.

Wexler A(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for the Study of Women, UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA. arwexler@ucla.edu

Although the disease today known as Huntington's was described as early as the 
mid-19th century, knowledgeable physicians despaired of finding successful 
therapies and affected families largely kept it hidden. Starting in the late 
1960 s, the confluence of grass-roots advocacy by HD family members, advances in 
Parkinson's treatment, and the development of molecular genetics and 
neuroscience helped turn HD into a focus of growing biomedical research. While 
therapies lag behind laboratory discoveries, disease altering interventions are 
now moving closer to the clinic. The Journal of Huntington's Disease is a 
welcome new resource in this effort.

DOI: 10.3233/JHD-2012-129002
PMID: 25056613 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2715. Sleep Med. 2011 Dec;12 Suppl 2:S43-9. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2011.10.010.

Does idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) really exist? What are the 
potential markers of neurodegeneration in iRBD?

Ferini-Strambi L(1).

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Center, Vita-Salute San Raffaele University, Milan, Italy. 
ferinistrambi.luigi@hsr.it

REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) may be idiopathic or associated with other 
neurologic disorders. A strong association between RBD and α-synucleinopathies 
has recently been observed, with the parasomnia often heralding the clinical 
onset of the neurodegenerative disease. The idiopathic form accounts for up to 
60% of the cases reported in the three largest series of patients with RBD. Some 
clinical follow-up studies revealed that a large proportion of these patients 
will eventually develop a parkinsonian syndrome or a dementia of the Lewy bodies 
type in the years following the RBD diagnosis. The estimated 10-year risk of 
neurodegenerative disease for idiopathic RBD is about 40%. Moreover, it has been 
reported that the median interval between RBD and subsequent neurologic syndrome 
is 25years. Several studies have looked at neurophysiologic and 
neuropsychological functions in idiopathic RBD and have found evidence of CNS 
dysfunction during both wakefulness and sleep in a variable proportion of these 
patients, challenging the concept of idiopathic RBD. Identifying subjects with a 
high risk of developing a neurodegenerative process may be crucial to develop 
early intervention strategies. Prospective studies in idiopathic RBD showed that 
potential markers of neurodegeneration include: (1) marked EEG slowing on 
spectral analysis; (2) decreased striatal 123I-FP-CIT binding and substantia 
nigra hyperechogenicity; (3) impaired olfactory function; (4) impaired color 
vision.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2011.10.010
PMID: 22136899 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2716. Sleep Med. 2011 Dec;12 Suppl 2:S54-8. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2011.10.012.

REM behaviour disorder and neurodegenerative diseases.

Zanigni S(1), Calandra-Buonaura G, Grimaldi D, Cortelli P.

Author information:
(1)Clinica Neurologica, Department of Neurological Sciences, University of 
Bologna, Via Ugo Foscolo 7, 40123 Bologna, Italy.

Rapid-eye movement (REM) sleep behaviour disorder (RBD) is an REM sleep 
parasomnia characterized by enactment of dream content during REM sleep 
associated with loss of muscle atonia. RBD can be either idiopathic or secondary 
to drugs or other diseases. The best recognized association is with 
neurodegenerative diseases, namely alpha-synucleinopathies. RBD may represent 
the first feature of neurodegeneration and can be considered an early marker of 
these disorders. This review describes the main clinical, pathogenetic, and 
therapeutic features of RBD, pointing to its association with neurodegenerative 
diseases and emphasizing the clinical and prognostic implications.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2011.10.012
PMID: 22136901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2717. Curr Pharm Des. 2012;18(1):15-26. doi: 10.2174/138161212798919039.

From small to big molecules: how do we prevent and delay the progression of 
age-related neurodegeneration?

Ho YS(1), Poon DC, Chan TF, Chang RC.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurodegenerative Diseases, Department of Anatomy, The 
University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Age-related neurodegeneration in the brain and retina is complicated. It 
comprises a series of events encompassing different modes of degeneration in 
neurons, as well as inflammation mediated by glial cells. Systemic inflammation 
and risk factors can contribute to disease progression. Age-related conditions 
such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), Parkinson's disease (PD) and Age-related 
Macular Degeneration (AMD) affect patients for 5 to 20 years and are highly 
associated with risk factors such as hyperhomocysteinaemia, 
hypercholesterolaemia, hypertension, and symptoms of mood disorder. The long 
duration of the degeneration and the wide array of systemic factors provide the 
opportunity for nutraceutical intervention to prevent or delay disease 
progression. Small molecules such as phenolic compounds are candidates for 
neuroprotection because they have anti-oxidant activities and can modulate 
intracellular signaling pathways. Bigger entities such as oligosaccharides and 
polysaccharides have often been neglected because of their complex structure. 
However, certain big molecules can provide neuroprotective effects. They may 
also have a wide spectrum of action against risk factors. In this review we use 
an integrative approach to the potential uses of nutraceutical products to 
prevent age-related neurodegeneration. These include direct effects of phenolic 
compounds and polysaccharides on neurons to antagonize various neurodegenerative 
mechanisms in AD, PD and AMD, and indirect effects of these compounds on 
peripheral disease-related risk factors.

DOI: 10.2174/138161212798919039
PMID: 22211681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2718. Arch Neurol. 2012 May;69(5):601-7. doi: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.2370.

Predictors of survival in patients with Parkinson disease.

Willis AW(1), Schootman M, Kung N, Evanoff BA, Perlmutter JS, Racette BA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
MO 63110, USA. willisa@neuro.wustl.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine the life expectancy of patients with Parkinson disease 
(PD) in the United States and identify demographic, geographic, and clinical 
factors that influence survival.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study of 138 000 Medicare beneficiaries with 
incident PD who were identified in 2002 and followed up through 2008.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Confounder-adjusted 6-year risk of death as influenced by 
3 groups of factors: (1) race, sex, and age at diagnosis; (2) geography and 
environmental factors; and (3) clinical conditions. We examined hospitalization 
diagnoses in patients with terminal PD and compared PD mortality with that of 
other common diseases.
RESULTS: Thirty-five percent of patients with PD lived more than 6 years. Sex 
and race significantly predicted survival; patients who were female (HR [hazard 
ratio], 0.74; 95% CI, 0.73-0.75), Hispanic (HR, 0.72; 95% CI, 0.65-0.80), or 
Asian (HR, 0.86; 95% CI, 0.82-0.91) had a lower adjusted risk of death than 
white men. Dementia, diagnosed in 69.6% of cases and most often in African 
American patients (78.2%) and women (71.5%), was associated with a greater 
likelihood of death (HR, 1.72; 95% CI, 1.69-1.75). Parkinson disease mortality 
was greater than that of many common life-threatening diseases. Patients with 
terminal PD were hospitalized frequently for cardiovascular disease (18.5%) and 
infection (20.9%) but rarely for PD (1.0%). Regional survival rates were similar 
but patients with PD living in urban high industrial metal emission areas had a 
slightly higher adjusted risk of death (HR, 1.19; 95% CI, 1.10-1.29).
CONCLUSIONS: Demographic and clinical factors impact PD survival. Dementia is 
highly prevalent in patients with PD and is associated with a significant 
increase in mortality. More research is needed to understand whether 
environmental exposures influence PD course or survival.

DOI: 10.1001/archneurol.2011.2370
PMCID: PMC3599783
PMID: 22213411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2719. Ann Agric Environ Med. 2011;18(2):294-303.

Biomonitoring and biomarkers of organophosphate pesticides exposure - state of 
the art.

Kapka-Skrzypczak L(1), Cyranka M, Skrzypczak M, Kruszewski M.

Author information:
(1)Independent Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Rural Health, 
Lublin, Poland. lucynakapka@gmail.com

Human biomonitoring provides an efficient and cost-effective way to identify and 
quantify exposure to chemical substances, including those having deleterious eff 
ects on human organisms. Once the risk of hazardous exposure has been identified 
and the mechanism of toxic eff ects has been elucidated, an ultimate decision 
about how to reduce exposure can be made. A particularly high risk of exposure 
to hazardous chemicals is associated with the use of pesticides in agriculture, 
especially the use of organophosphorous pesticides (OP), which are the most 
widely and commonly used insecticides worldwide. There is some strong evidence 
that chronic exposure to these compounds may have adverse eff ects on health. 
Exposure to pesticides has been associated with an increase in the incidence of 
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, multiple myeloma, soft tissue sarcoma, lung sarcoma, and 
cancer of the pancreas, stomach, liver, bladder and gall bladder, Parkinson 
disease, Alzheimer disease, and reproductive outcomes. In view of these 
findings, the detection of populations at risk constitutes a very important 
topic. The biomonitoring studies on individuals exposed to pesticides have shown 
an elevated level of indicators of DNA damage, such as chromosomal aberrations 
(CA), sister chromatid exchanges (SCE), micronuclei (MN), and recently, single 
cell gel electrophoresis (SCGE). The cytogenetic markers of DNA damage have 
become very popular and useful in providing an analytical data for risk 
assessment, such as internal exposure doses and early biological eff ects of 
both occupational and environmental exposure to pesticides. The article 
describes the usefulness and the limitations of these biomarkers in 
biomonitoring studies of populations exposed to pesticides, with regard to the 
main routes of uptake and different matrices, which can be used to monitor risk 
assessment in occupational settings. The article also summarizes the latest 
reports about biomarkers of susceptibility, and mentions other biomarkers widely 
used in biomonitoring studies, such as pesticide or its metabolites level.

PMID: 22216802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2720. Int Psychogeriatr. 2012 Apr;24(4):541-56. doi: 10.1017/S1041610211002511. Epub 
2012 Jan 6.

Cognitive impairment and vitamin B12: a review.

Moore E(1), Mander A, Ames D, Carne R, Sanders K, Watters D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Melbourne, Department of Surgery, 
The Geelong Hospital, Barwon Health, Geelong, Victoria, Australia. 
eileen.moore@barwonhealth.org.au

BACKGROUND: This review examines the associations between low vitamin B12 
levels, neurodegenerative disease, and cognitive impairment. The potential 
impact of comorbidities and medications associated with vitamin B12 derangements 
were also investigated. In addition, we reviewed the evidence as to whether 
vitamin B12 therapy is efficacious for cognitive impairment and dementia.
METHODS: A systematic literature search identified 43 studies investigating the 
association of vitamin B12 and cognitive impairment or dementia. Seventeen 
studies reported on the efficacy of vitamin B12 therapy for these conditions.
RESULTS: Vitamin B12 levels in the subclinical low-normal range (<250 ρmol/L) 
are associated with Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, and Parkinson's 
disease. Vegetarianism and metformin use contribute to depressed vitamin B12 
levels and may independently increase the risk for cognitive impairment. Vitamin 
B12 deficiency (<150 ρmol/L) is associated with cognitive impairment. Vitamin 
B12 supplements administered orally or parenterally at high dose (1 mg daily) 
were effective in correcting biochemical deficiency, but improved cognition only 
in patients with pre-existing vitamin B12 deficiency (serum vitamin B12 levels 
<150 ρmol/L or serum homocysteine levels >19.9 μmol/L).
CONCLUSION: Low serum vitamin B12 levels are associated with neurodegenerative 
disease and cognitive impairment. There is a small subset of dementias that are 
reversible with vitamin B12 therapy and this treatment is inexpensive and safe. 
Vitamin B12 therapy does not improve cognition in patients without pre-existing 
deficiency. There is a need for large, well-resourced clinical trials to close 
the gaps in our current understanding of the nature of the associations of 
vitamin B12 insufficiency and neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610211002511
PMID: 22221769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2721. Neuropathology. 2012 Feb;32(1):13-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01211.x. 
Epub 2011 Mar 29.

Lewy body-related α-synucleinopathy in the spinal cord of cases with incidental 
Lewy body disease.

Tamura T(1), Yoshida M, Hashizume Y, Sobue G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Hospital Organization Higashi Nagoya 
National Hospital, Japan. tam-taku@m7.gyao.ne.jp

Incidental Lewy body disease (ILBD) represents the early asymptomatic phase of 
Lewy body diseases (LBD), including idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Although pathological disturbances in the spinal cord, which connects the brain 
to the peripheral nervous system, plays an important role, the pathology of ILBD 
has not been adequately examined. Eighteen ILBD and eight age-matched LBD cases 
were enrolled in the present study. LB-related pathology was 
immunohistochemically evaluated using anti-phosphorylated α-synuclein (pαSyn) 
antibodies, revealing LB-related pathology in the spinal cords of 15 (83.3%) of 
the ILBD cases. Attempts were made to identify the early pattern of pαSyn 
deposition in the spinal cord by comparing the cervical, thoracic, lumbar and 
sacral segments in detail. Most pαSyn-positive structures were distributed in 
and around the autonomic nuclei of the spinal cord. The intermediolateral nuclei 
in the thoracic segments (Th/IML) were the most frequently and severely affected 
region, suggesting that Th/IML are the first structures affected. Furthermore, 
following analysis of the distribution pattern of the pαSyn-positive structures, 
it is suspected that LB-related pathology progresses toward the caudal vertebrae 
by involving neurons in the spinal cord that are vulnerable to αSyn. It should 
be noted that the ILBD cases enrolled in the present study were in an earlier 
stage than the PD cases enrolled in the previous study, and that the present 
study provides new, previously undescribed information.

© 2011 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1440-1789.2011.01211.x
PMID: 22243359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2722. Neurotoxicology. 2012 Aug;33(4):810-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2011.12.016. Epub 
2012 Jan 10.

Developmental origins of adult diseases and neurotoxicity: epidemiological and 
experimental studies.

Fox DA(1), Grandjean P, de Groot D, Paule MG.

Author information:
(1)University of Houston, College of Optometry, Houston, TX, USA. dafox@uh.edu

To date, only a small number of commercial chemicals have been tested and 
documented as developmental neurotoxicants. Moreover, an increasing number of 
epidemiological, clinical and experimental studies suggest an association 
between toxicant or drug exposure during the perinatal period and the 
development of metabolic-related diseases and neurotoxicity later in life. The 
four speakers at this symposium presented their research results on different 
neurotoxic chemicals relating to the developmental origins of health and adult 
disease (DOHaD). Philippe Grandjean presented epidemiological data on children 
exposed to inorganic mercury and methylmercury, and discussed the behavioral 
outcome measures as they relate to age and stage of brain development. Donald A. 
Fox presented data that low-dose human equivalent gestational lead exposure 
produces late-onset obesity only in male mice that is associated with 
neurodegeneration. Didima de Groot presented results on prenatal exposure of 
rats to methylazoxymethanol and discussed the results in light of the etiology 
of western Pacific amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinson-dementia complex. 
Merle G. Paule addressed the long-term changes in learning, motivation and 
short-term memory in aged Rhesus monkeys following acute 24 h exposure to 
ketamine during early development. Overall, these presentations addressed 
fundamental issues in the emerging areas of lifetime neurotoxicity testing, 
differential vulnerable periods of exposure, nonmonotonic dose-response effects 
and neurotoxic risk assessment. The results indicate that developmental 
neurotoxicity results in permanent changes, thus emphasizing the need to prevent 
such toxicity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2011.12.016
PMCID: PMC3657611
PMID: 22245043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest None of the authors has 
competing financial interests.


2723. Med Clin (Barc). 2011 Sep;137 Suppl 1:6-11. doi: 10.1016/S0025-7753(11)70010-0.

[Clinical characteristics of the neurological forms of Gaucher's disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Capablo Liesa JL(1), de Cabezón AS, Alarcia Alejos R, Ara Callizo JR.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Universitario Miguel Servet, Zaragoza, 
Spain. jcapablo@gmail.com

Gaucher's disease is the most prevalent disease of accumulation of 
glycosphingolipids. Neurological involvement is used to classify the different 
types of the disease. Type 1 affects approximately 90% of patients, and visceral 
manifestations and bone marrow, without affecting the nervous system. Type 2 is 
considered a severe form of disease with severe nervous system and death within 
two years. Type 3 is late, slowly progressive neurological symptoms and survival 
until the third decade. Besides these classical syndromes, the best knowledge of 
the disease related to the existence of national registries, the increased 
survival of patients resulting from replacement therapy, and demonstration of 
the behavior of glucocerebrosidase mutations as a risk factor of 
neurodegenerative diseases, has expanded the clinical phenotype and altered the 
traditional classification of the disease.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier España S.L. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S0025-7753(11)70010-0
PMID: 22230119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2724. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(4):273-8. doi: 10.1159/000334944. Epub 2012 
Jan 19.

Serum vitamin D deficiency as a predictor of incident non-Alzheimer dementias: a 
7-year longitudinal study.

Annweiler C(1), Rolland Y, Schott AM, Blain H, Vellas B, Beauchet O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Division of Geriatric Medicine, Angers University 
Hospital, Angers University Memory Center, University of Angers, UNAM, Angers, 
France. CeAnnweiler @ chu-angers.fr

BACKGROUND: Hypovitaminosis D has been cross-sectionally associated with 
dementia and stroke. The objective of this longitudinal study was to determine 
whether serum vitamin D deficiency at baseline could predict the onset of 
non-Alzheimer dementias (NAD) within 7 years among older women.
METHODS: Forty high-functioning older women (78.4 years, 76.4/82.0; median, 
25th/75th percentile) from the EPIDOS Toulouse study were divided into two 
groups based on vitamin D deficiency (i.e., serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D <10 ng/ml) 
at baseline. At the end of the 7-year follow-up period, women matching the 
DSM-IV but not the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria were diagnosed with NAD while those 
matching the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria were considered to have Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Subtle cognitive impairments at baseline, cardiovascular risk factors and 
Parkinson's disease were used as potential confounders.
RESULTS: NAD was reported in 6 women (82.8 years, 80.6/86.0) after 7 years of 
follow-up. More NAD were observed in women with vitamin D deficiency (p = 
0.023). There was no between-group difference regarding the onset of AD (p = 
0.332). We found an association between vitamin D deficiency at baseline and the 
onset of NAD (adjusted odds ratio = 19.57, p = 0.042). Conversely, vitamin D 
deficiency was not associated with AD (p = 0.222).
CONCLUSION: Baseline vitamin D deficiency predicted the onset of NAD within 7 
years among older women.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000334944
PMID: 22261995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2725. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(5):301-7. doi: 10.1159/000334657. Epub 2012 
Jan 19.

Validation study of the Italian Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination Revised in a 
young-old and old-old population.

Pigliautile M(1), Ricci M, Mioshi E, Ercolani S, Mangialasche F, Monastero R, 
Croce MF, Federici S, Mecocci P.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Gerontology and Geriatrics, Department of Human and Education 
Science, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

AIMS: The main aims of the study were the translation and the subsequent 
validation in Italian of the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination Revised 
(ACE-R), and the evaluation of its usefulness in discriminating cognitively 
normal subjects from patients with mild dementia in an elderly population.
METHODS: The ACE-R was translated and adapted into Italian. The Italian ACE-R 
was administered to a group of 179 elderly subjects (72 cognitively healthy and 
107 subjects with mild dementia, mean age 75.4±6.4 years). The group was 
stratified into two subsamples according to age, i.e. a young-old (<75 years) 
and an old-old (≥75 years) group, in order to evaluate the sensitivity and 
specificity of the test in detecting dementia in different age strata of elderly 
subjects.
RESULTS: The reliability of the Italian ACE-R was extremely good 
(α-coefficient=0.85). Two different cutoffs were identified for young-old 
(cutoff 79; sensitivity 90% and specificity 80%) and old-old subjects (cutoff 
60; sensitivity 82% and specificity 100%).
CONCLUSIONS: The Italian ACE-R is a valid screening tool to detect dementia, 
especially in the old-old population, which represents not only the fastest 
growing age group but also the group at the highest risk of dementia in Western 
countries.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000334657
PMID: 22262124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2726. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Apr 15;315(1-2):39-43. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.12.008. Epub 
2012 Jan 21.

Dementia is associated with insulin resistance in patients with Parkinson's 
disease.

Bosco D(1), Plastino M, Cristiano D, Colica C, Ermio C, De Bartolo M, Mungari P, 
Fonte G, Consoli D, Consoli A, Fava A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, S. Giovanni di Dio Hospital, Via Largo Bologna, 
88900, Crotone, Italy. nico_bosco@libero.it

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease is a neurodegenerative disorder involving the 
basal ganglia. Type-2 Diabetes Mellitus is an important risk factor for 
Alzheimer disease and vascular dementia. However, the association between 
Parkinson's disease and Diabetes Mellitus is controversial.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate glucose metabolism abnormalities in 110 Parkinson's 
disease patients with and without dementia.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We evaluated Insulin Resistance, glucose and insulin 
levels after a 2-h-oral-glucose-tolerance-test in 53 Parkinson's disease with 
dementia and 57 with Parkinson's disease without dementia, with normal fasting 
glucose.
RESULTS: BMI, waist circumference, fasting glucose and insulin values, HbA1c, 
triglycerides, blood lipid profile, depression rating, educational levels, 
levodopa-dosage and antipsychotic use were similar in both groups. Disease 
duration and motor impairment were higher in patients with Parkinson's disease 
and dementia group. After 2-h-oral-glucose-tolerance-test, the prevalence of 
glucose metabolism abnormalities was significantly higher in group with 
Parkinson's disease and dementia group (p=0.03). The insulin resistance was 
present in 62% patients with Parkinson's disease with dementia, of whom 30% had 
also impaired glucose tolerance, 5,6% newly diagnosed Diabetes Mellitus and 26% 
only Insulin Resistance. These percentages were significantly higher in group 
with Parkinson's disease and dementia, also after adjustment for disease 
duration and motor disability.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that PD patients with dementia are two times 
more likely to have insulin resistance than patients with PD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.12.008
PMID: 22265943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2727. Neurodegener Dis. 2012;10(1-4):229-31. doi: 10.1159/000334759. Epub 2012 Jan 21.

A pilot study examining associations between DYRK1A and α-synuclein dementias.

Jones EL(1), Aarsland D, Londos E, Ballard C.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Disease, King's College London, Guy's Campus, 
London, UK. emma.3.jones@kcl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: DYRK1A is a kinase targeting several proteins associated with the 
pathology of dementias, including α-synuclein and amyloid precursor protein. It 
is not clear if DYRK1A genetics are associated with neurodegenerative 
conditions.
OBJECTIVE: To determine if DYRK1A also has a genetic association with 
α-synuclein dementias such as dementia with Lewy bodies and Parkinson's disease 
dementia.
METHODS: DNA samples from prospectively followed cohorts of control and dementia 
individuals were genotyped for the DYRK1A rs8126696 polymorphism.
RESULTS: The rs8126696 polymorphism altered the risk of developing an 
α-synuclein-associated dementia.
CONCLUSION: DYRK1A could prove to be an important therapeutic target as it 
interacts with several proteins associated with the development of pathology in 
dementia.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000334759
PMID: 22269890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2728. Acta Neuropathol. 2012 Mar;123(3):433-47. doi: 10.1007/s00401-012-0943-2. Epub 
2012 Jan 24.

Early AD pathology in a [C-11]PiB-negative case: a PiB-amyloid imaging, 
biochemical, and immunohistochemical study.

Ikonomovic MD(1), Abrahamson EE, Price JC, Hamilton RL, Mathis CA, Paljug WR, 
Debnath ML, Cohen AD, Mizukami K, DeKosky ST, Lopez OL, Klunk WE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 200 
Lothrop Street BST S521, Pittsburgh, PA 15213. USA, ikonomovicmd@upmc.edu

Amyloid-β (Aβ) deposits are detectable in the brain in vivo using positron 
emission tomography (PET) and [C-11]-labeled Pittsburgh Compound B ([C-11]PiB); 
however, the sensitivity of this technique is not well understood. In this 
study, we examined Aβ pathology in an individual who had clinical diagnoses of 
probable dementia with Lewy bodies and possible Alzheimer's disease (AD) but 
with no detectable [C-11]PiB PET retention ([C-11]PiB(-)) when imaged 17 months 
prior to death. Brain samples were processed in parallel with region-matched 
samples from an individual with a clinical diagnosis of probable AD and a 
positive [C-11]PiB PET scan ([C-11]PiB(+)) when imaged 10 months prior to death. 
In the [C-11]PiB(-) case, Aβ plaques were sparse, occupying less than 2% 
cortical area, and were weakly labeled with 6-CN-PiB, a highly fluorescent 
derivative of PiB. In contrast, Aβ plaques occupied up to 12% cortical area in 
the [C-11]PiB(+) case, and were intensely labeled with 6-CN-PIB. The 
[C-11]PiB(-) case had low levels of [H-3]PiB binding (< 100 pmol/g) and Aβ1-42 
(< 500 pmol/g) concentration except in the frontal cortex where Aβ1-42 values 
(788 pmol/g) approached cortical values in the [C-11]PiB(+) case (800-1, 700 
pmol/g). In several cortical regions of the [C-11]PiB(-) case, Aβ1-40 levels 
were within the range of cortical Aβ1-40 values in the [C-11]PiB(+) case. 
Antemortem [C-11]PiB DVR values correlated well with region-matched postmortem 
measures of Aβ1-42 and Aβ1-40 in the [C-11]PiB(+), and with Aβ1-42 only in the 
[C-11]PiB(-) case. The low ratios of [H-3]PiB binding levels to Aβ 
concentrations and 6-CN-PiB to Aβ plaque loads in the [C-11]PiB(-) case indicate 
that Aβ pathology in the brain may be associated with low or undetectable levels 
of [C-11]PiB retention. Studies in greater numbers of [C-11]PiB PET autopsy 
cases are needed to define the Aβ concentration and [H-3]PiB binding levels 
required to produce a positive [C-11]PiB PET signal.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-012-0943-2
PMCID: PMC3383058
PMID: 22271153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest GE Healthcare holds a 
license agreement with the University of Pittsburgh based on the technology 
described in this manuscript. Drs. Klunk and Mathis are co-inventors of PiB and 
therefore have a financial interest in this license agreement. GE Healthcare 
provided a portion of the grant support for the [C-11]PiB brain autopsy program 
but, like other funding agencies, had no role in the design or interpretation of 
results or preparation of this manuscript.


2729. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2012 Feb;20(2):149-58. doi: 
10.1097/JGP.0b013e3182051bd6.

Antipsychotics and mortality in Parkinsonism.

Marras C(1), Gruneir A, Wang X, Fischer H, Gill SS, Herrmann N, Anderson GM, 
Hyson C, Rochon PA.

Author information:
(1)Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorders Centre, Toronto Western 
Hospital, ON, Canada. cmarras@uhnresearch.ca

BACKGROUND: : The use of antipsychotic medications is associated with an 
increased risk of death in older adults with dementia. The risk of death in 
patients with preexisting parkinsonism who receive antipsychotic drugs is not 
known.
METHODS: : Using a nested case-control design, we examined the risk of death 
within 30 days of newly starting antipsychotic medications among people with 
Parkinsonism aged 70 years and older in Ontario, Canada. Data were obtained from 
Ontario's healthcare administrative databases.
RESULTS: : Among 5,391 individuals with parkinsonism who died during the study 
period (2002-2008) and a matched comparison group of 25,937 who were still 
alive, individuals exposed to atypical antipsychotic drugs had a higher risk of 
death (unadjusted odds ratio [OR] = 2.8, 95% CI: 2.1-3.8, adjusted OR: 2.0, 95% 
CI: 1.4-2.7). Results were similar for quetiapine use compared with no 
antipsychotic use (unadjusted OR: 2.5, 95% CI: 1.6-4.0, adjusted OR = 1.8, 95% 
CI: 1.1-3.0). Typical antipsychotics were associated with an increased odds of 
death compared with atypical antipsychotics (unadjusted OR = 2.4, 95% CI 
1.1-5.2, adjusted OR = 2.4, 95% CI: 1.1-5.7).
CONCLUSIONS: : Individuals with parkinsonism who are newly prescribed 
antipsychotic medications have a higher risk of death within 30 days than those 
who do not start these medications. Although it is not possible to establish 
causality, the results suggest an increased risk. It is important to be vigilant 
for accompanying serious medical conditions that may increase mortality in 
individuals requiring treatment with antipsychotics and to consider alternative 
approaches to treating psychosis, agitation, and aggression in this population.

DOI: 10.1097/JGP.0b013e3182051bd6
PMID: 22273735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2730. Ann Neurol. 2012 Jan;71(1):49-56. doi: 10.1002/ana.22655.

Probable rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder increases risk for mild 
cognitive impairment and Parkinson disease: a population-based study.

Boot BP(1), Boeve BF, Roberts RO, Ferman TJ, Geda YE, Pankratz VS, Ivnik RJ, 
Smith GE, McDade E, Christianson TJ, Knopman DS, Tangalos EG, Silber MH, 
Petersen RC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is associated with 
neurodegenerative disease and particularly with the synucleinopathies. 
Convenience samples involving subjects with idiopathic RBD have suggested an 
increased risk of incident mild cognitive impairment (MCI), dementia (usually 
dementia with Lewy bodies), and Parkinson disease (PD). There are no data on 
such risks in a population-based sample.
METHODS: Cognitively normal subjects aged 70 to 89 years in a population-based 
study of aging who screened positive for probable RBD using the Mayo Sleep 
Questionnaire were followed at 15-month intervals. In a Cox proportional hazards 
model, we measured the risk of developing MCI, dementia, and PD among the 
exposed (probable RBD [pRBD](+)) and unexposed (pRBD(-)) cohorts.
RESULTS: Forty-four subjects with pRBD(+) status at enrollment (median duration 
of pRBD features was 7.5 years) and 607 pRBD(-) subjects were followed 
prospectively for a median of 3.8 years. Fourteen of the pRBD(+) subjects 
developed MCI, and 1 developed PD (15/44 = 34% developed MCI/PD); none developed 
dementia. After adjustment for age, sex, education, and medical comorbidity, 
pRBD(+) subjects were at increased risk of MCI/PD (hazard ratio [HR], 2.2; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 1.3-3.9; p = 0.005). Inclusion of subjects who 
withdrew from the study produced similar results, as did exclusion of subjects 
with medication-associated RBD. Duration of pRBD symptoms did not predict the 
development of MCI/PD (HR, 1.05 per 10 years; 95% CI, 0.84-1.3; p = 0.68).
INTERPRETATION: In this population-based cohort study, we observed that pRBD 
confers a 2.2-fold increased risk of developing MCI/PD over 4 years.

Copyright © 2011 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.22655
PMCID: PMC3270692
PMID: 22275251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2731. Mov Disord. 2012 Mar;27(3):349-56. doi: 10.1002/mds.24893. Epub 2012 Jan 24.

Diagnostic criteria for mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: 
Movement Disorder Society Task Force guidelines.

Litvan I(1), Goldman JG, Tröster AI, Schmand BA, Weintraub D, Petersen RC, 
Mollenhauer B, Adler CH, Marder K, Williams-Gray CH, Aarsland D, Kulisevsky J, 
Rodriguez-Oroz MC, Burn DJ, Barker RA, Emre M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, University of 
Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky, USA. ilitvan@ucsd.edu

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2012 Nov;27(13):1706; author reply 1707.

Mild cognitive impairment is common in nondemented Parkinson's disease (PD) 
patients and may be a harbinger of dementia. In view of its importance, the 
Movement Disorder Society commissioned a task force to delineate diagnostic 
criteria for mild cognitive impairment in PD. The proposed diagnostic criteria 
are based on a literature review and expert consensus. This article provides 
guidelines to characterize the clinical syndrome and methods for its diagnosis. 
The criteria will require validation, and possibly refinement, as additional 
research improves our understanding of the epidemiology, presentation, 
neurobiology, assessment, and long-term course of this clinical syndrome. These 
diagnostic criteria will support future research efforts to identify at the 
earliest stage those PD patients at increased risk of progressive cognitive 
decline and dementia who may benefit from clinical interventions at a 
predementia stage.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24893
PMCID: PMC3641655
PMID: 22275317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Relevant conflicts of interest/financial 
disclosures: A.I.T. has held consultancies with Medtronic, St. Jude Medical, and 
Boston Scientific, has served on the advisory board of St. Jude Medical, has 
received honoraria from Medtronic and the Parkinson’s Disease Foundation, and 
has been awarded grants from Medtronic, GlaxoSmithKline, and the National 
Parkinson Foundation; D.W. has served on the advisory board of Teva 
Pharmaceuticals and has received honoraria from The Michael J. Fox Foundation 
for Parkinson’s Research; R.P. has held consultancies with GE Healthcare and 
Elan Pharmaceuticals, has served on the advisory boards of Pfizer and Janssen 
Alzheimer Immunotherapy, has been awarded grants from the National Institutes of 
Health (P50 AG016574 and U01 AG006786), and has received royalties from Oxford 
University Press; C.H.A. has held consultancies with Merck Serono and Teva 
Pharmaceuticals; K.M. has been awarded grants from the National Institutes of 
Health (NS36630 and RR024156); D.B. has received honoraria from Merck Serono and 
The Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research and has received 
royalties from Henry Stewart Talks; R.B. has held consultancies with Oxford 
Biomedica, has served on the advisory board of Teva Lundbeck, has received 
honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline, has been awarded grants from Parkinson’s UK, the 
European Union FP7 program, the Child Health and Development Institute, and The 
Michael J. Fox Foundation for Parkinson’s Research, has been employed by the 
University of Cambridge, has received royalties from Wiley and Cambridge 
University Press, and has received monetary compensation from Springer for 
editorial work for the Journal of Neurology; and M.E. has held a consultancy 
with Merck Serono, has served on the advisory board of Merck Serono, has 
received honoraria from Merck Serono, and has received a clinical study grant 
from Teva Lundbeck.


2732. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2011 Nov;51(11):940-2. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.51.940.

[Subcortical vascular dementia: significance in the differential diagnosis of 
dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Tomimoto H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mie University Graduate School of Medicine.

Subcortical vascular dementia (SVD) is a subtype of vascular dementia which 
constitutes approximately half of vascular dementia in Japan. It is featured by 
hypertensive small vessel disease such as white matter lesions and lacunar 
infarctions. The clinical and pathological features of SVD are relatively 
uniform. White matter lesions may remain asymptomatic but may develop 
subcortical dementia and Parkinsonism, if neural network function is impaired 
severe enough. SVD and CAA are considered to be a subcortical and cortical 
counterpart of small vessel disease, respectively, and the latter is closely 
associated with Alzheimer's disease. Therapeutic strategy for SVD is classified 
to the remedies for vascular risk factors and anti-dementia treatment. 
Anti-choline esterase inhibitors and memantine may be beneficial for SVD 
patients, but are not approved as therapeutic agents for vascular dementia.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.51.940
PMID: 22277428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2733. J Genet Couns. 2012 Oct;21(5):662-70. doi: 10.1007/s10897-012-9480-3. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

Couples' coping in prodromal Huntington disease: a mixed methods study.

Downing NR(1), Williams JK, Leserman AL, Paulsen JS.

Author information:
(1)The University of Iowa College of Nursing, Iowa City, 52242, USA.

Huntington disease (HD) includes a prodromal phase with behavioral, cognitive, 
and motor function decline occurring up to 15 years prior to diagnosis. This 
study used mixed methods to examine how people in the prodromal phase and their 
companions coped with noticed changes. Twenty-three couples completed a 
semi-structured interview and Brief COPE. Participants with prodromal HD used 
acceptance, emotional support, and planning most frequently; companions used 
acceptance, planning, and active coping. Least frequently used coping strategies 
for each were denial, behavioral disengagement, and substance use. Qualitative 
interviews revealed coping strategies not included in the Brief COPE. 
Participants with prodromal HD used prescription medications, coping as a 
couple, hope, and self-monitoring; companions used hope and helping their 
partners. Many of the coping procedures were rated as effective, especially when 
changes were not severe. Couples may benefit from counseling that emphasizes 
using active coping strategies for changes that can be compensated for and 
acceptance for changes that cannot in prodromal HD. Findings from this study may 
be helpful for counseling patients and significant others facing other 
neurodegenerative conditions with prodromal or early phases, such as Alzheimer 
disease and Parkinson disease.

DOI: 10.1007/s10897-012-9480-3
PMCID: PMC3568751
PMID: 22278219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2734. Presse Med. 2012 Jul;41(7-8):695-701. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.018. Epub 2012 
Jan 28.

[Autonomic nervous system as a source of biomarkers in Parkinson's disease].

[Article in French]

Pouclet H(1), Lebouvier T, Flamant M, Coron E, Neunlist M, Derkinderen P, Rouaud 
T.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U913, University Nantes, Nantes, France.

No validated biomarker is yet available for Parkinson's disease (PD). Clinical 
PD symptoms include dopa-responsive motor symptoms and dopa-resistant non motor 
symptoms. Some of the non motor symptoms begin during the premotor stage, like 
constipation, hyposmia or REM-sleep disorders. Dementia, gait disorders and 
dysarthria occur in later stages of the disease. PD pathology extends well 
beyond the substantia nigra. It affects autonomic and non autonomic nuclei in 
the brainstem and in the medulla, the olfactory bulb and the peripheral 
autonomic nervous system. Alpha-synuclein aggregates, called Lewy bodies and 
Lewy neurites, are detectable in these structures at early stages. The study of 
the enteric nervous system (ENS) displays the Lewy pathology in living patients 
through the digestive biopsies. Minor salivary glands analysis could be a good 
marker as well, but this needs confirmation. An anatomopathologic PD biomarker 
would be interesting at different stages of PD: for the positive diagnosis, to 
follow the progression and to develop neuroprotective treatments.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2011.11.018
PMID: 22284542 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2735. Exp Neurol. 2013 Aug;246:72-83. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.01.011. Epub 2012 
Jan 18.

Axon degeneration in Parkinson's disease.

Burke RE(1), O'Malley K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Columbia University, 650 W 168th St., New York, NY, 
10032, USA. rb43@columbia.edu

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the most common neurodegenerative disease of the 
basal ganglia. Like other adult-onset neurodegenerative disorders, it is without 
a treatment that forestalls its chronic progression. Efforts to develop 
disease-modifying therapies to date have largely focused on the prevention of 
degeneration of the neuron soma, with the tacit assumption that such approaches 
will forestall axon degeneration as well. We herein propose that future efforts 
to develop neuroprotection for PD may benefit from a shift in focus to the 
distinct mechanisms that underlie axon degeneration. We review evidence from 
human post-mortem studies, functional neuroimaging, genetic causes of the 
disease and neurotoxin models that axon degeneration may be the earliest feature 
of the disease, and it may therefore be the most appropriate target for early 
intervention. In addition, we present evidence that the molecular mechanisms of 
degeneration of axons are separate and distinct from those of neuron soma. 
Progress is being made in understanding these mechanisms, and they provide 
possible new targets for therapeutic intervention. We also suggest that the 
potential for axon re-growth in the adult central nervous system has perhaps 
been underestimated, and it offers new avenues for neurorestoration. In 
conclusion, we propose that a new focus on the neurobiology of axons, their 
molecular pathways of degeneration and growth, will offer novel opportunities 
for neuroprotection and restoration in the treatment of PD and other 
neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.01.011
PMCID: PMC3340476
PMID: 22285449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2736. Nat Med. 2012 Jan 29;18(2):291-5. doi: 10.1038/nm.2613.

Tau deficiency induces parkinsonism with dementia by impairing APP-mediated iron 
export.

Lei P(1), Ayton S, Finkelstein DI, Spoerri L, Ciccotosto GD, Wright DK, Wong BX, 
Adlard PA, Cherny RA, Lam LQ, Roberts BR, Volitakis I, Egan GF, McLean CA, 
Cappai R, Duce JA, Bush AI.

Author information:
(1)Mental Health Research Institute, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, 
Australia.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2012 Feb;18(2):197-8.
    Mov Disord. 2012 Jun;27(7):816.
    Mov Disord. 2013 Apr;28(4):439.

The microtubule-associated protein tau has risk alleles for both Alzheimer's 
disease and Parkinson's disease and mutations that cause brain degenerative 
diseases termed tauopathies. Aggregated tau forms neurofibrillary tangles in 
these pathologies, but little is certain about the function of tau or its mode 
of involvement in pathogenesis. Neuronal iron accumulation has been observed 
pathologically in the cortex in Alzheimer's disease, the substantia nigra (SN) 
in Parkinson's disease and various brain regions in the tauopathies. Here we 
report that tau-knockout mice develop age-dependent brain atrophy, iron 
accumulation and SN neuronal loss, with concomitant cognitive deficits and 
parkinsonism. These changes are prevented by oral treatment with a moderate iron 
chelator, clioquinol. Amyloid precursor protein (APP) ferroxidase activity 
couples with surface ferroportin to export iron, but its activity is inhibited 
in Alzheimer's disease, thereby causing neuronal iron accumulation. In primary 
neuronal culture, we found loss of tau also causes iron retention, by decreasing 
surface trafficking of APP. Soluble tau levels fall in affected brain regions in 
Alzheimer's disease and tauopathies, and we found a similar decrease of soluble 
tau in the SN in both Parkinson's disease and the 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) mouse model. These data 
suggest that the loss of soluble tau could contribute to toxic neuronal iron 
accumulation in Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease and tauopathies, and 
that it can be rescued pharmacologically.

DOI: 10.1038/nm.2613
PMID: 22286308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2737. Brain. 2012 Jan;135(Pt 1):161-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/awr321.

Severe olfactory dysfunction is a prodromal symptom of dementia associated with 
Parkinson's disease: a 3 year longitudinal study.

Baba T(1), Kikuchi A, Hirayama K, Nishio Y, Hosokai Y, Kanno S, Hasegawa T, 
Sugeno N, Konno M, Suzuki K, Takahashi S, Fukuda H, Aoki M, Itoyama Y, Mori E, 
Takeda A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

Dementia is one of the most debilitating symptoms of Parkinson's disease. A 
recent longitudinal study suggests that up to 80% of patients with Parkinson's 
disease will eventually develop dementia. Despite its clinical importance, the 
development of dementia is still difficult to predict at early stages. We 
previously identified olfactory dysfunction as one of the most important 
indicators of cortical hypometabolism in Parkinson's disease. In this study, we 
investigated the possible associations between olfactory dysfunction and the 
risk of developing dementia within a 3-year observation period. Forty-four 
patients with Parkinson's disease without dementia underwent the odour stick 
identification test for Japanese, memory and visuoperceptual assessments, 
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scans and magnetic 
resonance imaging scans at baseline and 3 years later. A subgroup of patients 
with Parkinson's disease who exhibited severe hyposmia at baseline showed more 
pronounced cognitive decline at the follow-up survey. By the end of the study, 
10 of 44 patients with Parkinson's disease had developed dementia, all of whom 
had severe hyposmia at baseline. The multivariate logistic analysis identified 
severe hyposmia and visuoperceptual impairment as independent risk factors for 
subsequent dementia within 3 years. The patients with severe hyposmia had an 
18.7-fold increase in their risk of dementia for each 1 SD (2.8) decrease in the 
score of odour stick identification test for Japanese. We also found an 
association between severe hyposmia and a characteristic distribution of 
cerebral metabolic decline, which was identical to that of dementia associated 
with Parkinson's disease. Furthermore, volumetric magnetic resonance imaging 
analyses demonstrated close relationships between olfactory dysfunction and the 
atrophy of focal brain structures, including the amygdala and other limbic 
structures. Together, our findings suggest that brain regions related to 
olfactory function are closely associated with cognitive decline and that severe 
hyposmia is a prominent clinical feature that predicts the subsequent 
development of Parkinson's disease dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awr321
PMID: 22287381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2738. Gastroenterology Res. 2012 Feb;5(1):10-20. doi: 10.4021/gr392w. Epub 2012 Jan 
20.

The Effects of Percutaneous Endoscopic Gastrostomy on Quality of Life in 
Patients With Dementia.

Suzuki Y(1), Urashima M(2), Izumi M(3), Ito Y(4), Uchida N(5), Okada S(6), Ono 
H(7), Orimo S(8), Kohri T(9), Shigoka H(10), Shintani S(11), Tanaka Y(12), 
Yoshida A(13), Ijima M(14), Ito T(15), Endo T(16), Okano H(17), Maruyama M(18), 
Iwase T(19), Kikuchi T(20), Kudo M(21), Takahashi M(22), Goshi S(23), Mikami 
T(24), Yamashita S(25), Akiyama K(26), Ogawa T(27), Ogawa T(28), Ono S(29), 
Onozawa S(30), Kobayashi J(31), Matsumoto M(32), Matsumoto T(33), Jomoto K(34), 
Mizuhara A(35), Nishiguchi Y(36), Nishiwaki S(37), Aoki M(38), Ishizuka I(39), 
Kura T(40), Murakami M(41), Murakami A(42), Ohta T(43), Onishi K(44), Nakahori 
M(45), Tsuji T(46), Tahara K(47), Tanaka I(48), Kitagawa K(49), Shimazaki M(50), 
Fujiki T(51), Kusakabe T(52), Iiri T(53), Kitahara S(54), Horiuchi A(55), 
Suenaga H(56), Washizawa N(57), Suzuki M(58).

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, International University of Health and Welfare 
Hospital 537-3 Iguchi, Nasushiobara-shi, Tochigi 329-2763, Japan.
(2)Department of Molecular Epidemiology, Jikei University School of Medicine, 
3-25-8 Nishi-shimbashi, Minato-ku, Tokyo, 105-8461, Japan.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo-Musashino Hospital, 4-11-11 Komone, 
Itabashi-ku, Tokyo, 173-0037, Japan.
(4)Suzuki Internal Medicine Clinic, 4-5-43 Heiwadai, Nagareyama-shi, Chiba, 
270-0157, Japan.
(5)Department of Surgery, Haramachi Red-Cross Hospital, 698 Haramachi, 
Higashi-Agatsuma-machi, Gunma, 377-0882, Japan.
(6)Department of Surgery, Kitamihara Clinic, 18-350 Ishikawa-cho, Hakodate-shi, 
Hokkaido, 041-0802, Japan.
(7)Department of Internal Medicine, Seiwa Memorial Hospital, 5-1-1 
Kotoni1,Nishi-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido, 063-0811, Japan.
(8)Department of Neurology, Kanto Central Hospital, 6-25-1 Kami-Yoga, 
Setagaya-ku, Tokyo, 158-8531, Japan.
(9)Department of Surgery, Tone chuou hospital, 1855-1 Higashiharashinmachi, 
Numata-shi, Gunma, 378-005, Japan.
(10)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Internal Medicine, Toho 
University Ohashi Medical Center, 2-17-6 Ohashi, Meguro-ku, Tokyo, 153-8515, 
Japan.
(11)Department of Neurology, JA Toride Medical Center, 2-1-1 Hongoh, Toride 
City, Ibaraki, 302-0022, Japan.
(12)The Internal Department, Uchida hospital, 345-1 Kuyahara, Numata-shi, Gunma, 
378-0005, Japan.
(13)Center for Digestive and Liver Diseases, Ohfuna Chuo Hospital, 6-2-24 
Ohfuna, Kamakura, Kanagawa, 247-0056, Japan.
(14)Department of Internal Medicine, Isesaki Municipal Hospital, 12-1 
Tsunatorihonmachi, Isesaki-shi, Gunma, 372-0812, Japan.
(15)Department of Surgery, Nakamura Memorial Hospital, 
Nishi-14,Minami-1,Chuo-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido, 060-8570, Japan.
(16)Department of Gastroenterology, Sapporo Shirakaba-dai hospital, 2-18-7-26 
Tukisamu-Higash,Toyohira-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido, 062-0052, Japan.
(17)Department of Gastroenterology, Okano clinic, 3 Higashida-cho,Jodoji, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto-shi, Kyoto, 606-8411, Japan.
(18)Deaprtment of Surgery, Tokyo Metropolitan Ohkubo Hospital, 2-44-1 Kabukicho, 
Sinnjyukuku, Tokyo, 160-8488, Japan.
(19)Department of Internal medicine, Kyoto kujo hospial, 10 Karahashi 
Rajomon-cho Minami-ku, Kyoto-shi, Kyoto, 601-8485, Japan.
(20)Department of Surgery, Kanazawa Nishi Hospital, 6-15-41 Ekinishihonmachi, 
Kanazawa-shi, Ishikawa, 920-0025, Japan.
(21)Department of Surgery, Onishi Hospital, 139-1 Onishi, Fujika-shi, Gunma, 
370-1401, Japan.
(22)Department of Internal Medicine, Tsuruika Kyouritsu Hospotal, 9-34 
Fumizono-cho, Tsuruoka-shi, Yamagata, 997-0816, Japan.
(23)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Japan Agricultural 
Cooperatives of Niigata Joetsu General Hospital, 148-1 Daidoufukuda, Joetsu-shi, 
Niigata, 943-8507, Japan.
(24)Department of Gastroenterology, Hirosaki Municipal Hospital, 1-8-3 Ohmachi, 
Hirosaki- shi, Aomori, 036-8004, Japan.
(25)Department of Gastroenterology, Social Insurance Shimonoseki Welfare 
Hospital, 3-3-8 Kamishinchi, Shimonoseki-shi, Yamaguchi, 750-0061, Japan.
(26)Department of Surgery, Tokatsu-clinic Hospital, 865-2 Hinokuchi, 
Matsudo-shi, Chiba, 271-0067, Japan.
(27)Department of Surgery, Maebashi Red Cross Hospital, 3-21-36 Asahi-cho, 
Maebashi-shi, Gunma, 371-0014, Japan.
(28)Department of Neurology, International University of Health and Welfare 
Hospital, 537-3 Iguchi, Nasushiobara-shi, Tochigi, 329-2763, Japan.
(29)Department of Gastroenterology, Ako City Hospital, 1090 Nakahiro, Ako-shi, 
Hyogo, 678-0232, Japan.
(30)Department of HomeCareMedicine, Kameda Medical Center, 929 Higashicho, 
Kamogawa-shi, Chiba, 292-8601, Japan.
(31)Department of Surgery, Fujiyoshida Municipal Hospital, 6530 Kamiyoshida, 
Fujiyoshida-shi, Yamanashi, 403-0005, Japan.
(32)Department of Internal Medicine, Nara Prefectural Gojo Hospital, 5-2-59 
Noharanishi, Gojo-shi, Nara, 637-8511, Japan.
(33)Department of Surgery, National Hospital Organization Beppu Medical Center, 
1473 Uchikamado, Beppu, Oita, 874-0011, Japan.
(34)Director, Jomoto Gastroenteric & Internal Medical Clinic, 5-8-9 Kuhonnji, 
Kumamoto-shi, Kumamoto, 862-0976, Japan.
(35)Department of Cardiology and Vascular Surgery, Higashi-Washinomiya Hospital, 
3-9-3 Sakurada, Kuki-shi, Saitama, 340-0203, Japan.
(36)Department of Gastro-enterological Surgery, Osaka City General Hospital, 
2-13-22 Miyakojima-Hondori Miyakojima-ku, Osaka-shi, Osaka, 534-0021, Japan.
(37)Department of Internal Medicine, Nishimino Kosei Hospital, 986 Oshikoshi, 
Yoro-gun Yoro-cho, Gifu, 503-1394, Japan.
(38)Department of Surgery, Ohtawara Red Cross Hospital, 2-7-3 Sumiyoshi-cho, 
Ohtawara-shi, Tochigi, 324-8686, Japan.
(39)Department of Internal medicine, Kohka Public Hospital, 3-39 
Rokushin,Minakuchi-cho, Kohka-shi, Shiga, 528-0014, Japan.
(40)Department of Gastroenterology, Naganuma Municipal Hospital, 2-2-1 
Chuo-minami,Naganuma-cho, Yubari-gun, Hokkaido, 069-1332, Japan.
(41)Department of Internal Medicine, Murakami Memorial Hospital, 739 Oomachi, 
Saijo-shi, Ehime, 793-0030, Japan.
(42)Endoscopy unit, Iwate prefectural central Hospital, 1-4-1 ueda, Morioka-shi, 
Iwate, 020-0066, Japan.
(43)Center for Gastroenterology, Sapporo Higashi-Tokushukai Hospital, 3-1 
North33-East14,Higashi-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido, 065-0033, Japan.
(44)Internal Medicine, Matsue Seikyo General Hospital, 8-8-8 Nishitsuda, 
Matsue-shi, Shimane, 690-8522, Japan.
(45)Digestive Endoscopy Center, Sendai Kousei Hospital, 4-8 
Hirose-machi,Aoba-ku, Sendai-shi, Miyagi, 980-0873, Japan.
(46)Department of Gastroenterology, Akita City Hospital, 4-30 
Kawamotomatsuoka-cho, Akita-shi, Akita, 010-0933, Japan.
(47)Department of Surgery, Kure Kyosai Hospital, 2-3-28 Nishichuou, Kure-shi, 
Hiroshima, 737-8505, Japan.
(48)Department of Gastroenterology, Japan Red Cross Date General Hospital, 81 
Suenaga, Date-shi, Hokkaido, 052-8511, Japan.
(49)Department of Surgery, Tsuchida Hospital, 2-11,South-21,West-9,Chuo-ku, 
Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido, 064-0921, Japan.
(50)Department of Gastroenterology, Hirano General Hospital, 176-5 Kurono, 
Gifu-shi, Gifu, 501-1192, Japan.
(51)Department of Gastroenterology, Japanese Red Cross Society Shimizu Hospital, 
2-2 minami,Shimizu-cho, Kamikawa-gun, Hokkaido, 089-0195, Japan.
(52)Department of Gastroenterology, Higashi Sapporo Hospital, 3-3-7-35 
Higashi-Sapporo,Shiroishi-ku, Sapporo-shi, Hokkaido, 003-8585, Japan.
(53)Department of Gastroenterology, Tachikawa General Hospital, 3-2-11 
Kandamachi, Nagaoka-shi, Niigata, 940-8621, Japan.
(54)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Nagano Red Cross Hospital, 5-22-1 Wakasato, 
Nagano-shi, Nagano, 380-8582, Japan.
(55)Digestive Disease Center, Showa Inan General Hospital, 3230 Akaho, 
Komagane-shi, Nagano, 399-4117, Japan.
(56)Department of Surgery, Hitachikoh Hospital, 3-4-22 Kujichou, Hitachi-shi, 
Ibaraki, 319-1222, Japan.
(57)Nutritional Therapy Center, Toho University Omori Medical Center, 6-11-1 
Omorinishi, Ota-ku, Tokyo, 143-8541, Japan.
(58)Department of Neurology, The Jikei University School of Medicine, Aoto 
Hospital, 6-41-2 Aoto, Katsushika-ku, Tokyo, 125-8506, Japan.

BACKGROUND: To examine the effects of percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) 
on quality of life (QOL) in patients with dementia.
METHODS: We retrospectively included 53 Japanese community and tertiary 
hospitals to investigate the relationship between the newly developed PEG and 
consecutive dementia patients with swallowing difficulty between Jan 1st 2006 
and Dec 31st 2008. We set improvements in 1) the level of independent living, 2) 
pneumonia, 3) peroral intake as outcome measures of QOL and explored the factors 
associated with these improvements.
RESULTS: Till October 31st 2010, 1,353 patients with Alzheimer's dementia 
(33.1%), vascular dementia (61.7%), dementia with Lewy body disease (2.0%), Pick 
disease (0.6%) and others were followed-up for a median of 847 days (mean 805 ± 
542 days). A total of 509 deaths were observed (mortality 59%) in full-followed 
patients. After multivariate adjustments, improvement in the level of 
independent living was observed in milder dementia, or those who can live 
independently with someone, compared with advanced dementia, characterized by 
those who need care by someone: Odds Ratio (OR), 3.90, 95% confidence interval 
(95%CI), 1.59 - 9.39, P = 0.003. Similarly, improvement of peroral intake was 
noticed in milder dementia: OR, 2.69, 95%CI, 1.17 - 6.17, P = 0.02. Such 
significant associations were not observed in improvement of pneumonia.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that improvement of QOL after PEG insertion 
may be expected more in milder dementia than in advanced dementia.

DOI: 10.4021/gr392w
PMCID: PMC5051036
PMID: 27785173


2739. J Neurol. 2012 Sep;259(9):1769-80. doi: 10.1007/s00415-012-6428-3.

Positron emission tomography imaging in neurological disorders.

Politis M(1), Piccini P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Experimental Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, Centre for 
Neuroscience, Hammersmith Hospital, Imperial College London, Cyclotron Building, 
London W12 0NN, UK. marios.politis@imperial.ac.uk

Positron emission tomography (PET) is a powerful tool for in vivo imaging 
investigations of human brain function. It provides non-invasive quantification 
of brain metabolism, receptor binding of various neurotransmitter systems, and 
alterations in regional blood flow. The use of PET in a clinical setting is 
still limited due to the high costs of cyclotrons and radiochemical 
laboratories. However, once these limitations can be bypassed, PET could aid 
clinical practice by providing a useful imaging technique for the diagnosis, the 
planning of treatment, and the prediction outcome in various neurological 
diseases.This review aims to explain the PET imaging technique and its 
applications in neurological disorders such as Parkinson’s disease, Huntington’s 
disease, multiple sclerosis, and dementias.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-012-6428-3
PMID: 22297461 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2740. Curr Drug Targets. 2012 May;13(5):636-43. doi: 10.2174/138945012800398928.

Genetic variations in CHRNA7 or CHRFAM7 and susceptibility to dementia.

Neri M(1), Bonassi S, Russo P.

Author information:
(1)Unit of Clinical and Molecular Epidemiology, IRCCS San Raffaele Pisana, Rome, 
Italy. monicaneri2008@gmail.com

The presence of memory impairment and cognitive deficits in the Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), and Pick's disease (PiD) has been 
associated to dysfunction of cholinergic transmission, possibly due to the loss 
of cholinergic neurons and to the elimination of nAChR in dementia patients. 
Alternative hypotheses take into account molecular interactions of the β-amyloid 
peptide Aβ with nAChR, which may lead to deregulation of the receptor function. 
Genetic polymorphisms of CHRNA7 and CHRFAM7A, a fusion gene containing a partial 
CHRNA7 duplication, have been investigated as possible susceptibility traits to 
dementia, potentially useful either to identify high risk individuals or as 
therapeutic targets. To summarize the existing evidence, a systematic 
re-evaluation of published papers has been performed (PubMed database, no 
language restriction, updated to 1st August 2011). Eleven articles reporting 
data on genetic variations in CHRNA7 or CHRFAM7 and risk of dementia fulfilled 
selection criteria and were evaluated. Published evidence on the association 
between variations in CHRNA7 or CHRFAM7A and the risk of dementia is still 
sparse and inconclusive. Further studies are needed to establish whether some 
polymorphisms may really affect the probability of developing AD or other forms 
of dementia. Additional and more conclusive results may come from the ongoing 
GWAS studies investigating high numbers of genetic variants in large samples, 
that have the potential to assess the role of genetic susceptibility in 
dementia.

DOI: 10.2174/138945012800398928
PMID: 22300029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2741. Neurodegener Dis. 2012;10(1-4):212-5. doi: 10.1159/000334536. Epub 2012 Feb 1.

Activation of the unfolded protein response is an early event in Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's disease.

Hoozemans JJ(1), van Haastert ES, Nijholt DA, Rozemuller AJ, Scheper W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The 
Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are 
characterized by the accumulation and aggregation of misfolded proteins. 
Disturbed homeostasis in the endoplasmic reticulum leads to accumulation of 
misfolded proteins, which triggers a stress response called the unfolded protein 
response (UPR) that protects the cell against the toxic buildup of misfolded 
proteins.
OBJECTIVE: In this paper, we will briefly review the early involvement of the 
UPR in the pathology of AD and PD.
METHODS: Expression of UPR activation markers was analyzed in human brain tissue 
using immunohistochemistry and Western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Neuropathological studies demonstrate that UPR activation markers are 
increased in neurons in AD and PD. In AD, UPR activation markers are observed in 
neurons with diffuse staining of phosphorylated tau protein. In PD, increased 
immunoreactivity for UPR activation markers is detected in neuromelanin 
containing dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra, which colocalize with 
diffuse α-synuclein staining.
CONCLUSION: UPR activation is closely associated with the first stages of 
accumulation and aggregation of the toxic proteins involved in AD and PD. 
Studies of postmortem brain tissue indicate that UPR activation is an early 
event in neurodegeneration.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000334536
PMID: 22302012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2742. Neurosci Biobehav Rev. 2012 Apr;36(4):1140-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.01.004. Epub 2012 Jan 28.

Using Support Vector Machine to identify imaging biomarkers of neurological and 
psychiatric disease: a critical review.

Orrù G(1), Pettersson-Yeo W, Marquand AF, Sartori G, Mechelli A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosis Studies, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College 
London, De Crespigny Park, PO Box 67, London SE5 8AF, UK.

Standard univariate analysis of neuroimaging data has revealed a host of 
neuroanatomical and functional differences between healthy individuals and 
patients suffering a wide range of neurological and psychiatric disorders. 
Significant only at group level however these findings have had limited clinical 
translation, and recent attention has turned toward alternative forms of 
analysis, including Support-Vector-Machine (SVM). A type of machine learning, 
SVM allows categorisation of an individual's previously unseen data into a 
predefined group using a classification algorithm, developed on a training data 
set. In recent years, SVM has been successfully applied in the context of 
disease diagnosis, transition prediction and treatment prognosis, using both 
structural and functional neuroimaging data. Here we provide a brief overview of 
the method and review those studies that applied it to the investigation of 
Alzheimer's disease, schizophrenia, major depression, bipolar disorder, 
presymptomatic Huntington's disease, Parkinson's disease and autistic spectrum 
disorder. We conclude by discussing the main theoretical and practical 
challenges associated with the implementation of this method into the clinic and 
possible future directions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neubiorev.2012.01.004
PMID: 22305994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2743. Curr Treat Options Neurol. 2012 Apr;14(2):126-36. doi: 
10.1007/s11940-012-0168-7.

Treatment options for tauopathies.

Karakaya T(1), Fußer F, Prvulovic D, Hampel H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, J.W. Goethe-University, Heinrich-Hoffmann-Str. 10, 
60528, Frankfurt, Germany, tarik.karakaya@kgu.de.

To date, there are no approved and established pharmacologic treatment options 
for tauopathies, a very heterogenous group of neuropsychiatric diseases often 
leading to dementia and clinically diagnosed as atypical Parkinson syndromes. 
Among these so-called Parkinson plus syndromes are progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP), also referred to as Steele-Richardson-Olszewski syndrome; 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD); and corticobasal degeneration (CBD). Available 
treatment strategies are based mainly on small clinical trials, miscellaneous 
case reports, or small case-controlled studies. The results of these studies and 
conclusions about the efficacy of the medication used are often contradictory. 
Approved therapeutic agents for Alzheimer´s dementia, such as 
acetylcholinesterase inhibitors and memantine, have been used off-label to treat 
cognitive and behavioral symptoms in tauopathies, but the outcome has not been 
consistent. Therapeutic agents for the symptomatic treatment of Parkinson's 
disease (levodopa or dopamine agonists) are used for motor symptoms in 
tauopathies. For behavioral or psychopathological symptoms, treatment with 
antidepressants-especially selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors-could be 
helpful. Antipsychotics are often not well tolerated because of their adverse 
effects, which are pronounced in tauopathies; these drugs should be given very 
carefully because of an increased risk of cerebrovascular events. In addition to 
pharmacologic options, physical, occupational, or speech therapy can be applied 
to improve functional abilities. Each pharmacologic or nonpharmacologic 
intervention should be fitted to the specific symptoms of the individual 
patient, and decisions about the type and duration of treatment should be based 
on its efficacy for the individual and the patient's tolerance. Currently, no 
effective treatment is available that targets the cause of these diseases. 
Current research focuses on targeting tau protein pathology, including 
pathologic aggregation or phosphorylation; these approaches seem to be very 
promising.

DOI: 10.1007/s11940-012-0168-7
PMID: 22307450


2744. Neuropsychology. 2012 May;26(3):368-84. doi: 10.1037/a0027115. Epub 2012 Feb 6.

The organization and anatomy of narrative comprehension and expression in Lewy 
body spectrum disorders.

Ash S(1), Xie SX, Gross RG, Dreyfuss M, Boller A, Camp E, Morgan B, O'Shea J, 
Grossman M.

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. ash@mail.med.upenn.edu

OBJECTIVE: Patients with Lewy body spectrum disorders (LBSD) such as Parkinson's 
disease, Parkinson's disease with dementia, and dementia with Lewy bodies 
exhibit deficits in both narrative comprehension and narrative expression. The 
present research examines the hypothesis that these impairments are due to a 
material-neutral deficit in organizational executive resources rather than to 
impairments of language per se. We predicted that comprehension and expression 
of narrative would be similarly affected and that deficits in both expression 
and comprehension of narrative would be related to the same anatomic 
distribution of prefrontal disease.
METHOD: We examined 29 LBSD patients and 26 healthy seniors on their 
comprehension and expression of narrative discourse. For comprehension, we 
measured accuracy and latency in judging events with high and low associativity 
from familiar scripts such as "going fishing." The expression task involved 
maintaining the connectedness of events while narrating a story from a wordless 
picture book.
RESULTS: LBSD patients were impaired on measures of narrative organization 
during both comprehension and expression relative to healthy seniors. Measures 
of organization during narrative expression and comprehension were significantly 
correlated with each other. These measures both correlated with executive 
measures but not with neuropsychological measures of lexical semantics or 
grammar. Voxel-based morphometry revealed overlapping regressions relating 
frontal atrophy to narrative comprehension, narrative expression, and measures 
of executive control.
CONCLUSIONS: Difficulty with narrative discourse in LBSD stems in part from a 
deficit of organization common to comprehension and expression. This deficit is 
related to prefrontal cortical atrophy in LBSD.

DOI: 10.1037/a0027115
PMCID: PMC3348419
PMID: 22309984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2745. Gene. 2012 Jun 10;501(1):63-78. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.049. Epub 2012 Jan 
30.

Structural and functional characterization of H2 haplotype MAPT promoter: unique 
neurospecific domains and a hypoxia-inducible element would enhance rationally 
targeted tauopathy research for Alzheimer's disease.

Maloney B(1), Lahiri DK.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neurogenetics, Department of Psychiatry, Institute of 
Psychiatric Research Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 
46202, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the leading cause of dementia in the elderly. 
Extraneuronal plaque comprising mostly the amyloid β peptide and intraneuronal 
tangles of hyperphosphorylated microtubule-associated τ protein (τ, gene MAPT) 
are typical of AD. Misfolded τ is also implicated in Parkinson's disease and 
frontotemporal dementia. We aim to understand the regulation of the human MAPT 
promoter by mapping its functional domains. We subcloned a 4868 base pair (bp) 
fragment from human BAC RPCI-11 100C5. Sequence analysis revealed an H2 
haplotype MAPT promoter, 5'-UTR, and intronal fragment. Database analysis of the 
fragment showed 50%-75% homology with mouse and >90% with rhesus monkey. 
Comparison with human H1 sequences revealed differences that crossed predicted 
transcription factor sites. DNA-protein interaction studies by electrophoretic 
mobility shift assay suggested hypoxia response and an active specificity 
protein 1 (SP1) site in the 5'-untranslated region. Transfection of a series of 
MAPT promoter deletions revealed unique functional domains. The distal-most had 
different activities in neuronal vs. non-neuronal cells. We have cloned, 
sequenced, and functionally characterized a 4868bp fragment of the human MAPT 
5'-flanking region, including the core promoter region (-302/+4), neurospecific 
domains (-4364/-1992 and +293/+504, relative to +1 TSS), and a hypoxia-inducible 
element (+60/+84). Our work extended functional analysis of the MAPT sequence 
further upstream, and explores cell-type specificity of MAPT promoter activity. 
Finally, we provided direct comparison of likely transcription factor binding 
sites, which are useful to understand differences between H1/H2 pathogenic 
associations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.01.049
PMCID: PMC3391566
PMID: 22310385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests The authors declare that 
they have no competing interests.


2746. J Neurol. 2012 Sep;259(9):1808-13. doi: 10.1007/s00415-011-6407-0. Epub 2012 Feb 
7.

Link between non-motor symptoms and cognitive dysfunctions in de novo, 
drug-naive PD patients.

Erro R(1), Santangelo G, Picillo M, Vitale C, Amboni M, Longo K, Costagliola A, 
Pellecchia MT, Allocca R, De Rosa A, De Michele G, Santoro L, Barone P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Science, University of Naples Federico II, Naples, 
Italy.

Little is known about the relationship between cognitive dysfunctions and the 
non-motor complex in subjects with newly diagnosed untreated Parkinson's disease 
(PD). The aim of this study was to explore the association between non-motor 
symptoms (NMS) and cognitive dysfunctions in an incident cohort of de novo, 
drug-naive, PD patients. Sixty-six non-demented, early, untreated PD patients 
completed a semi-structured interview on NMS and a battery of neuropsychological 
tests that assess verbal memory, visuospatial abilities, and attention/executive 
functions. Scores were age- and education-corrected. Patients who failed at 
least two tests for each cognitive domain were diagnosed as having mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI). All but three (95.4%) PD patients complained of at 
least one NMS. A total of 37.8% was diagnosed with MCI. There was a relationship 
between sleep-NMS and cognitive dysfunctions. Specifically, both REM behavioral 
sleep disorders (RBD) and insomnia were associated with lower scores on several 
cognitive tests. Moreover, RBD was closely related to MCI. NMS and MCI are very 
common even in the early phase of PD, before patients are treated. Given the 
correlation between sleep disturbances and cognitive impairment, it is possible 
that sleep symptoms in PD patients might be considered as an early marker of 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1007/s00415-011-6407-0
PMID: 22310940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2747. Arq Neuropsiquiatr. 2012 Feb;70(2):114-8. doi: 10.1590/s0004-282x2012000200008.

Metabolic syndrome and dementia associated with Parkinson's disease: impact of 
age and hypertension.

Schelp AO(1), Mendes-Chiloff CL, Bazan R, Paduan VC, Pioltini AB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Psychology and Psychiatry, Botucatu Medical School, 
São Paulo State University "Júlio de Mesquita Filho", Botucatu, SP, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To determine correlations between age and metabolic disorders in 
Parkinson's disease (PD) patients.
METHODS: This observational cross-sectional study included brief tests for 
dementia and the Mattis test. Signals of metabolic syndrome were evaluated.
RESULTS: There was no significant effect from the presence of hypertension 
(OR=2.36 for patients under 65 years old and OR=0.64 for patients over 65), 
diabetes or hypercholesterolemia regarding occurrences of dementia associated 
with PD (24% of the patients). The study demonstrated that each year of age 
increased the estimated risk of dementia in PD patients by 9% (OR=1.09; 95%CI: 
1.01-1.17).
CONCLUSION: There was no evidence to correlate the presence of metabolic 
syndrome with the risk of dementia that was associated with PD. The study 
confirmed that dementia in PD is age dependent and not related to disease 
duration.

DOI: 10.1590/s0004-282x2012000200008
PMID: 22311215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2748. Mov Disord. 2012 May;27(6):720-6. doi: 10.1002/mds.24939. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder and risk of dementia in Parkinson's 
disease: a prospective study.

Postuma RB(1), Bertrand JA, Montplaisir J, Desjardins C, Vendette M, Rios 
Romenets S, Panisset M, Gagnon JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Québec, Canada.

One of the most devastating nonmotor manifestations of PD is dementia. There are 
few established predictors of dementia in PD. In numerous cross-sectional 
studies, patients with rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) 
have increased cognitive impairment on neuropsychological testing, but no 
prospective studies have assessed whether RBD can predict Parkinson's dementia. 
PD patients who were free of dementia were enrolled in a prospective follow-up 
of a previously published cross-sectional study. All patients had a 
polysomnogram at baseline. Over a mean 4-year follow-up, the incidence of 
dementia was assessed in those with or without RBD at baseline using regression 
analysis, adjusting for age, sex, disease duration, and follow-up duration. Of 
61 eligible patients, 45 (74%) were assessed and 42 were included in a full 
analysis. Twenty-seven patients had baseline RBD, and 15 did not. Four years 
after the initial evaluation, 48% with RBD developed dementia, compared to 0% of 
those without (P-adjusted = 0.014). All 13 patients who developed dementia had 
mild cognitive impairment on baseline examination. Baseline REM sleep atonia 
loss predicted development of dementia (% tonic REM = 73.2 ± 26.7 with dementia, 
40.8 ± 34.5 without; P = 0.029). RBD at baseline also predicted the new 
development of hallucinations and cognitive fluctuations. In this prospective 
study, RBD was associated with increased risk of dementia. This indicates that 
RBD may be a marker of a relatively diffuse, complex subtype of PD.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24939
PMID: 22322798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2749. Exp Neurol. 2012 Apr;234(2):499-505. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.01.024. Epub 
2012 Feb 1.

iTRAQ and multiple reaction monitoring as proteomic tools for biomarker search 
in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Parkinson's disease dementia.

Lehnert S(1), Jesse S, Rist W, Steinacker P, Soininen H, Herukka SK, Tumani H, 
Lenter M, Oeckl P, Ferger B, Hengerer B, Otto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 Apr;8(4):180.

About 30% of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) develop Parkinson's disease 
dementia (PDD) in the course of the disease. Until now, diagnosis is based on 
clinical and neuropsychological examinations, since so far there is no 
laboratory marker. In this study we aimed to find a neurochemical marker which 
would allow a risk assessment for the development of a dementia in PD patients. 
For this purpose, we adopted a gel-free proteomic approach (iTRAQ-method) to 
identify biomarker-candidates in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of patients with 
PD, PDD and non-demented controls (NDC). Validation of these candidates was then 
carried out by multiple-reaction-monitoring (MRM) optimised for CSF. Using the 
iTRAQ-approach, we were able to identify 16 differentially regulated proteins. 
Fourteen out of these 16 proteins could then be followed-up simultaneously in 
our optimised MRM-measurement protocol. However only 
Tyrosine-kinase-non-receptor-type 13 and Netrin-G1 differed significantly 
between PDD and NDC cohorts. In addition, a significant difference was found for 
Golgin-160 and Apolipoprotein B-100 between PD and NDC. Apart from possible 
pathophysiological considerations, we propose that Tyrosine-kinase 
non-receptor-type 13 and Netrin G1 are biomarker candidates for the development 
of a Parkinson's disease dementia. Furthermore we suggest that iTRAQ and MRM are 
valuable tools for the discovery of biomarker in cerebrospinal fluid. However 
further validation studies need to be done with larger patient cohorts and other 
proteins need to be checked as well.

Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2012.01.024
PMID: 22327139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2750. Neurodegener Dis. 2012;10(1-4):195-202. doi: 10.1159/000335038. Epub 2012 Feb 9.

Mutant GBA1 expression and synucleinopathy risk: first insights from cellular 
and mouse models.

Sardi SP(1), Singh P, Cheng SH, Shihabuddin LS, Schlossmacher MG.

Author information:
(1)Genzyme, Sanofi Company, Framingham, Mass 01701, USA. pablo.sardi@genzyme.com

Heterozygous mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA1) are associated with 
increased risk for α-synuclein aggregation disorders ('synucleinopathies'), 
which include Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
Homozygous GBA1 mutations lead to reduced GBA1 lysosomal activity underlying 
three variants of Gaucher disease (GD). Despite the wealth of clinical and 
genetic evidence supporting the association between mutant genotypes and 
synucleinopathy risk, the precise mechanisms by which GBA1 mutations lead to PD 
and DLB remain unclear. Here, we summarize recent findings that highlight the 
complexity of this pathogenetic link. In neural cells, both gain and loss of 
function mechanisms, as conferred by mutant GBA1 expression and activity loss, 
respectively, seem to promote aberrant α-synuclein processing. In addition, we 
draw attention to recent insights gleaned from GD animal models regarding axonal 
pathology, brain inflammation and memory dysfunction. From a translational 
perspective, we discuss the concepts of neural enzyme replacement therapy and 
pharmacological agents as potential treatment strategies for GBA1-associated 
synucleinopathies. Finally, we touch on the issue whether aberrant α-synuclein 
species may coregulate GBA1 activity in the vertebrate brain, thereby providing 
a reverse link, i.e., between an important synucleinopathy risk factor and the 
enzyme's lysosomal function. In summary, several leads connecting GBA1 mutations 
with α-synuclein misprocessing have emerged as potential targets for the 
treatment of GBA1-related synucleinopathies, and possibly, for 
non-GBA1-associated neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335038
PMID: 22327140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2751. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2011;32(6):408-16. doi: 10.1159/000335364. Epub 2012 
Feb 8.

Differences in survival between patients with dementia with Lewy bodies and 
patients with Alzheimer's disease--measured from a fixed cognitive level.

Stubendorff K(1), Hansson O, Minthon L, Londos E.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund 
University, Malmö, Sweden. Kajsa.Stubendorff@med.lu.se

INTRODUCTION: The aim of this study was to compare survival in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
Since anamnestic and retrospective information about disease duration are 
unreliable variables, we measured survival from a fixed cognitive level.
METHODS: Survival time was measured from the reported disease onset, from the 
time of diagnosis, from Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 20 ± 1, and from 
MMSE 17 ± 1.
RESULTS: Survival time was significantly shorter in the DLB group compared to 
the AD group both from the time of diagnosis and from the cognitive levels of 20 
and 17 on the MMSE. There was no difference in survival when measured from the 
reported disease onset.
DISCUSSION: Our findings indicate that DLB patients have a more malignant 
clinical course. Our method of investigating survival in a cognitively 
homogenous population may gain scientific power. Reliable methods to predict 
survival and the clinical course are of great value for patients, caregivers, 
doctors, and society.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335364
PMID: 22327504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2752. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2012 Apr;12(2):182-92. doi: 10.1007/s11910-012-0253-z.

REM sleep behavior disorder and REM sleep without atonia as an early 
manifestation of degenerative neurological disease.

McCarter SJ(1), St Louis EK, Boeve BF.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Center for Sleep Medicine and Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic and 
Foundation, 200 First Street Southwest, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
mccarter.stuart@mayo.edu

Erratum in
    Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2012 Apr;12(2):226.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a parasomnia 
characterized by repeated episodes of dream enactment behavior and REM sleep 
without atonia (RSWA) during polysomnography recording. RSWA is characterized by 
increased phasic or tonic muscle activity seen on polysomnographic 
electromyogram channels. RSWA is a requisite diagnostic feature of RBD, but may 
also be seen in patients without clinical symptoms or signs of dream enactment 
as an incidental finding in neurologically normal individuals, especially in 
patients receiving antidepressant therapy. RBD may be idiopathic or symptomatic. 
Patients with idiopathic RBD often later develop other neurological features 
including parkinsonism, orthostatic hypotension, anosmia, or cognitive 
impairment. RSWA without clinical symptoms as well as clinically overt RBD also 
often occurs concomitantly with the α-synucleinopathy family of 
neurodegenerative disorders, which includes idiopathic Parkinson disease, Lewy 
body dementia, and multiple system atrophy. This review article considers the 
epidemiology of RBD, clinical and polysomnographic diagnostic standards for both 
RBD and RSWA, previously reported associations of RSWA and RBD with 
neurodegenerative disorders and other potential causes, the pathophysiology of 
which brain structures and networks mediate dysregulation of REM sleep muscle 
atonia, and considerations for the effective and safe management of RBD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-012-0253-z
PMCID: PMC3656587
PMID: 22328094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure Conflicts of interest: S.J. McCarter: 
none; E.K. St. Louis: has received grant support from NCRR/NIH and Mayo CTSA; 
and has received consultant’s fees for service on clinical trial adverse events 
committee for an investigational treatment for obstructive sleep apnea from 
Inspire, Inc.; B.F. Boeve: has received grant support from NIH, Cephalon, Inc., 
Allon Pharmaceuticals, Mangurian Foundation, Alzheimer’s Association, and GE 
Healthcare; he is the Co-editor of “Behavioral Neurology of Dementia” text; and 
he has received payment for development of educational presentations from the 
American Academy of Neurology.


2753. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Nov;33(11):2599-611. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.01.004. Epub 2012 Feb 11.

Amyloid-specific T-cells differentiate Alzheimer's disease from Lewy body 
dementia.

Lanuti P(1), Ciccocioppo F, Bonanni L, Marchisio M, Lachmann R, Tabet N, 
Pierdomenico L, Santavenere E, Catinella V, Iacone A, Thomas A, Gambi D, Miscia 
S, Onofrj M, Kern F.

Author information:
(1)Cell Signalling Unit, Department of Medicine and Aging Sciences, University 
G. d'Annunzio of Chieti-Pescara, Chieti, Italy.

Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies are the most common 
neurodegenerative dementias in old age. Accurate diagnosis of these conditions 
has important clinical implications because they tend to be confounded. In the 
brain of Alzheimer's disease patients amyloid-beta is produced in excess and 
deposited as plaques, forming the hallmark of this condition. Lymphocytes have 
been implicated in the process of amyloid-beta removal and inflammation 
occurrence. Here we investigated peripheral amyloid-beta1-42-specific T-cells by 
multicolor flow cytometry to simultaneously detect and characterize activation 
markers and cell signaling proteins (phospho-protein kinase C) in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease or Lewy body dementia and in healthy controls. Results 
indicate that only Alzheimer's disease patients display small subsets of 
peripheral amyloid-beta1-42-specific T-cells, characterized by bright expression 
of phosphorylated-protein kinase C-delta or -zeta whose significance although 
discussed, is far from being understood. The identification of such subsets, 
anyhow, may strongly contribute to distinguish Alzheimer's disease from dementia 
with Lewy bodies, opening possible new routes to early therapeutic strategies.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.01.004
PMID: 22330173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2754. Int Psychogeriatr. 2012 Jun;24(6):940-7. doi: 10.1017/S1041610212000026. Epub 
2012 Feb 14.

Profile and variables related to antipsychotic consumption according to dementia 
subtypes.

Calvó-Perxas L(1), de Eugenio RM, Marquez-Daniel F, Martínez R, Serena J, Turbau 
J, Vilalta-Franch J, Viñas M, Turró-Garriga O, Roig AM, López-Pousa S, 
Garre-Olmo J; Registry of Dementias of Girona Study.

Collaborators: Castellanos M, Batlle G, Batlle DG, Gich J, Melendez R, Molins A, 
Ramio L, Serena J, Silva Y, Hernandez M, Lejarreta S, Lozano M, Pericot I, 
Vilalta-Franch J, Estrada AT, Turbau J, Turro O, Soler O, Alsina E, de Eugenio 
R, Luna A, Flaque M, Carmona O, Cullell M, Osuna T, Martınez R, Bisbe J, Linares 
M, Daniel FM, Vallmajo N, Espada F, Gonzalez M, Casas I, Perkal H, Vinas M, 
Turbau J, Roig AM, Coromina J.

Author information:
(1)Research Unit, Institut d'Assistència Sanitària, Girona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Antipsychotics (APs) are usually prescribed to deal with behavioral 
and psychological symptoms of dementia (BPSD), but poor outcomes, important side 
effects, and high mortality risk should be addressed. The aim of this study was 
to estimate the prevalence of AP consumption in patients with dementia, and to 
describe and compare the sociodemographic and clinical characteristics of 
patients consuming APs.
METHODS: This was a cross-sectional study using 1,894 cases of dementia 
registered from 2007 to 2009 by the Registry of Dementias of Girona (ReDeGi), 
which is a population-based passive surveillance system of dementia diagnoses. 
APs were categorized according to the anatomical therapeutic chemical (ATC) 
classification, and grouped as typical antipsychotics (TAPs) or atypical 
antipsychotics (AAPs). Binary logistic regression analyses were used to detect 
the predictors of AP use as well as the variables associated with TAP or AAP 
prescription.
RESULTS: APs were used in 29.6% of the cases, with Parkinsonian syndromes (PSd) 
being the subtype of dementia with the highest AP prescription (50.6% of the 
patients with PSd). AAPs were mainly prescribed in all subtypes of dementia, 
except in vascular dementia (VaD) and PSd, where no preference in TAP or AAP use 
was found. Psychotic antecedents, dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) diagnoses, 
cognitive impairment, and BPSD were AP use predictors. AAP use was related to 
higher severity of dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite their disputed benefit-risk ratios, APs are extensively 
used, off-label, to treat BPSD, and AAPs are more commonly prescribed than TAPs. 
AP consumption was frequent in DLB, and was related to dementia severity 
indicators.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610212000026
PMID: 22333005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2755. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Aug;33(8):1844.e11-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.01.006. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Contribution of VPS35 genetic variability to LBD in the Flanders-Belgian 
population.

Verstraeten A(1), Wauters E, Crosiers D, Meeus B, Corsmit E, Elinck E, 
Mattheijssens M, Peeters K, Cras P, Pickut B, Vandenberghe R, Engelborghs S, De 
Deyn PP, Van Broeckhoven C, Theuns J.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Brain Diseases Group, Department of Molecular Genetics, 
VIB, Antwerp, Belgium.

VPS35 was recently identified as a novel autosomal dominant gene for Parkinson 
disease. In this study, we aimed to determine the contribution of simple and 
complex VPS35 variations to the genetic etiology of the spectrum of Lewy body 
disorders (LBD) in a Flanders-Belgian patient cohort (n = 677). We identified 3 
novel missense variations in addition to 1 silent and 1 intronic variation 
predicted to activate a cryptic splice site, but no copy number variations. 
Despite the absence of these rare variations in the control group (n = 800), we 
could not attain convincing evidence for pathogenicity by segregation analysis 
or in silico predictions. Hence, our data do not support a major role for VPS35 
variations in the genetic etiology of Lewy body disorders in the 
Flanders-Belgian population.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.01.006
PMID: 22336192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2756. Ideggyogy Sz. 2012 Jan 30;65(1-2):6-15.

[Depression in neuropsychiatric diseases].

[Article in Hungarian]

Hidasi Z(1), Salacz P, Csibri E.

Author information:
(1)Semmelweis Egyetem, Altalános Orvostudományi Kar, Pszichiátriai és 
Pszichoterápiás Klinika, Budapest. hidasi@psych.sote.hu

Depression is frequently observed together with neurological disorders. Moreover 
this connection is bidirectional in the case of several neurological disorders, 
as depression can be either a comorbide syndrome or also a risk factor of them. 
Neurobiological background of depression involves neuroanatomical structures, 
their interconnected networks, disturbances of neurotransmitters, neurohormonal, 
neuroimmunological and neurotrophic changes, genetic background. Disfunction of 
these systems also plays a role in the pathogenesis of comorbid depression of 
neurological disorders. Interactions and clinical aspects of biological factors 
involved in the pathogenesis of depression in dementias, Parkinson's disease, 
cerebrovascular disorders and epilepsy are discussed further. Depression as a 
result of neurobiological factors responsible for both neurological and 
psychiatric consequencies of these disorders, are often atypical as a clinical 
manifestation, however chracteristic for the particular neurological disorder. 
Evaluation of the biological backgound and clinical features of depression in 
neurological disorders makes the complex neuropsychiatric approach of these 
disorders possible.

PMID: 22338841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2757. Neurologia. 2012 Jun;27(5):290-300. doi: 10.1016/j.nrl.2011.12.005. Epub 2012 
Feb 17.

[Competency: general principles and applicability in dementia].

[Article in Spanish]

Alvaro LC(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología y Comité de Ética Asistencial del Hospital de Basurto, 
Departamento de Neurociencias, Universidad del País Vasco EHU/UPV, Bilbao, 
España. luiscarlosalvaro@yahoo.es

INTRODUCTION: Competency means the capacity to make responsible and balanced 
decisions. This may be performed in clinical settings (decision-making abilities 
on treatment or risky diagnostic procedures) and also in daily-life activities 
(financial matters, nursing home admittance, contracts, etc.). Competency is 
linked to the ethical principle of autonomy and to a horizontal doctor-patient 
interaction, far from ancient paternalistic relationships. It is contemplated in 
the Spanish law as the patient's right to be informed and to make free choices, 
particularly in cases of dementia.
DEVELOPMENT: The competency that we assess is the so-called natural or working 
capacity. It is specific for an action or task. The level of required capacity 
depends on the decision: higher for critical ones, lower for low-risk decisions. 
The assessment process requires noting the patient's capacity to understand, 
analyse, self-refer and apply the information. There are some guides available 
that may be useful in competency assessments, but nevertheless the final 
statement must be defined by the physician in charge of the patient and clinical 
judgement. Capacity is directly related to the level of cognitive deterioration. 
Nevertheless, specific cognitive tests like MMSE (mini-mental) have a low 
predictive value. The loss of competency is more associated with the so-called 
legal standards of incapacity (LS). These encompass a five steps range 
(LS1-LS5), which may detect the incapacity from the mild levels of dementia. The 
cortical functions that are the best predictors of incapacity are language and 
executive dysfunctions. These explain the incapacity in cases of Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's disease, and have been studied more.
CONCLUSIONS: Incapacity is common and it influences the clinical decision-making 
process. We must be particularly cautious with clinical trials of dementia. It 
also involves other areas of daily life, particularly financially related ones, 
where limitations are present from the mild cognitive impairment level. The 
neurological community has already produced specific and invaluable documents 
like the one from Sitges, although in our opinion this community has to increase 
its awareness, and also its involvement as much in the clinical as in the 
research sides of this field.

Copyright © 2011 Sociedad Española de Neurología. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nrl.2011.12.005
PMID: 22341678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2758. Can J Neurol Sci. 2012 Mar;39(2):213-9. doi: 10.1017/s0317167100013251.

Pathologic evaluation of the supraoptic and paraventricular nuclei in dementia.

Diodati D(1), Cyn-Ang L, Kertesz A, Finger E.

Author information:
(1)Cognitive Neurology and Alzheimer Research Centre, St. Joseph's Hospital, 
Canada.

BACKGROUND: The neuropeptide oxytocin, produced in the supraoptic (SON) and 
paraventricular nuclei (PVN) of the hypothalamus, is now understood to function 
as a neurotransmitter critical for various aspects of social cognition and 
pro-social behaviour. While patients with Frontotemporal dementia (FTD) display 
prominent and progressive deficits in such social behaviours, the integrity of 
these nuclei in FTD is not known.
METHODS: We conducted a quantitative neuropathologic examination of the SON and 
PVN from patients with FTLD with TDP-43 proteinopathy, Alzheimer's disease, Lewy 
body disease and controls to determine whether significant pathologic changes or 
neuronal loss may contribute to the striking behavioural symptoms of FTD.
RESULTS: Contrary to predictions, we found both nuclei to be free of significant 
pathologic change (TDP-43) in FTLD. In contrast, tau related pathology was found 
in the PVN in Alzheimer's disease, and alpha-synuclein pathology in the SON in 
patients with Lewy body dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that the SON and PVN are resistant to FTLD 
TDP-43 pathology. They also support prior suggestions that the SON is resistant 
to Alzheimer's disease (AD) related pathology, and extend this to demonstrate 
SON susceptibility to alpha-synuclein pathology in patients with Lewy body 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1017/s0317167100013251
PMID: 22343156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2759. Mov Disord. 2012 Apr;27(4):512-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.24946. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Genetic influences on cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease.

Morley JF(1), Xie SX, Hurtig HI, Stern MB, Colcher A, Horn S, Dahodwala N, Duda 
JE, Weintraub D, Chen-Plotkin AS, Van Deerlin V, Falcone D, Siderowf A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvalia, USA.

The role of genetic factors in cognitive decline associated with Parkinson's 
disease (PD) is unclear. We examined whether variations in apolipoprotein E 
(APOE), microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT), or 
catechol-O-methytransferase (COMT) genotypes are associated with cognitive 
decline in PD. We performed a prospective cohort study of 212 patients with a 
clinical diagnosis of PD. The primary outcome was change in Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale version 2 score. Linear mixed-effects models and survival analysis 
were used to test for associations between genotypes and change in cognitive 
function over time. The ε4 allele of APOE was associated with more rapid decline 
(loss of 2.9; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.7-4.1) of more points per year; P 
< 0.001) in total score and an increased risk of a ≥ 10 point drop during the 
follow-up period (hazard ratio, 2.8; 95% CI: 1.4-5.4; P = 0.003). MAPT haplotype 
and COMT genotype were associated with measures of memory and attention, 
respectively, over the entire follow-up period, but not with the overall rate of 
cognitive decline. These results confirm and extend previously described genetic 
associations with cognitive decline in PD and imply that individual genes may 
exert effects on specific cognitive domains or at different disease stages. 
Carrying at least one APOE ε4 allele is associated with more rapid cognitive 
decline in PD, supporting the idea of a component of shared etiology between PD 
dementia and Alzheimer's disease. Clinically, these results suggest that 
genotyping can provide information about the risk of future cognitive decline 
for PD patients.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24946
PMCID: PMC3323737
PMID: 22344634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: There are no relevant financial 
disclosures or conflicts of interest.


2760. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013 Jan;120(1):157-67. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-012-0771-5. Epub 2012 Feb 18.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease: heterogenous mechanisms.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Kenyongasse 18, 1070, Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Cognitive impairment is common in Parkinson disease (PD), with long-term 
longitudinal studies reporting that most PD patients develop dementia. A high 
proportion of patients with PD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI) progress to 
dementia within a short time. Impairments occur in a range of cognitive domains, 
but single-domain impairment is more common than multiple one, non-amnestic more 
common than amnestic impairment. Although the term MCI applied to PD (PD-MCI) is 
not without controversy due to the lack of uniform diagnostic consensus 
criteria, the biological validity of PD-MCI is supported by many recent studies 
that show heterogenous mechanisms in the clinical presentation, neuropsychology, 
neuroimaging, biomarkers, and neuropathology, suggesting abnormal metabolic 
network activities involving several cortical and subcortical nervous systems. 
Prospective studies using specific biomarkers, including amyloid imaging, and 
cerebro-spinal fluid biomarkers are warranted for an exact diagnosis and 
prognostic assessment of early cognitive deficits in PD patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0771-5
PMID: 22350538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2761. Neurology. 2012 Feb 21;78(8):590-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318247cc56.

Discussions about treatment restrictions in chronic neurologic diseases: a 
structured review.

Seeber AA(1), Hijdra A, Vermeulen M, Willems DL.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
The Netherlands. a.a.seeber@amc.uva.nl

OBJECTIVE: Many incurable neurologic diseases have predictable complications 
during their course or at their end stage. Timely discussions of potential 
treatment restrictions may improve the quality of treatment decisions toward the 
end of life. What is known about the actual practice of these discussions?
METHODS: We performed a literature search in MEDLINE, EMBASE, and CINAHL for 
empirical studies about discussions and decisions to restrict treatment in the 
course of 6 conditions: motor neuron disease (amyotrophic lateral sclerosis 
[ALS]), primary malignant brain tumors, multiple sclerosis, stroke, Parkinson 
disease, and dementia (Alzheimer disease).
RESULTS: In 10 of 43 studies, the actual practice of decision-making was 
studied; in the remaining 33, caregivers were interviewed about this practice. 
Three scenarios were described: 1) acute devastating disease (severe stroke); 2) 
stable severe neurologic deficit with complications (poststroke brain damage); 
and 3) chronic progressive disease with complications (dementia and ALS). We 
found no studies concerning the other conditions. In all 3 scenarios, 
discussions and decisions seemed to be mostly triggered by the occurrence of 
life-threatening situations, either caused by the disease itself (1), or 
complications (2 and 3, including many patients with ALS). Some ALS studies 
showed that timely discussion of treatment options improved end-of-life 
decision-making.
CONCLUSIONS: The actual practice of discussions about treatment restrictions in 
chronic neurologic disease has hardly been studied. The currently available 
empirical data suggest that discussions are mainly triggered by life-threatening 
situations, whereas anticipation of such situations may be beneficial for 
patients and their families.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318247cc56
PMID: 22351797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2762. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(2):73-8. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.73.

[FTDP-17 presenting amnestic MCI as an initial symptom: case report].

[Article in Japanese]

Kutoku Y(1), Miyazaki Y, Yamashita Y, Kuwano R, Murakami T, Sunada Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kawasaki Medical School.

A 46-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for examination of her amnesia. 
Psychiatric examinations revealed that her recent memory was moderately 
disturbed despite well-preserved general cognitive function. Brain MRI and I-IMP 
SPECT (eZIS) revealed mild brain atrophy and hypoperfusion localized to the 
hippocampus, superior parietal lobule, and posterior cingulate gyrus. She was 
diagnosed with amnestic MCI at that time. However, five years later, she 
developed personality changes, parkinsonism and dementia. Investigation of her 
family medical history revealed that the patient's two sisters are demented and 
under the medical care. DNA analysis revealed an intronic mutation IVS10 C>T in 
the MAPT gene. Although her two sisters also have the same mutation, her elder 
sister has typical FTD without parkinsonism. Approximately 10% of patients with 
amnestic MCI develop Alzheimer's disease each year. Thus, amnestic MCI has been 
usually considered to be an early stage of Alzheimer's disease. Interestingly 
our patient having a MAPT gene mutation started to develop amnestic MCI as an 
initial symptom. Therefore because of the diversity in early clinical features 
of FTDP-17, aggressive DNA analysis is necessary for accurate diagnosis.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.73
PMID: 22354229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2763. Exp Neurobiol. 2011 Dec;20(4):181-8. doi: 10.5607/en.2011.20.4.181. Epub 2011 
Dec 29.

Transmission of Synucleinopathies in the Enteric Nervous System of A53T 
Alpha-Synuclein Transgenic Mice.

Lee HJ(1), Suk JE, Lee KW, Park SH, Blumbergs PC, Gai WP, Lee SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, 
Korea.

Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are characterized 
by abnormal deposition of α-synuclein aggregates in many regions of the central 
and peripheral nervous systems. Accumulating evidence suggests that the 
α-synuclein pathology initiates in a few discrete regions and spreads to larger 
areas in the nervous system. Recent pathological studies of PD patients have 
raised the possibility that the enteric nervous system is one of the initial 
sites of α-synuclein aggregation and propagation. Here, we evaluated the 
induction and propagation of α-synuclein aggregates in the enteric nervous 
system of the A53T α-synuclein transgenic mice after injection of human brain 
tissue extracts into the gastric walls of the mice. Western analysis of the 
brain extracts showed that the DLB extract contained detergent-stable 
α-synuclein aggregates, but the normal brain extract did not. Injection of the 
DLB extract resulted in an increased deposition of α-synuclein in the myenteric 
neurons, in which α-synuclein formed punctate aggregates over time up to 4 
months. In these mice, inflammatory responses were increased transiently at 
early time points. None of these changes were observed in the A53T mice injected 
with saline or the normal brain extract, nor were these found in the wild type 
mice injected with the DLB extract. These results demonstrate that pathological 
α-synuclein aggregates present in the brain of DLB patient can induce the 
aggregation of endogenous α-synuclein in the myenteric neurons in A53T mice, 
suggesting the transmission of synucleinopathy lesions in the enteric nervous 
system.

DOI: 10.5607/en.2011.20.4.181
PMCID: PMC3268152
PMID: 22355263


2764. Eur J Neurol. 2012 Aug;19(8):1100-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2012.03682.x. Epub 
2012 Feb 23.

The impact of silent vascular brain burden in cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease.

González-Redondo R(1), Toledo J, Clavero P, Lamet I, García-García D, 
García-Eulate R, Martínez-Lage P, Rodríguez-Oroz MC.

Author information:
(1)Clínica Universidad de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: White matter hyperintensities (WMHs) detected by 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain are associated with dementia and 
cognitive impairment in the general population and in Alzheimer's disease. Their 
effect in cognitive decline and dementia associated with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) is still unclear.
METHODS: We studied the relationship between WMHs and cognitive state in 111 
patients with PD classified as cognitively normal (n = 39), with a mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI) (n = 46) or dementia (n = 26), in a cross-sectional 
and follow-up study. Cognitive state was evaluated with a comprehensive 
neuropsychological battery, and WMHs were identified in FLAIR and T2-weighted 
MRI. The burden of WMHs was rated using the Scheltens scale.
RESULTS: No differences in WMHs were found between the three groups in the 
cross-sectional study. A negative correlation was observed between semantic 
fluency and the subscore for WMHs in the frontal lobe. Of the 36 non-demented 
patients re-evaluated after a mean follow-up of 30 months, three patients 
converted into MCI and 5 into dementia. Progression of periventricular WMHs was 
associated with an increased conversion to dementia. A marginal association 
between the increase in total WMHs burden and worsening in the Mini Mental State 
Examination was encountered.
CONCLUSIONS: White matter hyperintensities do not influence the cognitive status 
of patients with PD. Frontal WMHs have a negative impact on semantic fluency. 
Brain vascular burden may have an effect on cognitive impairment in patients 
with PD as WMHs increase overtime might increase the risk of conversion to 
dementia. This finding needs further confirmation in larger prospective studies.

© 2012 The Author(s). European Journal of Neurology © 2012 EFNS.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1468-1331.2012.03682.x
PMID: 22360775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2765. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2012 Jun;83(6):607-11. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2011-301590. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Ten year survival and outcomes in a prospective cohort of new onset Chinese 
Parkinson's disease patients.

Auyeung M(1), Tsoi TH, Mok V, Cheung CM, Lee CN, Li R, Yeung E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Pamela Youde Nethersole Eastern Hospital, Hong Kong, 
SAR China. auyema@yahoo.com.hk

OBJECTIVE: The 10 year outcomes and impact of motor and non-motor features on 
survival of a cohort of new onset Chinese Parkinson's disease (PD) patients were 
prospectively studied.
METHOD: A cohort of new onset PD patients from 1995 to 2002 was recruited from a 
regional hospital based movement disorder clinic. Subjects were classified into 
postural instability gait disorder (PIGD), tremor predominant type or mixed 
subtypes at presentation. All were evaluated yearly for development of sensory 
complaints, first significant fall, hallucinations, dementia, postural 
hypotension, speech disturbances, dysphagia and postural instability persisted 
during 'on' medication state (PIPon). Mortality and predictors of death were 
determined.
RESULTS: 171 new onset PD patients were recruited. After a mean follow-up of 
11.3±2.6 years, 50 (29%) patients died. The standardised mortality ratio was 1.1 
(CI 0.8 to 1.5, p=0.34). 83 (49%) developed dementia, 81 (47%) had psychosis and 
103 (60%) had sensory complaints. Postural hypotension was found in 58 (34%) 
patients, 108 (63%) had PIPon, 101 (59%) had falls, 102 (60%) had dysphagia, 148 
(87%) had freezing of gait and 117 (68%) had speech disturbances. 46 (27%) were 
institutionalised whereas 54 (32%) lived independently. Dementia (HR 5.0, 95% CI 
2.1 to 13.0), PIPon (HR 2.8, 95% CI 1.2 to 6.8), older onset (HR 1.05, 1 year 
increase in age, 95% CI 1.0 to 1.1) and PIGD type (HR 2.1, 95% CI 1.2 to 3.7) 
were independent predictors of death.
CONCLUSIONS: 10 years into PD, a significant proportion of patients developed 
dopa resistant motor and non-motor features. Older onset, PIGD type, PIPon and 
dementia had a negative impact on survival. Standardised mortality ratio was 
1.1.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2011-301590
PMID: 22362919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2766. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e30903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030903. Epub 2012 Feb 17.

The impact of different types of assistive devices on gait measures and safety 
in Huntington's disease.

Kloos AD(1), Kegelmeyer DA, White SE, Kostyk SK.

Author information:
(1)Division of Physical Therapy, The Ohio State College of Medicine, The Ohio 
State University, Columbus, Ohio, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Gait and balance impairments lead to frequent falls and injuries in 
individuals with Huntington's disease (HD). Assistive devices (ADs) such as 
canes and walkers are often prescribed to prevent falls, but their efficacy is 
unknown. We systematically examined the effects of different types of ADs on 
quantitative gait measures during walking in a straight path and around 
obstacles.
METHODS: Spatial and temporal gait parameters were measured in 21 subjects with 
HD as they walked across a GAITRite walkway under 7 conditions (i.e., using no 
AD and 6 commonly prescribed ADs: a cane, a weighted cane, a standard walker, 
and a 2, 3 or 4 wheeled walker). Subjects also were timed and observed for 
number of stumbles and falls while walking around two obstacles in a 
figure-of-eight pattern.
RESULTS: Gait measure variability (i.e., coefficient of variation), an indicator 
of fall risk, was consistently better when using the 4WW compared to other ADs. 
Subjects also walked the fastest and had the fewest number of stumbles and falls 
when using the 4WW in the figure-of-eight course. Subjects walked significantly 
slower using ADs compared to no AD both across the GAITRite and in the 
figure-of-eight. Measures reflecting gait stability and safety improved with the 
4WW but were made worse by some other ADs.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030903
PMCID: PMC3281896
PMID: 22363511 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: Presently ADK, DAK, and SKK 
are funded for an ongoing study by the Lundbeck Inc. This is separate from the 
assistive device study. Dr. Kloos has received research support from the 
Huntington Study Group, the Huntington's Society of Canada, and Lundbeck, Inc. 
Dr. Kegelmeyer has received research support from the Huntington Study Group, 
the Huntington's Society of Canada, The Institute for Optimal Aging and 
Lundbeck, Inc. Dr. White reports no disclosures. Dr. Kostyk receives research 
support from the Huntington Study Group (HSG), the Parkinson Study Group (PSG), 
the Huntington's Society of Canada, National Institutes of Health/National 
Institute Neurologic Disorders and Stroke, Novartis, Neurologix, Inc. and 
Lundbeck, Inc. and has received travel reimbursement and honoraria from the FDA 
Office of Orphan Products Development Grant Program. These sources funded other 
projects and current projects but not the assistive device study. There are no 
patents, products in development or marketed products to declare. This does not 
alter the authors′ adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and 
materials.


2767. Brain. 2012 Mar;135(Pt 3):819-32. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws006.

Progressive neuronal inclusion formation and axonal degeneration in CHMP2B 
mutant transgenic mice.

Ghazi-Noori S(1), Froud KE, Mizielinska S, Powell C, Smidak M, Fernandez de 
Marco M, O'Malley C, Farmer M, Parkinson N, Fisher EM, Asante EA, Brandner S, 
Collinge J, Isaacs AM.

Author information:
(1)MRC Prion Unit, UCL Institute of Neurology, London WC1N 3BG, UK.

Mutations in the charged multivesicular body protein 2B (CHMP2B) gene cause 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration. The mutations lead to C-terminal truncation 
of the CHMP2B protein. We generated Chmp2b knockout mice and transgenic mice 
expressing either wild-type or C-terminally truncated mutant CHMP2B. The 
transgenic CHMP2B mutant mice have decreased survival and show progressive 
neurodegenerative changes including gliosis and increasing accumulation of p62- 
and ubiquitin-positive inclusions. The inclusions are negative for the TAR DNA 
binding protein 43 and fused in sarcoma proteins, mimicking the inclusions 
observed in patients with CHMP2B mutation. Mice transgenic for mutant CHMP2B 
also develop an early and progressive axonopathy characterized by numerous 
amyloid precursor protein-positive axonal swellings, implicating altered axonal 
function in disease pathogenesis. These findings were not observed in Chmp2b 
knockout mice or in transgenic mice expressing wild-type CHMP2B, indicating that 
CHMP2B mutations induce degenerative changes through a gain of function 
mechanism. These data describe the first mouse model of dementia caused by 
CHMP2B mutation and provide new insights into the mechanisms of CHMP2B-induced 
neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws006
PMID: 22366797 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2768. J Rehabil Med. 2012 Apr;44(4):319-24. doi: 10.2340/16501977-0935.

Stroke rehabilitation is associated with a reduction in dementia risk: a 
population-based retrospective cohort study.

Chou YC(1), Liao CC, Su LT, Yang PY, Sung FC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, China Medical University 
Hospital, 404 Taichung, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: Focusing on the relationship between physical activity and incident 
cognitive impairment, the aim of this study was to investigate whether stroke 
rehabilitation reduces the risk of dementia.
METHODS: Claims data of 1,000,000 insured subjects randomly selected from the 
National Health Insurance programme of Taiwan were used to identify adults with 
a newly diagnosed ischaemic stroke in 1997-2002. Among them, 1,375 received 
rehabilitation and 3,722 did not. Both groups were followed up until the end of 
2007 to measure the incidence of development of dementia.
RESULTS: The incidence of development of dementia was lower in the 
rehabilitation cohort than in the non-rehabilitation cohort (1.22 vs 1.70 per 
100 person-years), with an adjusted hazard ratio (HR) of 0.73 (95% confidence 
interval (CI) = 0.60-0.89) in the multivariate Cox proportional hazard 
regression analysis. Female gender (HR = 1.26, 95% CI = 1.07-1.50), older age 
(HR = 7.71, 95% CI = 3.36-17.7), low income (HR = 1.82, 95% CI = 1.42-2.33), and 
Parkinson's disease (HR = 1.64, 95% CI = 1.33-2.03) were risk factors associated 
with the development of dementia.
CONCLUSION: Post-stroke rehabilitation is associated with a reduction in 
dementia risk among ischaemic stroke patients.

DOI: 10.2340/16501977-0935
PMID: 22366821 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2769. Brain Pathol. 2012 Nov;22(6):745-56. doi: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012.00585.x. Epub 
2012 Apr 12.

Biochemical increase in phosphorylated alpha-synuclein precedes histopathology 
of Lewy-type synucleinopathies.

Lue LF(1), Walker DG, Adler CH, Shill H, Tran H, Akiyama H, Sue LI, Caviness J, 
Sabbagh MN, Beach TG.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun 
City, AZ 85351, USA. Lihfen.lue@bannerhealth.com

A key component in Lewy body (LB) pathology in LB disorders is α-synuclein 
phosphorylated at serine 129 (pαsyn). However, it is not known if increase in 
the level of biochemically measurable pαsyn precedes the presence of 
histologically identified Lewy-type synucleinopathy (LTS). To gain sights into 
possible temporal sequence, we measured levels of pαsyn in cingulate and 
temporal cortices that develop LTS pathology at later stages of LB disorders. 
Brain homogenates from 128 autopsy cases including normal controls and subjects 
classified by Unified LTS histopathology staging system were studied. We found 
that biochemically measurable pαsyn levels in cingulate and temporal cortices 
were significantly increased at Unified stages III and IV. When pαsyn levels 
were compared between LTS density scores instead of Unified stages, significant 
increases were detected even as LTS density scores increased from 0 to 1 in 
olfactory bulb and substantia nigra. Therefore, our findings demonstrated that 
changes of pαsyn levels in cingulate and temporal cortices coincided with the 
early appearance of the LTS pathology in olfactory bulb and substantia nigra, 
even though histologically demonstrable LTS was lacking in the cortical region. 
Therefore, identifying the underlying mechanisms driving these changes could be 
crucial to understanding the pathogenesis of LB disorders.

© 2012 The Authors; Brain Pathology © 2012 International Society of 
Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1750-3639.2012.00585.x
PMCID: PMC4427521
PMID: 22369130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2770. J Physiol Biochem. 2012 Sep;68(3):455-60. doi: 10.1007/s13105-012-0159-x. Epub 
2012 Feb 28.

Estrogens: mechanisms of neuroprotective effects.

Petrovska S(1), Dejanova B, Jurisic V.

Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Institute of Physiology, Skopje, Republic of Macedonia. 
sani_960@yahoo.com

Within the last few years, there has been a growing interest in the 
neuroprotective effects of estrogen and the possible beneficial effects of 
estrogen in neurodegenerative diseases such as stroke, Alzheimer's disease, and 
Parkinson's disease. The concept of neuroprotective effects of estrogen in women 
remains controversial because these effects may vary with the timing of 
treatment. Research increasingly suggests that changes in estrogen levels during 
aging may increase risk for Alzheimer's disease, the most common type of 
dementia. This update reviews the newest information about estrogen and 
cognitive aging, including information regarding the role of bioavailable 
estrogen in older women and men.

DOI: 10.1007/s13105-012-0159-x
PMID: 22371015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2771. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e32383. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032383. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Diagnosis of Parkinson's disease based on disease-specific autoantibody profiles 
in human sera.

Han M(1), Nagele E, DeMarshall C, Acharya N, Nagele R.

Author information:
(1)University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey-Graduate School of 
Biomedical Sciences at the School of Osteopathic Medicine, Stratford, New 
Jersey, United States of America.

Parkinson's disease (PD), hallmarked by a variety of motor disorders and 
neurological decline, is the second most common neurodegenerative disease 
worldwide. Currently, no diagnostic test exists to identify sufferers, and 
physicians must rely on a combination of subjective physical and neurological 
assessments to make a diagnosis. The discovery of definitive blood-borne 
biomarkers would be a major step towards early and reliable diagnosis. Despite 
attention devoted to this search, such biomarkers have remained elusive. In the 
present study, we used human protein microarrays to reveal serum autoantibodies 
that are differentially expressed among PD and control subjects. The diagnostic 
significance of each of these autoantibodies was evaluated, resulting in the 
selection of 10 autoantibody biomarkers that can effectively differentiate PD 
sera from control sera with a sensitivity of 93.1% and specificity of 100%. PD 
sera were also distinguishable from sera obtained from Alzheimer's disease, 
breast cancer, and multiple sclerosis patients with accuracies of 86.0%, 96.6%, 
and 100%, respectively. Results demonstrate that serum autoantibodies can be 
used as highly specific and accurate biomarkers for PD diagnosis throughout the 
course of the disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032383
PMCID: PMC3285212
PMID: 22384236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have read the 
journal's policy and have the following conflicts: MH, NA and CD have no 
competing interests. EN is a paid consultant for Durin Technologies. RN is 
Founder of Durin Technologies and has stock interest. This does not alter the 
authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.


2772. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Apr 1;175(7):627-35. doi: 10.1093/aje/kwr362. Epub 2012 Mar 
1.

Use of calcium channel blockers and Parkinson's disease.

Pasternak B(1), Svanström H, Nielsen NM, Fugger L, Melbye M, Hviid A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Epidemiology Research, Statens Serum Institut, Copenhagen S, 
Denmark. bjp@ssi.dk

Experimental evidence and case-control studies suggest that dihydropyridine 
calcium channel blockers (DiCCBs) may protect against Parkinson's disease. The 
authors conducted a historical cohort study in Denmark to investigate the 
association between DiCCB use and risk of Parkinson's disease (1998-2006). 
Individual-level data on filled drug prescriptions, diagnostic information, and 
covariates were linked between nationwide registries. Among DiCCB users, 173 
incident cases of Parkinson's disease were detected during 461,984 person-years 
of follow-up, compared with 5,538 cases during 17,343,641 person-years of 
follow-up among nonusers. After adjustment for age, sex, year, propensity score, 
and use of other antihypertensive drugs and statins, DiCCB use was associated 
with a reduced risk of Parkinson's disease (rate ratio (RR) = 0.71, 95% 
confidence interval (CI): 0.60, 0.82). This association was not present in 
patients who had previously used DiCCBs (RR = 1.04, 95% CI: 0.87, 1.24). DiCCB 
users aged ≥65 years were at lower risk of Parkinson's disease than DiCCB users 
aged <65 years (RR = 0.59, 95% CI: 0.40, 0.85). Among patients with Parkinson's 
disease, DiCCB use was associated with reduced risk of death (adjusted RR = 
0.66, 95% CI: 0.47, 0.91) but not dementia (adjusted RR = 0.97, 95% CI: 0.60, 
1.56). In conclusion, DiCCB exposure was associated with a reduced risk of 
incident Parkinson's disease, particularly in older patients, and with reduced 
mortality among patients with Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kwr362
PMID: 22387374 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2773. Med Hypotheses. 2012 May;78(5):675-81. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.02.009. Epub 
2012 Mar 4.

Glutamate-based depression GBD.

McCarthy DJ(1), Alexander R, Smith MA, Pathak S, Kanes S, Lee CM, Sanacora G.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroscience AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals LP, Wilmington, DE, USA. 
dennis.mccarthy@astrazeneca.com

We describe a new term: glutamate-based depression (GBD). GBD is defined as a 
chronic depressive illness associated with environmental stress and diseases 
associated with altered glutamate neurotransmission. We hypothesize that 
glutamate-induced over-activation of extrasynaptic NMDA receptors in the 
subgenual cingulate area called Brodmann's 25 plays an important role in the 
etiology of depression and may be responsible for the high incidence of 
co-morbid depression associated in diseases with glutamate etiology. While 
depression is a syndrome with multiple possible etiologies, we propose that a 
disruption in glutamatergic neurotransmission may underline a substantial 
proportion of clinically observed depression. The high rates of depressive 
symptoms associated with various disorders in which altered glutamatergic 
functions have been identified, may suggest a common pathophysiological 
mechanism is underlying the diverse clinical presentations.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2012.02.009
PMID: 22391030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2774. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e32664. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032664. Epub 2012 Mar 2.

CSF concentrations of cAMP and cGMP are lower in patients with Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease but not Parkinson's disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Oeckl P(1), Steinacker P, Lehnert S, Jesse S, Kretzschmar HA, Ludolph AC, Otto 
M, Ferger B.

Author information:
(1)CNS Diseases Research, Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Biberach an 
der Riss, Germany.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Neurol. 2012 May;8(5):241.

BACKGROUND: The cyclic nucleotides cyclic adenosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cAMP) 
and cyclic guanosine-3',5'-monophosphate (cGMP) are important second messengers 
and are potential biomarkers for Parkinson's disease (PD), amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Here, we investigated by liquid 
chromatography/tandem mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
concentrations of cAMP and cGMP of 82 patients and evaluated their diagnostic 
potency as biomarkers. For comparison with a well-accepted biomarker, we 
measured tau concentrations in CSF of CJD and control patients. CJD patients 
(n = 15) had lower cAMP (-70%) and cGMP (-55%) concentrations in CSF compared 
with controls (n = 11). There was no difference in PD, PD dementia (PDD) and ALS 
cases. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analyses confirmed cAMP and 
cGMP as valuable diagnostic markers for CJD indicated by the area under the 
curve (AUC) of 0.86 (cAMP) and 0.85 (cGMP). We calculated a sensitivity of 100% 
and specificity of 64% for cAMP and a sensitivity of 67% and specificity of 100% 
for cGMP. The combination of both nucleotides increased the sensitivity to 80% 
and specificity to 91% for the term cAMPxcGMP (AUC 0.92) and to 93% and 100% for 
the ratio tau/cAMP (AUC 0.99).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that the CSF determination of cAMP and 
cGMP may easily be included in the diagnosis of CJD and could be helpful in 
monitoring disease progression as well as in therapy control.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0032664
PMCID: PMC3292568
PMID: 22396786 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors PO and BF are 
employees of Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG. Funding does not alter 
the authors' adherence to all the PLoS ONE polices on sharing data and material.


2775. Neurodegener Dis. 2012;10(1-4):187-90. doi: 10.1159/000335909. Epub 2012 Mar 6.

Prevalence and profile of mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Monastero R(1), Di Fiore P, Ventimiglia GD, Ventimiglia CC, Battaglini I, 
Camarda R, Camarda C.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Epidemiology and Psychology of Aging and Dementia, Department 
of Experimental Biomedicine and Clinical Neuroscience, University of Palermo, 
Palermo, Italy. roberto.monastero @ gmail.com

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The frequency of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) ranges from 19 to 40%, and this is probably due to methodological 
differences between the studies. The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
frequency and profile of MCI in a large sample of nondemented PD subjects and 
neurologically healthy subjects (NHS).
METHODS: A total of 872 subjects (582 controls and 290 PD) were included. The 
association between MCI and PD was tested, using logistic regression models; 
odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CI) were calculated.
RESULTS: Fifty-three percent of PD subjects and 45% NHS met the criteria for MCI 
(p = 0.001). The PD subjects showed a higher frequency of nonamnestic MCI 
(naMCI), compared to NHS (23.8 vs. 14.4%, p ≤ 0.0001). In comparison to NHS, PD 
was associated with a univariate OR of 1.9 (95% CI = 1.3-2.8) for naMCI, and 
this association was marginally significant after multiple comparisons 
(multivariate OR = 1.5, 95% CI = 0.96-2.3, p = 0.077).
CONCLUSION: The association between PD and the impairment of nonmemory domains 
is probably due to frontal-subcortical involvement, which characterizes the 
disease.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000335909
PMID: 22398358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2776. BMC Neurol. 2012 Mar 8;12:12. doi: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-12.

Specificity of transcranial sonography in parkinson spectrum disorders in 
comparison to degenerative cognitive syndromes.

Laučkaitė K(1), Rastenytė D, Šurkienė D, Vaitkus A, Sakalauskas A, Lukoševičius 
A, Gleiznienė R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Lithuanian University of Health Sciences, Academy of 
Medicine, Mickevičiaus street 9, Kaunas, Lithuania. kristina.lauckaite@lsmuni.lt

BACKGROUND: Hyperechogenicity of the substantia nigra (SN+), detected by 
transcranial sonography (TCS), was reported as a characteristic finding in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), with high diagnostic accuracy values, when compared 
mainly to healthy controls or essential tremor (ET) group. However, some data is 
accumulating that the SN + could be detected in other neurodegenerative and even 
in non-neurodegenerative disorders too. Our aim was to estimate the diagnostic 
accuracy of TCS, mainly focusing on the specificity point, when applied to a 
range of the parkinsonian disorders, and comparing to the degenerative cognitive 
syndromes.
METHODS: A prospective study was carried out at the Hospital of Lithuanian 
University of Health Sciences from January until September 2011. Initially, a 
TCS and clinical examination were performed on 258 patients and 76 controls. The 
General Electric Voluson 730 Expert ultrasound system was used. There were 12.8% 
of cases excluded with insufficient temporal bones, and 4.3% excluded with an 
unclear diagnosis. The studied sample consisted of the groups: PD (n = 71, 
33.2%), ET (n = 58, 27.1%), PD and ET (n = 10, 4.7%), atypical parkinsonian 
syndromes (APS) (n = 3, 1.4%), hereditary neurodegenerative parkinsonism (HDP) 
(n = 3, 1.4%), secondary parkinsonism (SP) (n = 23, 10.8%), mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) (n = 33, 15.4%), dementia (n = 13, 6.1%), and control (n = 71).
RESULTS: There were 80.3% of PD patients at stages 1 & 2 according to Hoehn and 
Yahr. At the cut-off value of 0.20 cm² of the SN+, the sensitivity for PD was 
94.3% and the specificity - 63.3% (ROC analysis, AUC 0.891), in comparison to 
the rest of the cohort. At the cut-off value of 0.26 cm², the sensitivity was 
90% and the specificity 82.4%.The estimations for the lowest specificity for PD, 
in comparison to the latter subgroups (at the cut-off values of 0.20 cm² and 
0.26 cm², respectively) were: 0% and 33.3% to APS, 33.3% and 66.7% to HDP, 34.8% 
and 69.6% to SP, 55.2% and 82.8% to ET, 75% and 91.7% to dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: The high sensitivity of the test could be employed as a valuable 
screening tool. But TCS is more useful as a supplementary diagnostic method, due 
to the specificity values not being comprehensive.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2377-12-12
PMCID: PMC3317847
PMID: 22400906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2777. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Apr 18;514(2):156-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.02.078. Epub 
2012 Mar 3.

Analysis of PLA2G6 gene mutation in sporadic early-onset parkinsonism patients 
from Chinese population.

Tian JY(1), Tang BS, Shi CH, Lv ZY, Li K, Yu RL, Shen L, Yan XX, Guo JF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha, 410008 Hunan, People's Republic of China.

Recent studies have shown that PLA2G6 is a causative gene for PARK14-linked 
autosomal recessive early-onset complicated dystonia-parkinsonism, early-onset 
parkinsonism with frontotemporal dementia and autosomal recessive early-onset 
Parkinsonism without added complicated clinical features. In order to 
investigate the characteristics of PLA2G6 gene mutations in Chinese sporadic 
early-onset parkinsonism (EOP) patients, we performed polymerase chain reaction 
and DNA direct sequencing on a cohort of sporadic EOP patients from Chinese 
population. In this study, we found a novel heterozygous varient (p.G679V). 
Bioinformatics demonstrates that p.G679V exhibits highly conserved residues 
across species, which hints it might be a pathogenic mutation. Our result 
indicated that PLA2G6 mutations might not be a main cause of Chinese sporadic 
EOP.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.02.078
PMID: 22406380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2778. BMJ. 2012 Mar 9;344:e1566. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e1566.

Discontinuation of antidepressants in people with dementia and neuropsychiatric 
symptoms (DESEP study): double blind, randomised, parallel group, placebo 
controlled trial.

Bergh S(1), Selbæk G, Engedal K.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Old Age Psychiatric Research, Innlandet Hospital Trust, N-2312 
Ottestad, Norway. sverre.bergh@sykehuset-innlandet.no

Comment in
    Evid Based Med. 2013 Feb;18(1):27-8.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of discontinuing antidepressant treatment in 
people with dementia and neuropsychiatric symptoms.
DESIGN: Double blind, randomised, parallel group, placebo controlled trial.
SETTING: Norwegian nursing homes; residents recruited by 16 study centres in 
Norway from August 2008 to June 2010.
PARTICIPANTS: 128 patients with Alzheimer's disease, dementia or vascular 
dementia, and neuropsychiatric symptoms (but no depressive disorder), who had 
been prescribed escitalopram, citalopram, sertraline, or paroxetine for three 
months or more. We excluded patients with severe somatic disease or terminal 
illness, or who were unable to take tablets or capsules as prescribed.
INTERVENTIONS: Antidepressant treatment was discontinued over one week in 63 
patients, and continued in 68 patients. We assessed patients at baseline, four, 
seven, 13, and 25 weeks.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Primary outcomes were score differences between study 
groups in the Cornell scale of depression in dementia and the neuropsychiatric 
inventory (10 item version) after 25 weeks. Secondary outcomes were score 
differences in the clinical dementia rating scale, unified Parkinson's disease 
rating scale, quality of life-Alzheimer's disease scale, Lawton and Brody's 
physical self maintenance scale, and severe impairment battery.
RESULTS: Using a linear multilevel model analysis, we found that the 
discontinued group had significantly higher scores on the Cornell scale after 25 
weeks than the continuation group (difference -2.89 (95% confidence interval 
-4.76 to -1.02); P=0.003). We saw a similar result in the mean total score for 
the neuropsychiatric inventory after 25 weeks, but this difference was 
non-significant (-5.96 (-12.35 to 0.44); P=0.068). We confirmed these results by 
non-response analysis (>30% worsening on the Cornell scale)--significantly more 
patients worsened in the discontinuation group than in the continuation group 
(32 (54%) v 17 (29%); P=0.006). We found no significant differences between the 
groups for secondary outcomes. Forty seven (37%) patients withdrew from the 
study early.
CONCLUSIONS: Discontinuation of antidepressant treatment in patients with 
dementia and neuropsychiatric symptoms leads to an increase in depressive 
symptoms, compared with those patients who continue with treatment.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrial.gov NCT00594269, EudraCT 2006-002790-43.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.e1566
PMID: 22408266 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2779. BMJ. 2012 Mar 12;344:e1442. doi: 10.1136/bmj.e1442.

Inverse association between cancer and Alzheimer's disease: results from the 
Framingham Heart Study.

Driver JA(1), Beiser A, Au R, Kreger BE, Splansky GL, Kurth T, Kiel DP, Lu KP, 
Seshadri S, Wolf PA.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research Education and Clinical Center and Boston VA Medical 
Center, Boston, MA 02130, USA. jdriver@partners.org

Comment in
    BMJ. 2012;344:e1662.

OBJECTIVES: To relate cancer since entry into the Framingham Heart Study with 
the risk of incident Alzheimer's disease and to estimate the risk of incident 
cancer among participants with and without Alzheimer's disease.
DESIGN: Community based prospective cohort study; nested age and sex matched 
case-control study.
SETTING: Framingham Heart Study, USA.
PARTICIPANTS: 1278 participants with and without a history of cancer who were 
aged 65 or more and free of dementia at baseline (1986-90).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Hazard ratios and 95% confidence intervals for the risks 
of Alzheimer's disease and cancer.
RESULTS: Over a mean follow-up of 10 years, 221 cases of probable Alzheimer's 
disease were diagnosed. Cancer survivors had a lower risk of probable 
Alzheimer's disease (hazard ratio 0.67, 95% confidence interval 0.47 to 0.97), 
adjusted for age, sex, and smoking. The risk was lower among survivors of 
smoking related cancers (0.26, 0.08 to 0.82) than among survivors of non-smoking 
related cancers (0.82, 0.57 to 1.19). In contrast with their decreased risk of 
Alzheimer's disease, survivors of smoking related cancer had a substantially 
increased risk of stroke (2.18, 1.29 to 3.68). In the nested case-control 
analysis, participants with probable Alzheimer's disease had a lower risk of 
subsequent cancer (0.39, 0.26 to 0.58) than reference participants, as did 
participants with any Alzheimer's disease (0.38) and any dementia (0.44).
CONCLUSIONS: Cancer survivors had a lower risk of Alzheimer's disease than those 
without cancer, and patients with Alzheimer's disease had a lower risk of 
incident cancer. The risk of Alzheimer's disease was lowest in survivors of 
smoking related cancers, and was not primarily explained by survival bias. This 
pattern for cancer is similar to that seen in Parkinson's disease and suggests 
an inverse association between cancer and neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1136/bmj.e1442
PMCID: PMC3647385
PMID: 22411920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: All authors have completed 
the ICMJE uniform disclosure form at www.icmje.org/coi_disclosure.pdf (available 
on request from the corresponding author) and declare: no support from any 
organisation for the submitted work; no financial relationships with any 
organisations that might have an interest in the submitted work in the previous 
three years; and no other relationships or activities that could appear to have 
influenced the submitted work.


2780. Geriatr Psychol Neuropsychiatr Vieil. 2012 Mar;10(1):65-72. doi: 
10.1684/pnv.2012.0316.

[Alzheimer's disease and related disorders: specificity of young onset patients, 
including ethical aspects].

[Article in French]

Lebert F(1), Boitte P, de Bouvet A, Pasquier F.

Author information:
(1)Centre national de référence des malades Alzheimer jeunes, Université Lille 
Nord de France, CHU de Lille. florence.lebert@chu-lille.fr

The number of patients with young onset dementia (YOD) (that is before age 65) 
is estimated at 32,000 in France, and 5000 with onset dementia before 60 years. 
These patients differ from older ones by the greater number of rares causes 
(29%), heterogeneity of the presentation among the usual diseases, such as 
non-amnestic phenotypes of Alzheimer's disease, high frequency of frontal 
symptoms, and possible genetic origin. These aspects must be taken into account 
for the diagnosis, often more difficult than in older ones because patients have 
a little knowledge of the YOD, excepted in the genetics forms. YOD patients can 
still work or drive a car, and we should choose between the respect for autonomy 
and the security for the patient and their carers. YOD patients can be more 
often included in pharmacological trials because they have lower associated 
disorders. Individual non-pharmacological treatment should be priviledged 
because they don't easily accept collective activities with other patients over 
60 years of age. Excepted for the very young patients (onset before 45), the 
survival is longer than in late onset dementia, with sometimes severe behavioral 
problems related to frontal syndrome. In France, the caregiving at home has been 
improved since the possibility for the YOD patients to receive a financial 
assistance reserved for the disabled patients, but admission to a nursing home 
before 60 is very difficult and increases the caregiver burden and perception of 
unfairness. There is a discrimination between young or older demented patients 
related to the great difficulty to meet the needs of younger patients, due to 
the rigidity of the medical and social systems. The presentation of a limited 
offer for the YOD patients must initiate reflections on our capacities to 
respect the autonomy and the dignity of the Alzheimer's patients regardless of 
age.

DOI: 10.1684/pnv.2012.0316
PMID: 22414401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2781. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2012;33(1):59-72. doi: 10.1159/000336598. Epub 2012 
Mar 8.

Clock test deficits related to the global cognitive state in Alzheimer's and 
Parkinson's disease.

Saur R(1), Maier C, Milian M, Riedel E, Berg D, Liepelt-Scarfone I, Leyhe T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University of Tübingen, Tübingen, 
Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Clock drawing (CD) seems to be impaired quite early in the 
process of cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease (PD).
METHODS: We assessed performance on the CD test (CDT), clock setting test (CST) 
and clock reading test (CRT) in 32 elderly healthy controls, 41 patients with 
PD, 23 patients with amnestic mild cognitive impairment (aMCI) and 40 patients 
with Alzheimer's dementia (AD). Our focus was on comparing the performance of PD 
and aMCI/AD patients in relation to their global cognitive states 
(operationalized by the Mini Mental Status Examination). We also analyzed 
qualitative differences in errors of drawing, setting and reading clocks.
RESULTS: We found that performance in CDT, but not in the CST or CRT, was 
impaired earlier in PD than in aMCI/AD. Incorrect placement of the minute hand 
was the most prominent error in both patient groups. We found no specific 
influence of visuospatial dysfunction in PD on clock drawing.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that executive function related to retrieval of 
semantic memory about the minute hand is compromised early in PD.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000336598
PMID: 22415211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2782. Genome Res. 2012 Jun;22(6):1050-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.134098.111. Epub 2012 Mar 14.

Primate segmental duplication creates novel promoters for the LRRC37 gene family 
within the 17q21.31 inversion polymorphism region.

Bekpen C(1), Tastekin I, Siswara P, Akdis CA, Eichler EE.

Author information:
(1)Swiss Institute of Allergy and Asthma Research, Davos, Switzerland. 
cemalettin.bekpen@boun.edu.tr

The LRRC37 gene family maps to a complex region of the human genome and has been 
subjected to multiple rounds of segmental duplication. We investigate the 
expression and regulation of this gene family in multiple tissues and organisms 
and show a testis-specific expression of this gene family in mouse but a more 
ubiquitous pattern of expression among primates. Evolutionary and phylogenetic 
analyses support a model in which new alternative promoters have been acquired 
during primate evolution. We identify two promoters, Cl8 and particularly Cl3, 
both of which are highly active in the cerebellum and fetal brain in human and 
have been duplicated from a promoter region of two unrelated genes, BPTF and 
DND1, respectively. Two of these more broadly expressed gene family members, 
LRRC37A1 and A4, define the boundary of a common human inversion polymorphism 
mapping to chromosome 17q21.31 (the MAPT locus)-a region associated with risk 
for frontal temporal dementia, Parkinsonism, and intellectual disability. We 
propose that the regulation of the LRRC37 family occurred in a stepwise manner, 
acquiring foreign promoters from BPTF and DND1 via segmental duplication. This 
unusual evolutionary trajectory altered the regulation of the LRRC37 family, 
leading to increased expression in the fetal brain and cerebellum.

DOI: 10.1101/gr.134098.111
PMCID: PMC3371713
PMID: 22419166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2783. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Feb;28(2):135-41. doi: 10.1002/gps.3799. Epub 
2012 Mar 16.

Examining carer stress in dementia: the role of subtype diagnosis and 
neuropsychiatric symptoms.

Lee DR(1), McKeith I, Mosimann U, Ghosh-Nodyal A, Thomas AJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Campus for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle 
University, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK. D.R.Lee@newcastle.ac.uk

INTRODUCTION: Caring for people with dementia incurs significant stress for 
carers. Stress has been related to the duration of caring role, the number of 
weekly hours provided and severity of cognitive impairment. What remains less 
clear is the impact of neuropsychiatric symptoms and subtype of dementia on 
carer stress and this study aimed to examine these.
METHODS: Dementia carers were recruited for people with a range of dementia 
subtypes. Carers were interviewed using the Neuropsychiatric Inventory with the 
Carer Distress Scale. Cognitive fluctuations were assessed using the Dementia 
Cognitive Fluctuations Scale. All patients were also examined with The Cambridge 
Assessment for mental disorders in the elderly.
RESULTS: Dementia diagnostic subtype, the presence of cognitive fluctuations and 
some neuropsychiatric symptoms (psychosis and mood disturbance) did predict 
carer stress (all at p < 0.01) but age, gender and severity of cognitive 
impairment did not (all p > 0.33). Carers of people with dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) experienced more stress than 
those caring for patients with Alzheimer's disease and vascular dementia. Carer 
stress was associated with higher levels of psychosis, mood disturbances, 
daytime sleep and cognitive fluctuations in the person with dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: This study identified the significant impact on carers of providing 
care for people with DLB and PDD dementia subtypes and also highlighted the 
significant impact of providing care for patients with high levels of psychosis, 
mood disturbances and cognitive fluctuations.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.3799
PMID: 22422615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2784. Neuroepidemiology. 2012;38(3):138-47. doi: 10.1159/000336348. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

High prevalence of major neurological disorders in two Albanian communities: 
results of a door-to-door survey.

Kruja J(1), Beghi E, Zerbi D, Dobi D, Kuqo A, Zekja I, Mijo S, Kapisyzi M, 
Messina P.

Author information:
(1)University Service of Neurology, UHC 'Mother Theresa', Tirana, Albania.

BACKGROUND: There are few epidemiological studies on neurological disorders in 
Albania.
METHODS: A door-to-door survey was undertaken in two geographical areas (Tirana 
and Saranda) with different socioeconomic backgrounds. Two random samples of the 
local population underwent a structured interview to ascertain headache, 
epilepsy, dementia, parkinsonism, multiple sclerosis, polyneuropathy, stroke and 
cerebral palsy. Each diagnosis was made using standard criteria for 
epidemiological studies and was confirmed by history, neurological examination 
and, where available, the review of personal medical records. Lifetime 
prevalence ratios with 95% confidence intervals were calculated.
RESULTS: Of the 9,869 individuals screened (Tirana 4,953; Saranda 4,916), 4,867 
were males aged 1-91 years (median 39 years) and 5,002 were females aged 1-96 
years (median 37 years). Crude prevalence ratios (per 1,000) were: headache 
241.9 (233.5-250.3), polyneuropathy 32.5 (29.0-36.0), epilepsy 14.2 (11.7-16.3), 
stroke 12.4 (10.2-14.6), dementia 9.6 (7.7-11.5), parkinsonism 8.0 (6.2-9.8), 
cerebral palsy 4.8 (3.4-6.2), and multiple sclerosis 0.3 (0.0-0.6). Prevalence 
varied with age and gender, with differences across diseases. Except for 
polyneuropathy (Tirana 39.8; Saranda 25.2), ratios were not different in the two 
study areas.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of selected neurological disorders in Albania is 
higher than in other countries. Differences may be explained by study design, 
population structure and/or genetic and environmental factors.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000336348
PMID: 22433124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2785. Neurologia. 2015 Nov-Dec;30(9):574-85. doi: 10.1016/j.nrl.2012.02.001. Epub 2012 
Mar 19.

The neurologist facing pain in dementia.

[Article in English, Spanish]

Álvaro González LC(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurociencias, Hospital Universitario Basurto, Universidad del 
País Vasco/Euskal Herriko Unibertsitatea, Bilbao, España. Electronic address: 
luiscarlos.alvarogonzalez@osakidetza.net.

INTRODUCTION: Ageing, a common background in dementia, is usually associated 
with painful disorders. Nevertheless, the use of analgesics is limited due to 
poor communication. On the other hand, dementia lesions are placed in the 
nociceptive pathways. For this reason, the painful experience becomes different 
and distinctive for every lesional type.
COURSE: The lateral nociceptive pathway (lateral thalamic nuclei and primary 
parietal cortex), which is in charge of the primary pain perception, is 
preserved in dementia. Thereafter, the shear painful perception, including pain 
intensity and threshold, remains unmodified. Distinctly, the medial pain 
pathways are affected by dementia lesions. In this pathway are included: the 
intralaminar thalamic nuclei, the pons (locus ceruleus:LC), the mesencephalon 
(periaacueductal grey substance: PGS), the hypothalamus (paraventricular nuclei, 
mamilary tuberculum) and different areas of the parietal (primary, secondary, 
operculum), temporal (amigdala, hypoccampus) and frontal (anterior cingular: 
ACC). As a consequence, the features of pain executed by these areas will be 
compromised: the cognitive assessment, the mood and emotion inherent to pain, 
the pain memory or the autonomic responses are modified in dementia. 
Specifically, in Alzheimer's disease (AD) there is a reduction in the 
anticipatory and avoidance responses and also a flattening of the autonomic 
responses. These are essentially secondary to the degenerative changes in the 
medial temporal (pain memory) and ACC (cognitive and mood aspects) areas. In 
vascular dementias, there is a cortico-subcortical deafferentation secondary to 
the white matter lesions. The consequence is the presence of hyperpathy and 
hyperalgesia. In the frontotemporal dementias, there is a reduction in pain 
expressivity. It is linked to the lesions in the orbitofrontal and anterior 
temporal areas, which are responsible of the emotional aspects of pain. In 
Parkinson's disease, painful conditions are a common characteristic. They are 
attributed to an early lesion in the LC, which reduces its prominent 
antinociceptive activity. Finally, in the demented patients there is a lack of 
expectations to analgesic treatments. This means an absence of the placebo 
effect, which is, alongside the pharmacokinetic action, an inherent part of the 
analgesic response. The placebo response is related to activity in the ACC and 
PGS. Giving its lack, higher doses of analgesics are necessary in dementias.
CONCLUSIONS: The assessment of pain in dementia is rather complex, which is the 
main reason for the scarcity of the analgesic treatment in dementias. It must be 
specific and systematic. For this purpose, the pain scales are a useful tool. 
For communicative patients, simple visual scales are helpful, meanwhile in the 
non-communicative patients the multidimensional scales are the most suitable. By 
this means, the expressive, motor, emotional, functional and social interactions 
are evaluated. Pain may be responsible of progression and cognitive 
deterioration in dementia. This evolution could be reversible, and consequently 
it has to be foreseen in order to implement analgesic treatment. Trying to 
minimize adverse events, it has to be potent but closely monitored.

Copyright © 2010 Sociedad Española de Neurología. Published by Elsevier España, 
S.L.U. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nrl.2012.02.001
PMID: 22436370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2786. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2012 Apr;71(4):266-73. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e31824b211b.

Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer disease at National Institute on 
Aging Alzheimer Disease Centers, 2005-2010.

Beach TG(1), Monsell SE, Phillips LE, Kukull W.

Author information:
(1)Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, Arizona 85351, USA. 
thomas.beach@bannerhealth.com

The neuropathologic examination is considered to provide the gold standard for 
Alzheimer disease (AD). To determine the accuracy of currently used clinical 
diagnostic methods, clinical and neuropathologic data from the National 
Alzheimer's Coordinating Center, which gathers information from the network of 
National Institute on Aging (NIA)-sponsored Alzheimer Disease Centers (ADCs), 
were collected as part of the National Alzheimer's Coordinating Center Uniform 
Data Set (UDS) between 2005 and 2010. A database search initially included all 
1198 subjects with at least one UDS clinical assessment and who had died and 
been autopsied; 279 were excluded as being not demented or because critical data 
fields were missing. The final subject number was 919. Sensitivity and 
specificity were determined based on "probable" and "possible" AD levels of 
clinical confidence and 4 levels of neuropathologic confidence based on varying 
neuritic plaque densities and Braak neurofibrillary stages. Sensitivity ranged 
from 70.9% to 87.3%; specificity ranged from 44.3% to 70.8%. Sensitivity was 
generally increased with more permissive clinical criteria and specificity was 
increased with more restrictive criteria, whereas the opposite was true for 
neuropathologic criteria. When a clinical diagnosis was not confirmed by minimum 
levels of AD histopathology, the most frequent primary neuropathologic diagnoses 
were tangle-only dementia or argyrophilic grain disease, frontotemporal lobar 
degeneration, cerebrovascular disease, Lewy body disease and hippocampal 
sclerosis. When dementia was not clinically diagnosed as AD, 39% of these cases 
met or exceeded minimum threshold levels of AD histopathology. Neurologists of 
the NIA-ADCs had higher predictive accuracy when they diagnosed AD in subjects 
with dementia than when they diagnosed dementing diseases other than AD. The 
misdiagnosis rate should be considered when estimating subject numbers for AD 
studies, including clinical trials and epidemiologic studies.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e31824b211b
PMCID: PMC3331862
PMID: 22437338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2787. J Neurosci. 2012 Mar 21;32(12):4240-6. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5575-11.2012.

Deficiency of ATP13A2 leads to lysosomal dysfunction, α-synuclein accumulation, 
and neurotoxicity.

Usenovic M(1), Tresse E, Mazzulli JR, Taylor JP, Krainc D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA

The autophagy-lysosomal pathway plays an important role in the clearance of 
long-lived proteins and dysfunctional organelles. Lysosomal dysfunction has been 
implicated in several neurodegenerative disorders including Parkinson's disease 
and related synucleinopathies that are characterized by accumulations of 
α-synuclein in Lewy bodies. Recent identification of mutations in genes linked 
to lysosomal function and neurodegeneration has offered a unique opportunity to 
directly examine the role of lysosomes in disease pathogenesis. Mutations in 
lysosomal membrane protein ATP13A2 (PARK9) cause familial Kufor-Rakeb syndrome 
characterized by early-onset parkinsonism, pyramidal degeneration and dementia. 
While previous data suggested a role of ATP13A2 in α-synuclein misfolding and 
toxicity, the mechanistic link has not been established. Here we report that 
loss of ATP13A2 in human fibroblasts from patients with Kufor-Rakeb syndrome or 
in mouse primary neurons leads to impaired lysosomal degradation capacity. This 
lysosomal dysfunction results in accumulation of α-synuclein and toxicity in 
primary cortical neurons. Importantly, silencing of endogenous α-synuclein 
attenuated the toxicity in ATP13A2-depleted neurons, suggesting that loss of 
ATP13A2 mediates neurotoxicity at least in part via the accumulation of 
α-synuclein. Our findings implicate lysosomal dysfunction in the pathogenesis of 
Kufor-Rakeb syndrome and suggest that upregulation of lysosomal function and 
downregulation of α-synuclein represent important therapeutic strategies for 
this disorder.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.5575-11.2012
PMCID: PMC3462811
PMID: 22442086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2788. Neurology. 2012 May 1;78(18):1434-40. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318253d54b. Epub 
2012 Mar 21.

Cognitive performance of GBA mutation carriers with early-onset PD: the CORE-PD 
study.

Alcalay RN(1), Caccappolo E, Mejia-Santana H, Tang M-, Rosado L, Orbe Reilly M, 
Ruiz D, Ross B, Verbitsky M, Kisselev S, Louis E, Comella C, Colcher A, Jennings 
D, Nance M, Bressman S, Scott WK, Tanner C, Mickel S, Andrews H, Waters C, Fahn 
S, Cote L, Frucht S, Ford B, Rezak M, Novak K, Friedman JH, Pfeiffer R, Marsh L, 
Hiner B, Siderowf A, Payami H, Molho E, Factor S, Ottman R, Clark LN, Marder K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University, New York, NY, USA. rna2104@columbia.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2012 May 1;78(18):1372-3.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the cognitive phenotype of glucocerebrosidase (GBA) 
mutation carriers with early-onset Parkinson disease (PD).
METHODS: We administered a neuropsychological battery and the University of 
Pennsylvania Smell Identification Test (UPSIT) to participants in the CORE-PD 
study who were tested for mutations in PARKIN, LRRK2, and GBA. Participants 
included 33 GBA mutation carriers and 60 noncarriers of any genetic mutation. 
Primary analyses were performed on 26 GBA heterozygous mutation carriers without 
additional mutations and 39 age- and PD duration-matched noncarriers. Five 
cognitive domains, psychomotor speed, attention, memory, visuospatial function, 
and executive function, were created from transformed z scores of individual 
neuropsychological tests. Clinical diagnoses (normal, mild cognitive impairment 
[MCI], dementia) were assigned blind to genotype based on neuropsychological 
performance and functional impairment as assessed by the Clinical Dementia 
Rating (CDR) score. The association between GBA mutation status and 
neuropsychological performance, CDR, and clinical diagnoses was assessed.
RESULTS: Demographics, UPSIT, and Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale-III 
performance did not differ between GBA carriers and noncarriers. GBA mutation 
carriers performed more poorly than noncarriers on the Mini-Mental State 
Examination (p = 0.035), and on the memory (p = 0.017) and visuospatial (p = 
0.028) domains. The most prominent differences were observed in nonverbal memory 
performance (p < 0.001). Carriers were more likely to receive scores of 0.5 or 
higher on the CDR (p < 0.001), and a clinical diagnosis of either MCI or 
dementia (p = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: GBA mutation status may be an independent risk factor for cognitive 
impairment in patients with PD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e318253d54b
PMCID: PMC3345785
PMID: 22442429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2789. Presse Med. 2012 Nov;41(11):1092-7. doi: 10.1016/j.lpm.2012.02.006. Epub 2012 
Mar 22.

[Orthostatic hypotension: epidemiology and mechanisms].

[Article in French]

Monsuez JJ(1), Beddok R, Mahiou A, Ngaleu A, Belbachir S.

Author information:
(1)Hôpitaux universitaires de Paris-Seine, Saint-Denis, hôpital René-Muret, 
service de cardiologie, 93270 Sevran, France. jean-jacques.monsuez@rmb.aphp.fr

Orthostatic hypotension (OH) is defined as a decrease in systolic blood pressure 
more than or equal to 20 mm Hg or diastolic more than or equal to 10 mm Hg 
within three minutes of standing up. Discharge records for 0.4% of all 
hospitalizations include OH as a diagnosis. The prevalence of OH is related to 
aging, reaching 5 to 30% in unselected elders aged more than or equal to 65 
years, especially those treated for hypertension and/or living in nursing homes 
or health care facilities. OH is associated with an increased risk of syncope 
and subsequent cardiovascular mortality. Standing results in pooling of 25-30% 
of blood in the lower extremities and splanchnic-mesenteric circulation, thereby 
reducing venous return, ventricular filling, cardiac output and, in turn, blood 
pressure. Compensatory mechanisms to maintain BP involve the baroreflex and the 
sympathetic nervous system (SNS). Failure of SNS results in neurogenic OH, which 
is severe in multiple system atrophy with dysautonomia (Shy-Drager syndrome), 
also commonly seen in patients with Lewy body dementia and in patients with 
Parkinson's disease, in whom OH is less severe and occurs later. Conversely, SNS 
function is preserved in secondary OH associated with hypovolemia, anemia, 
antihypertensive or psychotropic drugs. Clinical manifestations and tolerance of 
OH depends on its severity and on cerebral blood flow autoregulation, which both 
impact on the risk of syncope, trauma and subsequent prognosis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

DOI: 10.1016/j.lpm.2012.02.006
PMID: 22445241 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2790. Commun Integr Biol. 2011 Nov 1;4(6):731-4. doi: 10.4161/cib.17603.

Does the cycad genotoxin MAM implicated in Guam ALS-PDC induce disease-relevant 
changes in mouse brain that includes olfaction?

Kisby G, Palmer V, Lasarev M, Fry R, Iordanov M, Magun E, Samson L, Spencer P.

Comment in
    PLoS ONE. 6:e20911.

Western Pacific amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and parkinsonism-dementia 
complex (PDC), a prototypical neurodegenerative disease (tauopathy) affecting 
distinct genetic groups with common exposure to neurotoxic chemicals in cycad 
seed, has many features of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases (AD), including 
early olfactory dysfunction. Guam ALS-PDC incidence correlates with cycad flour 
content of cycasin and its aglycone methylazoxymethanol (MAM), which produces 
persistent DNA damage (O(6)-methylguanine) in the brains of mice lacking 
O(6)-methylguanine methyltransferase (Mgmt(-/-)). We described in Mgmt(-/-)mice 
up to 7 days post-MAM treatment that brain DNA damage was linked to brain gene 
expression changes found in human neurological disease, cancer, and skin and 
hair development. This addendum reports 6 months post-MAM treatment- related 
brain transcriptional changes as well as elevated mitogen activated protein 
kinases and increased caspase-3 activity, both of which are involved in tau 
aggregation and neurofibrillary tangle formation typical of ALS-PDC and AD, plus 
transcriptional changes in olfactory receptors. Does cycasin act as a "slow 
(geno)toxin" in ALS-PDC?

DOI: 10.4161/cib.17603
PMCID: PMC3306344
PMID: 22446540


2791. Neurogenetics. 2012 May;13(2):133-40. doi: 10.1007/s10048-012-0318-9. Epub 2012 
Mar 25.

JPH3 repeat expansions cause a progressive akinetic-rigid syndrome with severe 
dementia and putaminal rim in a five-generation African-American family.

Schneider SA(1), Marshall KE, Xiao J, LeDoux MS.

Author information:
(1)Schilling Section of Clinical and Molecular Neurogenetics at the Department 
of Neurology, University of Lubeck, 23568 Lubeck, Germany.

We report the clinical, neuropsychological, genetic, and radiological features 
of a large five-generation African-American kindred from the southern USA 
presenting with a progressive akinetic-rigid syndrome and severe dementia, but 
clinically insignificant chorea, due to mutations in junctophillin 3 (JPH3). 
Overt disease onset was in the mid-20s to late 30s with cognitive decline, REM 
sleep disturbance, or psychiatric features, followed by development of a 
levodopa-unresponsive akinetic-rigid motor syndrome. Dystonia and myoclonus were 
present in some subjects. A bedridden, nonverbal severely akinetic-rigid state 
developed within 10 to 15 years after onset. CTG repeat expansions ranged from 
47 to 53. Imaging revealed generalized cerebral atrophy with severe striatal 
involvement and putaminal rim hyperintensity. Analysis of our kindred indicates 
that JPH3 mutations should be considered in the differential diagnosis of 
early-onset dementia and hypokinetic-rigid syndromes in individuals of African 
descent. Moreover, chorea may not be overtly manifest at presentation or during 
significant parts of the disease course.

DOI: 10.1007/s10048-012-0318-9
PMCID: PMC3370891
PMID: 22447335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure None of the authors have a conflict 
of interest. Dr. LeDoux serves on the speakers’ bureaus for Lundbeck, Merz, and 
Teva Neuroscience; serves as an advisor for Merz; serves on the Xenazine 
Advisory Board for Lundbeck, Inc., and the Botulinum Toxin Type A Advisory Board 
for Allergan; receives research support from the National Institutes of Health, 
Dystonia Medical Research Foundation, and Merz; and receives royalty payments 
for Animal Models of Movement Disorders (Elsevier).


2792. Mov Disord. 2012 May;27(6):677-89. doi: 10.1002/mds.24957. Epub 2012 Mar 22.

REM sleep behavior disorder: motor manifestations and pathophysiology.

Arnulf I(1).

Author information:
(1)Sleep disorders unit, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Pierre and Marie Curie 
University, Inserm U975, CRICM, Paris, France. isabelle.arnulf@psl.aphp.fr

Patients with REM sleep behavior disorder (RBD) enact violent dreams during REM 
sleep in the absence of normal muscle atonia. This disorder is highly frequent 
in patients with synucleinopathies (60%-100% of patients) and rare in patients 
with other neurodegenerative disorders. The disorder is detected by interview 
plus video and sleep monitoring. Abnormal movements expose the patients and bed 
partners to a high risk of injury and sleep disruption. The disorder is usually 
alleviated with melatonin and clonazepam. Limb movements are mainly minor, 
jerky, fast, pseudohallucinatory, and repeated, with a limp wrist during 
apparently grasping movements, although body jerks and complex violent (fights) 
and nonviolent culturally acquired behaviors are also observed. Notably, 
parkinsonism disappears during RBD-associated complex behaviors in patients with 
Parkinson's disease and with multiple system atrophy, suggesting that the upper 
motor stream bypasses the basal ganglia during REM sleep. Longitudinal studies 
show that idiopathic RBD predisposes patients to later develop Parkinson's 
disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and, more rarely, multiple system atrophy, 
with a rate of conversion of 46% within 5 years. During this time window, 
patients concomitantly develop nonmotor signs (decreased olfaction and color 
vision, orthostatic hypotension, altered visuospatial abilities, increased harm 
avoidance) and have abnormal test results (decreased putamen dopamine uptake, 
slower EEG). Patients with idiopathic RBD have higher and faster risk for 
conversion to Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies if abnormalities 
in dopamine transporter imaging, transcranial sonography, olfaction, and color 
vision are found at baseline. They constitute a highly specific target for 
testing neuroprotective agents.

Copyright © 2012 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.24957
PMID: 22447623 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2793. Neurosci Lett. 2012 Apr 25;515(1):97-101. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.03.037. 
Epub 2012 Mar 21.

Ibuprofen ameliorates protein aggregation and astrocytic gliosis, but not 
cognitive dysfunction, in a transgenic mouse expressing dementia with Lewy 
bodies-linked P123H β-synuclein.

Sekiyama K(1), Fujita M, Sekigawa A, Takamatsu Y, Waragai M, Takenouchi T, 
Sugama S, Hashimoto M.

Author information:
(1)Division of Sensory and Motor Systems, Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of 
Medical Science, Tokyo 156-0057, Japan.

Epidemiological studies have shown that ibuprofen, a non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory drug, reduces the risk for neurodegenerative diseases such as 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD). In this context, it has 
been shown that chronic treatment with ibuprofen improves cognitive dysfunction 
and histopathologic outcome in mouse models of AD. However, the therapeutic 
effects of ibuprofen in animal models of PD and related synucleinopathies such 
as dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) have not been investigated. Therefore, the 
main objective of this study was to determine if ibuprofen ameliorates 
neuropathology and cognitive dysfunction in a transgenic (tg) mouse expressing 
DLB-linked P123H β-synuclein. P123H β-synuclein tg mice and their non-tg 
littermates aged 3 months were given ibuprofen in their diet (n=13). Controls 
did not receive ibuprofen (n=11). After 3 months, the mice were evaluated using 
a Morris water maze test, followed by neuropathological analyses. Compared to 
control P123H β-synuclein tg mice, P123H β-synuclein tg mice that received 
ibuprofen had significantly reduced protein aggregation and astrogliosis. 
However, ibuprofen treatment produced little improvement of the learning 
disability of P123H β-synuclein tg mice in the Morris water maze test. These 
results suggest that amelioration of neuropathologies by ibuprofen does not 
necessarily lead to improved cognitive function in synucleinopathies such as 
DLB.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2012.03.037
PMID: 22459406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2794. Neurobiol Aging. 2012 Aug;33(8):1850.e1-11. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.02.017. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

Screening for C9ORF72 repeat expansion in FTLD.

Ferrari R(1), Mok K, Moreno JH, Cosentino S, Goldman J, Pietrini P, Mayeux R, 
Tierney MC, Kapogiannis D, Jicha GA, Murrell JR, Ghetti B, Wassermann EM, 
Grafman J, Hardy J, Huey ED, Momeni P.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, Department of Internal Medicine, Texas Tech 
University Health Sciences Center, Lubbock, TX 79430, USA.

In the present study we aimed to determine the prevalence of C9ORF72 GGGGCC 
hexanucleotide expansion in our cohort of 53 frontotemporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD) patients and 174 neurologically normal controls. We identified the 
hexanucleotide repeat, in the pathogenic range, in 4 (2 bv-frontotemporal 
dementia (FTD) and 2 FTD-amyotrophic lateral sclerosis [ALS]) out of 53 patients 
and 1 neurologically normal control. Interestingly, 2 of the C9ORF72 expansion 
carriers also carried 2 novel missense mutations in GRN (Y294C) and in 
PSEN-2(I146V). Further, 1 of the C9ORF72 expansion carriers, for whom pathology 
was available, showed amyloid plaques and tangles in addition to TAR 
(trans-activation response) DNA-binding protein (TDP)-43 pathology. In summary, 
our findings suggest that the hexanucleotide expansion is probably associated 
with ALS, FTD, or FTD-ALS and occasional comorbid conditions such as Alzheimer's 
disease. These findings are novel and need to be cautiously interpreted and most 
importantly replicated in larger numbers of samples.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2012.02.017
PMCID: PMC3743244
PMID: 22459598 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2795. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2012 Feb;56(1):39-54.

Identification of biomarkers in Lewy-body disorders.

Warr L(1), Walker Z.

Author information:
(1)North Essex Partnership Foundation NHS Trust, Essex, UK.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) may account for up to 30% of all dementia cases. 
The symptoms of DLB can be difficult to disentangle from other dementia 
subtypes, particularly Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD and DLB pathologies often 
overlap within individuals. Like DLB, Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) also 
shares common features with DLB. Currently, whether an individual is diagnosed 
with PDD or DLB depends solely on the timing of symptom onset. Early, accurate 
diagnosis is needed for optimal management and treatment. It is hoped that the 
development of existing and new Lewy body disorders biomarkers will facilitate 
more accurate diagnosis. Reduced dopamine transporter levels in DLB as shown 
with [123I]FP-CIT-SPECT currently appears to be the most reliable and valid 
biomarker, although other (predominantly imaging-based) methods also appear to 
have the high sensitivity and specificity required for a good biomarker. This 
includes (in DLB compared to AD) reduced cardiac 123I-MIBG uptake, occipital 
hypometabolism on FDG-PET and preservation of medial temporal lobe structures on 
CT/MRI. Perfusion SPECT, cerebrospinal fluid protein levels (amyloid, tau and 
α-synuclein), electroencephalography, saccadic eye movement tracking and 11C-PiB 
amyloid imaging also hold promise as biomarkers in terms of differentiating DLB, 
AD, PDD and other neurodegenerative disorders, although findings are less 
consistent. Studies utilising a combination approach in which two or more 
potential biomarkers are compared seem to provide very good sensitivity and 
specificity. In general, longitudinal studies, pathological confirmation of 
diagnosis and the combined approach may hold the most promise for the 
identification of biomarkers.

PMID: 22460159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2796. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2012 Feb;56(1):55-67.

Cognitive impairment in degenerative parkinsonisms: role of radionuclide brain 
imaging.

Arnaldi D(1), Morbelli S, Morrone E, Campus C, Nobili F.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Neurophysiology, Department of Neuroscience, Ophthalmology and 
Genetics, San Martino University Hospital, Genoa, Italy.

Cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD) and atypical parkinsonian 
syndromes is gaining increased clinical significance. The neurochemical and 
neuropathological basis in the various parkinsonian forms and even in an 
individual patient are not fully elucidated yet and could be heterogeneous. Loss 
of dopaminergic, cholinergic and noradrenergic innervation has been suggested to 
be the underlying neurochemical deficits for cognitive impairment and dementia 
in PD, but the onset of cognitive impairment and the progression to dementia may 
not share the same underlying neurochemical basis. Similarly, pathological 
evidence is also heterogeneous, ranging from subcortical pathology, limbic or 
cortical Lewy body type degeneration, and Alzheimer's type pathology that can be 
found even in the same patient with PD dementia (PDD). Typically, the prototype 
of early cognitive deficit in PD is a dysexecutive syndrome, but other cognitive 
domains are more involved when dementia develops, mainly including visuospatial, 
language and memory dysfunction. Functional radionuclide neuroimaging, by means 
of single-photon emission computed tomography and positron emission tomography, 
are contributing to characterize the topographic cortical pattern of cognitive 
impairment, as well as to define the underlying neurochemical deficit. Lastly, 
the advent of amyloid PET may help clarifying the meaning of amyloid load in 
diffuse Lewy body disease and PDD. Knowing the neurochemical and 
pathophysiological substrate of cognitive deficit in patients with PD or other 
degenerative Parkinsonisms may help the clinician in understanding the clinical 
condition of an individual patient in order to plan pharmacological and 
non-pharmacological intervention. The introduction of acetylcholinesterase 
inhibitors for therapy of PDD is an example of information integration between 
clinical-neuropsychological and pathophysiological-neurochemical aspects 
obtained also with the key contribution of functional neuroimaging.

PMID: 22460160 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2797. J Am Geriatr Soc. 2012 Apr;60(4):756-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.03909.x. 
Epub 2012 Mar 29.

Age and sex variation in prevalence of chronic medical conditions in older 
residents of U.S. nursing homes.

Moore KL(1), Boscardin WJ, Steinman MA, Schwartz JB.

Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Aging of Jewish Home, San Francisco, California, USA. 
kmoore@jhsf.org

OBJECTIVES: To investigate patterns in prevalences of chronic medical conditions 
over the age span of long-term stay nursing home residents and between the sexes 
with data from the 2004 National Nursing Home Survey (NNHS).
DESIGN: Retrospective, cross-sectional study.
SETTING: U.S. nursing homes.
PARTICIPANTS: Nationally representative sample comprising 11,788 long-term stay 
residents (3,003 (25%) men, 8,785 (75%) women) aged 65 and older.
MEASUREMENTS: Clinical Classifications Software was used to group International 
Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, codes to identify the 20 
most-prevalent chronic medical conditions. SAS survey procedures were used to 
account for design effects of stratification and clustering to generate 
nationally representative estimates of prevalences of medical conditions.
RESULTS: Average age was 84, with women older than men (85 vs 81, P = .02) and 
67% of women aged 80 to 95. Women required more assistance with activities of 
daily living. The most frequent chronic medical conditions were hypertension 
(men 53%, women 56%), dementia (men 45%, women 52%), depression (men 31%, women 
37%), arthritis (men 26%, women 35%), diabetes mellitus (men 26%, women 23%), 
gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD) (men 23%, women 23%), atherosclerosis 
(men 24%, women 20%), congestive heart failure (CHF) (men 18%, women 21%), 
cerebrovascular disease (CVD) (men 24%, women 19%), and anemia (men 17%, women 
20%). Sex differences in prevalences existed for all but constipation, GERD, and 
hypertension. Diabetes mellitus, CVD, and lipid disorders decreased with age in 
men and women. Atrial fibrillation, anemia, arthritis, CHF, dementia, and 
thyroid disease increased with age in men and women. Age-related patterns 
differed between the sexes for diabetes mellitus, hypertension, and Parkinson's 
disease.
CONCLUSION: The profile of chronic medical conditions varies over the age span 
of nursing home residents and differs between men and women. This knowledge 
should guide educational and care efforts in long-term care.

© 2012, Copyright the Authors Journal compilation © 2012, The American 
Geriatrics Society.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.2012.03909.x
PMCID: PMC3387922
PMID: 22463062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: The authors do not have 
any conflict of interest related to the subject matter of the manuscript.


2798. J Alzheimers Dis. 2012;30(4):791-803. doi: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112183.

Changes in brain transcripts related to Alzheimer's disease in a model of HFE 
hemochromatosis are not consistent with increased Alzheimer's disease risk.

Johnstone DM(1), Graham RM, Trinder D, Riveros C, Olynyk JK, Scott RJ, Moscato 
P, Milward EA.

Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, The University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, NSW, Australia.

Iron abnormalities are observed in the brains of Alzheimer's disease (AD) 
patients, but it is unclear whether common disorders of systemic iron overload 
such as hemochromatosis alter risks of AD. We used microarrays and real-time 
reverse transcription-PCR to investigate changes in the brain transcriptome of 
adult Hfe-/- mice, a model of hemochromatosis, relative to age- and 
gender-matched wildtype controls. Classification by functional pathway analysis 
revealed transcript changes for various genes important in AD. There were 
decreases of up to 9-fold in transcripts for amyloid-β protein precursor, tau, 
apolipoprotein E, presenilin 1, and various other γ-secretase components, as 
well as Notch signaling pathway molecules. This included decreased transcripts 
for 'hairy and enhancer of split' Hes1 and Hes5, downstream targets of Notch 
canonical signaling. The reductions in Hes1 and Hes5 transcripts provide 
evidence that the changes in levels of transcripts for γ-secretase components 
and Notch signaling genes have functional consequences. The effects appeared 
relatively specific for AD in that few genes pertaining to other important 
neurodegenerative diseases, notably Parkinson's disease and Huntington's 
disease, or to inflammation, oxidative stress, or apoptosis, showed altered 
transcript levels. The observed effects on AD-related gene transcripts do not 
appear to be consistent with increased AD risk in HFE hemochromatosis and might, 
if anything, be predicted to protect against AD to some extent. As Hfe-/- mice 
did not have higher brain iron levels than wildtype controls, these studies 
highlight the need for further research in models of more severe hemochromatosis 
with brain iron loading.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-2012-112183
PMID: 22466002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2799. Mayo Clin Proc. 2012 Apr;87(4):335-40. doi: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2011.12.016.

High school football and risk of neurodegeneration: a community-based study.

Savica R(1), Parisi JE, Wold LE, Josephs KA, Ahlskog JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA. 
savica.rodolfo@mayo.edu

OBJECTIVE: To assess whether high school football played between 1946 and 1956, 
when headgear was less protective than today, was associated with development of 
neurodegenerative diseases later in life.
METHODS: All male students who played football from 1946 to 1956 in the high 
schools of Rochester, Minnesota, plus a non-football-playing referent group of 
male students in the band, glee club, or choir were identified. Using the 
records-linkage system of the Rochester Epidemiology Project, we reviewed (from 
October 31, 2010, to March 30, 2011) all available medical records to assess 
later development of dementia, Parkinson disease (PD), or amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS). We also compared the frequency of dementia, PD, or ALS with 
incidence data from the general population of Olmsted County, Minnesota.
RESULTS: We found no increased risk of dementia, PD, or ALS among the 438 
football players compared with the 140 non-football-playing male classmates. 
Parkinson disease and ALS were slightly less frequent in the football group, 
whereas dementia was slightly more frequent, but not significantly so. When we 
compared these results with the expected incidence rates in the general 
population, only PD was significantly increased; however, this was true for both 
groups, with a larger risk ratio in the non-football group.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that high school students who played American 
football from 1946 to 1956 did not have an increased risk of later developing 
dementia, PD, or ALS compared with non-football-playing high school males, 
despite poorer equipment and less regard for concussions compared with today and 
no rules prohibiting head-first tackling (spearing).

Copyright © 2012 Mayo Foundation for Medical Education and Research. Published 
by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mayocp.2011.12.016
PMCID: PMC3538465
PMID: 22469346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2800. Curr Alzheimer Res. 2012 Jul;9(6):709-17. doi: 10.2174/156720512801322537.

A population-based clinicopathological study in the oldest-old: the 90+ study.

Corrada MM(1), Berlau DJ, Kawas CH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 
92697-1400, USA. mcorrada@uci.edu

Population-based longitudinal clinicopathological studies provide an ideal 
opportunity to study a variety of risk and protective factors in relation to 
pathology associated with dementia in individuals who are representative of the 
general population. The 90+ Study is a population-based study designed 
specifically to study aging and dementia as well as its neuropathological 
correlates in participants 90 years of age and older. We present demographic and 
pathological data on the first 104 participants to come to autopsy from the 
brain donation component of the study, The 90+ Autopsy Study. Cognitive 
diagnosis was assigned according to diagnostic and statistical manual 4th 
edition criteria for dementia and neuropathological diagnoses were made 
according to the Consortium to Establish a Registry for Alzheimer's Disease 
protocol. Dementia was present in 61% of autopsied participants, the majority of 
whom were diagnosed with Alzheimer's disease (85%). Many different types of 
pathology typically associated with dementia were common in the oldest-old, and 
included neurofibrillary tangles, neuritic plaques, diffuse plaques, Lewy 
bodies, hippocampal sclerosis, and cerebral infarctions. Most types of pathology 
were more frequently found in participants suffering from dementia but there was 
extensive overlap in pathology among those with and without dementia. In 
addition, 22% of demented participants did not have sufficient pathology to 
account for their cognitive loss. Our results highlight the poor associations 
between these common pathological lesions and dementia in the oldest-old and the 
importance of considering many different types of pathology, possibly including 
some yet to be identified, in order to account for all dementias in the 
oldest-old.

DOI: 10.2174/156720512801322537
PMCID: PMC3409303
PMID: 22471863 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have no potential conflicts of 
interest relevant to the subject matter discussed in this manuscript.


