501. Science. 1998 Nov 6;282(5391):1072-4. doi: 10.1126/science.282.5391.1072.

Experimental therapeutics of neurodegenerative disorders: unmet needs.

Shoulson I(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester Medical Center, School of 
Medicine and Dentistry, Suite 212, 1351 Mt. Hope Avenue, Rochester, NY 14620, 
USA.

Viewpoint The experimental therapeutics of neurodegenerative disorders is in its 
infancy, but neuroprotective strategies are already being applied in healthy 
persons at high risk of developing disease as well as in patients with manifest 
illness. Knowledge of etiology and pathogenesis, improved design of clinical 
trials, the development of biological markers, the advent of genetic animal 
models, the enhanced identification of susceptibility factors, and more 
effective drug delivery-such advances have improved the prospects for 
forestalling onset of illness and clinical decline in the growing numbers of 
people affected by neurodegenerative disorders.

DOI: 10.1126/science.282.5391.1072
PMID: 9804537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


502. Neurologia. 1998 Aug-Sep;13(7):335-48.

[Neurosomnology: in the cutting-edge of neurology].

[Article in Spanish]

Culebras A(1).

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Syracuse, Nueva 
York.

The surnames that honor the title of this work belong to individuals fascinated 
by the function of sleep and its integration in neurological illness. Sleep is a 
function of the brain exhibiting changes with age that are predictable. There 
are two major manifestations of sleep alteration: somnolence and insomnia. A 
rich variety of sleep alterations is associated with numerous neurological 
disorders. Some occur acutely like in stroke whereas others appear gradually 
like those associated with Parkinson's disease and the dementias. The pathology 
of sleep is a new area of involvement in the scope of practice of the 
neurologist. In the future the sleep specialist will also intervene in the 
prevention of mental fatigue and traffic accidents and in the promotion of sleep 
hygiene in primary medicine.

PMID: 9810796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


503. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1998 Nov;65(5):804-5. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.65.5.804.

Neuropsychological prediction of dementia in Parkinson's disease.

Hughes TA, Read L, Mindham RH.

Comment on
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1998 Feb;64(2):178-83.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.65.5.804
PMCID: PMC2170356
PMID: 9810972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


504. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1998 Oct;13(10):667-73. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1099-1166(1998100)13:10<667::aid-gps839>3.0.co;2-g.

Impact of chronic systemic and neurological disorders on disability, depression 
and life satisfaction.

Broe GA(1), Jorm AF, Creasey H, Grayson D, Edelbrock D, Waite LM, Bennett H, 
Cullen JS, Casey B.

Author information:
(1)University of Sydney, Centre for Education and Research on Ageing, Concord 
Hospital, Australia.

Erratum in
    Int J Geriatr Psychiatry 1999 Jun;14(6):497-8.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the effects of a range of chronic systemic and neurological 
disorders on three life quality indicators: disability, depressive symptoms and 
life satisfaction.
METHODS: As part of the Sydney Older Persons Study, a community survey was 
carried out with 434 non-demented people aged 75 or over living in Sydney, 
Australia. Subjects were given a medical examination covering the following 
disorders: heart disease, chronic lung disease, bone and joint disease, stroke, 
visual loss, peripheral vascular disease, obesity, other systemic diseases, gait 
ataxia, gait slowing (including Parkinsonism) and cognitive impairement short of 
dementia. They were also assessed on a clinician-rated disability scale and 
given self-report depression and life satisfaction scales.
RESULTS: Gait slowing affected all three indicators of life quality. Heart 
disease and chronic lung disease affected disability and depressive symptoms, 
but not life satisfaction. These associations were present when the effects of 
age, sex, education and all other disorders were controlled in multiple 
regression analyses. However, when disability was also controlled, none of the 
physical disorders predicted life satisfaction and only heart disease continued 
to predict depressive symptoms.
CONCLUSION: Of the physical disorders considered in the study, gait slowing, 
heart disease and chronic lung disease had the greatest impact on life quality. 
These disorders affect depressive symptoms and life satisfaction largely because 
they increase disability.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1099-1166(1998100)13:10<667::aid-gps839>3.0.co;2-g
PMID: 9818301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


505. Mov Disord. 1998 Nov;13(6):885-94. doi: 10.1002/mds.870130605.

Young-onset Parkinson's disease revisited--clinical features, natural history, 
and mortality.

Schrag A(1), Ben-Shlomo Y, Brown R, Marsden CD, Quinn N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurology, Institute of Neurology, University College, 
London, UK.

The authors report on clinical features and mortality rates in a group of 149 
patients with apparent idiopathic parkinsonism starting before the age of 40 
years. Ten had juvenile parkinsonism (JP; onset before age 21 years) and 139 had 
young-onset Parkinson's disease (YOPD; onset at age 21 to 40 years). Included 
were 60 patients originally reported 10 years ago. Fifty percent of the JP group 
had a positive family history of parkinsonism in a first-degree relative, and 
clinical presentation was heterogeneous. Mortality risk was threefold that of 
the normal population. In the YOPD group, the mortality risk was double that of 
the normal population. Poor initial response to L-dopa was a risk factor for 
early death. In two previously reported patients, the diagnosis had been changed 
to multiple system atrophy and Machado-Joseph disease. After a median disease 
duration of 18 years, cognitive impairment was found in only 19% of YOPD 
patients (13% of those younger than 60 years and 43% of those 60 years or 
older). Age was the most important factor for development of dementia, but 
female sex and positive family history of parkinsonism also had more modest 
predictive value. After a disease duration of 10 years or less, only 5% of 
patients were experiencing falls and 30% freezing, but all patients had 
developed L-dopa-related fluctuations and dyskinesias. The authors conclude that 
the mortality rate in parkinsonism starting before the age of 40 is increased in 
comparison to the normal population and is similar to the general Parkinson's 
disease population. Intellectual function and postural reflexes are usually well 
preserved for many years despite a long history of parkinsonism and the early 
and frequent occurrence of treatment complications, provided the patients remain 
biologically and chronologically young.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.870130605
PMID: 9827611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


506. Drugs Aging. 1998 Nov;13(5):341-55. doi: 10.2165/00002512-199813050-00002.

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors. A perspective on their use in the elderly.

Volz HP(1), Gleiter CH.

Author information:
(1)Hans-Berger-Kliniken, Klinik für Psychiatrie, Friedrich-Schiller-Universität 
Jena, Germany. volz@landgraf.med.uni-jena.de

Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs) are mainly used in psychiatry for the 
treatment of depressive disorders and in neurology for the treatment of 
Parkinson's disease. While the classical, nonselective and nonreversible MAOIs, 
such as phenelzine and tranylcypromine, are characterised by the risk of 
inducing a hypertensive crisis when dietary tyramine is ingested, the selective 
monoamine oxidase-B (MAO-B) inhibitor selegiline (deprenyl) and, even more so, 
the selective and reversible monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) inhibitor moclobemide, 
are free from this potential interaction. Drug tolerability data for the elderly 
show that moclobemide is one of the most well tolerated compounds. Selegiline, 
especially when used in combination with levodopa, can cause anorexia, dry 
mouth, dyskinesia and, most problematic, orthostatic hypotension. For the 
traditional MAOIs, phenelzine and tranylcypromine, published data are 
insufficient to be able to give a conclusive tolerability statement regarding 
the use of these compounds in elderly people. Although orthostatic hypotension 
occurs in most patients treated with traditional MAOIs, the incidence in elderly 
patients with depression does not appear to be greater than that reported with 
tricyclic antidepressants.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-199813050-00002
PMID: 9829163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


507. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 1998 Oct 20;118(25):3959-63.

[Emotional and cognitive disorders in Parkinson disease].

[Article in Norwegian]

Arsland D(1), Larsen JP.

Author information:
(1)Alderspsykiatrisk seksjon, Rogaland psykiatriske sjukehus, Stavanger.

The majority of patients with Parkinson's disease develop psychiatric symptoms. 
40% of the patients suffer from symptoms of depression, severely affecting daily 
functioning, motor symptoms, cognition, and quality of life for both the 
patients and their spouses. Antidepressants may alleviate the depressive 
symptoms, but treatment is complicated by complex pharmacodynamic interactions. 
Hallucinations, with or without delusions, occur in 15-20% of patients, and are 
usually caused by dopaminergic treatment. Patients suffering from dementia and 
depression are, however at particular risk of developing psychosis. Treatment 
consists of lowering the dose of dopaminergic agents, but many patients require 
symptomatic treatment with atypical antipsychotic drugs. Most Parkinsonian 
patients develop impairment of memory and executive functions, and more than 25% 
of patients develop dementia. Dementia increases with the age at onset and the 
duration of Parkinson's disease. Subcortical dementia is the most commonly 
observed syndrome, but symptoms of cortical dementia are also observed. No 
treatment is available, although cholinergic agents may prove useful.

PMID: 9830342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


508. Neuropsychol Rev. 1998 Sep;8(3):109-67. doi: 10.1023/a:1025628925796.

Differential diagnosis of the major progressive dementias and depression in 
middle and late adulthood: a summary of the literature of the early 1990s.

Rosenstein LD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Scott & White Clinic and Memorial Hospital, Temple, 
Texas 76508, USA.

There is a preponderance of research on the neuropsychology of the various 
dementias. There are also direct comparisons between two or more dementias 
available in the literature. This paper sought to summarize the most recent 
literature, primarily from 1990 through mid-1996, including recent reviews of 
the literature from previous decades. The purpose was to provide, in one 
location, a summary of neuropsychological (i.e., cognitive, motor, and 
psychiatric) characteristics of major noninfectious, progressive dementias and 
depression of middle and late adulthood. It is hoped that this review, 
particularly a summary table provided, will serve as a guide in the differential 
diagnosis of the dementias by clinicians. In addition to Alzheimer's disease, 
vascular dementias, Parkinson's disease, Lewy body dementia, Huntington's 
disease, and frontal lobe dementia, the impact of depression on cognitive 
functioning is covered given the frequency with which neuropsychologists are 
asked to differentiate depression from primary dementia.

DOI: 10.1023/a:1025628925796
PMID: 9834489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


509. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1998;154 Suppl 2:S99-105.

[Lewy body dementia].

[Article in French]

Petit H(1), Lebert F, Jacob B, Pasquier F.

Author information:
(1)Clinique Neurologique, Centre de la Mémoire, CHRU, Lille.

Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) is an entity which now fulfils clinical and 
neuropathological criteria according to international consensus guidelines 
(McKeith et al., 1996). It is now possible, in clinical practice, to consider 
the diagnosis of DLB from the beginning of the management of a demented patient. 
The clinical, diagnostic and therapeutic aspects of DLB are investigated in a 
prospective manner. Visual hallucinations, fluctuations and extrapyramidal 
symptoms seem to have, in association with the progressive cognitive decline, 
some particularities. However their specificity should be correlated with 
neuropathological data. Other symptoms, such as repeated falls or syncope, 
neuroleptic sensitivity, systematized delusions or other modalities of 
hallucinations, are probably additional arguments giving more predictive value 
to the association of the major symptoms. The role of neuropsychological 
patterns at the beginning of the cognitive decline is shown. There are some 
recent concordant results of functional imaging in DLB. The neuropathological 
aspects of DLB and the links with Parkinson pathology and especially Alzheimer 
pathology are emphasized.

PMID: 9834550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


510. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1998;54:211-9. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-7508-8_21.

Free radicals in Alzheimer's dementia: currently available therapeutic 
strategies.

Rösler M(1), Retz W, Thome J, Riederer P.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatric Department, University of Würzburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Substantial evidence now exists that oxidative stress may play an important role 
in the etiopathogenesis of DAT. The different sources of oxidative stress in DAT 
are suggesting several pharmacological opportunities for influencing the 
disease. It is possible to distinguish 2 major types of possible therapeutic 
agents according to their pharmacological point of attack. 1. Radical 
scavengers, agents directly interacting with free radicals. Candidates of this 
type are gingko biloba, vitamins A, C, E and estrogen. 2. Antioxidants, which 
are able to prevent or decrease the production of free radicals by use of 
specific neuropharmacological properties. Candidates are selegiline, a MAO-B 
inhibitor well established in the therapy of Parkinson's disease, and 
tenilsetam, which is believed to be an AGE-inhibitor. Recent in vitro studies 
have demonstrated the efficacy of both types of therapeutic agents by preventing 
or delaying oxidative neural damage. Some clinical data exist regarding the 
antidementive properties particularly in terms of gingko biloba, selegiline and 
vitamin E. The efficacy studies about these compounds seem to indicate a 
promising future strategy in the therapy of DAT. But it is too early to draw 
definite conclusions since it is well known that all of our candidate substances 
do not act specifically as radical scavengers or antioxidants.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-7508-8_21
PMID: 9850930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


511. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1998;9 Suppl 3:2-7. doi: 10.1159/000051197.

Update on diagnostic methods, natural history and outcome variables in 
Alzheimer's disease.

Gauthier S(1).

Author information:
(1)McGill Centre for Studies in Aging, Verdun, Que., Canada.

The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD) currently relies on history obtained 
from family or friends and on mental status assessment matched to National 
Institute of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke criteria. 
Progression over time may or may not be typical, suggesting alternate diagnoses 
such as Lewy body or frontotemporal dementias. Apolipoprotein E genotype does 
not appear to be useful as a diagnostic marker. The usefulness of brain imaging 
in AD must be reexamined. Critical events in the natural history of AD, such as 
institutionalization and loss of ability for self-care, could be used as end 
points. Loss of ability for instrumental tasks, such as driving, traveling 
alone, or managing finances, would be preferable for early-stage stabilization 
studies. Different symptomatic domains of AD (mood, cognition, functional 
autonomy, behavior, motoricity) can be quantified using specific outcome 
measures. Although cognitive loss has been considered a core symptom of AD from 
a regulatory perspective, loss of functional autonomy and behavioral 
disinhibition are considered more important by clinicians and families. 
Recently, the availability of new scales has led to an interest in all of these 
domains. Results from symptomatic drug studies suggest a differential effect of 
cholinesterase inhibitors on cognition versus muscarinic agonists on functional 
autonomy and behavior. Hence there is a need to measure these domains separately 
and, eventually, to attempt combination therapy. Quality of life is a difficult 
but important dimension of AD therapeutic research, and it requires further 
methodological research.

DOI: 10.1159/000051197
PMID: 9853196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


512. Behav Neurol. 1999 Jan 1;11(3):173-83.

Intellectual, mnemonic, and frontal functions in dementia with Lewy bodies: A 
comparison with early and advanced Parkinson's disease.

Downes JJ(1), Priestley NM, Doran M, Ferran J, Ghadiali E, Cooper P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Liverpool, UK. down@liverpool.ac.uk

Both Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) share a common 
neuropathological marker, the presence of Lewy bodies in brain stem and basal 
forebrain nuclei. DLB, in addition, is associated with Lewy bodies in the 
neocortex, and, in it's more common form, with Alzheimer-type pathological 
markers, particularly amyloid plaques. Published neuropsychological studies have 
focused on the differential profiles of DLB and Alzheimer's disease (AD). 
However, it is presently unclear whether DLB should be classified as a variant 
of AD or PD. In the present study we compare a healthy age-matched control group 
with three groups of patients, one with DLB, and two with PD. One of the PD 
groups was early in the course (PD-E) and the second, more advanced group 
(PD-A), was matched on severity of cognitive impairment with the DLB group. The 
results show that DLB was associated with a different pattern of 
neuropsychological impairment than the PD-A group, particularly in tests 
believed to be mediated by prefrontal cortical regions.

PMID: 22387597


513. Alzheimer Dis Assoc Disord. 1998;12 Suppl 3:S10-5.

Gene-environment interaction in late-onset Alzheimer disease: the role of 
apolipoprotein-epsilon4.

Mayeux R(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, and Taub Center for Alzheimer's Disease Research, 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, New York 
10032, USA.

PMID: 9876937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


514. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1998 Summer;11(2):98-106. doi: 
10.1177/089198879801100207.

Genetic epidemiology of Parkinson's disease.

Payami H(1), Zareparsi S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health Sciences 
University, Portland 97201-3098, USA.

The cause of Parkinson's disease (PD) is unknown. The major risk factors 
identified to date are family history, age, and elements of rural living. Nearly 
one-third of all PD cases are familial, a small subset of which appears 
autosomal dominant; however, the majority exhibit no clear inheritance pattern. 
Autosomal dominant PD is genetically heterogeneous: two PD genes have been 
mapped to chromosomes 2 and 4 and there may be additional as yet unidentified 
genes. The common forms of PD-both familial and sporadic cases-appear to involve 
a complex interplay of genetic susceptibility and environmental exposure. The 
observations that rural residence and pesticide exposure increase the risk of 
developing PD, and that a synthetic drug, 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine, can cause parkinsonism, suggest 
that at least a subset of PD may be caused by a toxin. Furthermore, modest but 
significant associations have been reported between PD susceptibility and genes 
that regulate metabolism of drugs and neurotoxins. There is also evidence for 
mitochondrial dysfunction in PD, a finding that was recently traced to anomalies 
in mitochondrial DNA. At the present time, the genetics of PD appear to be 
complex, involving multiple nuclear genes and possibly mitochondrial genes as 
well.

DOI: 10.1177/089198879801100207
PMID: 9877530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


515. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 1998 Summer;11(2):107-14. doi: 
10.1177/089198879801100208.

Clinical and genetic aspects of progressive supranuclear palsy.

Litvan I(1), Hutton M.

Author information:
(1)Defense & Veteran Head Injury Program, Henry M. Jackson Foundation, Bethesda, 
Maryland 20892-9130, USA.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) is, after Parkinson's disease, the most 
common form of degenerative parkinsonism. Several clinical features are used in 
the recognition of this disorder as well as in the differentiation from related 
disorders. Clinical criteria that could increase diagnostic accuracy in research 
studies are also emphasized. Due to a better understanding of the genetic 
aspects of PSP, recent studies have suggested that it is a recessive disorder in 
linkage disequilibrium with the tau (tau) gene, rather than a sporadic disorder. 
In addition, the recent identification of mutations in the tau gene associated 
with a similar neurodegenerative condition (frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17) has further strengthened the argument that 
tau dysfunction is somehow involved in the pathogenesis of PSP. Nongenetic 
factors that could trigger or perpetuate the cascade of events leading to 
neuronal degeneration in PSP are also reviewed.

DOI: 10.1177/089198879801100208
PMID: 9877531 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


516. Psychiatr Clin North Am. 1998 Dec;21(4):941-71, viii. doi: 
10.1016/s0193-953x(05)70051-4.

Frequently missed diagnosis in geriatric psychiatry.

Bair BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Salt Lake City VA Medical Center GRECC, Utah, USA.

Older adults are an important segment of the population that has specific health 
care needs. Their unique biopsychosocial characteristics impact the 
presentation, evaluation, and management of psychiatric illnesses. This article 
describes how common psychiatric disorders present in an aging population. 
Research in this area is relatively new and much more information is still 
needed. Close attention should be paid to new knowledge as it emerges about this 
growing population.

DOI: 10.1016/s0193-953x(05)70051-4
PMID: 9890132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


517. Arch Neurol. 1999 Jan;56(1):98-102. doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.1.98.

Clinical correlates of vascular parkinsonism.

Winikates J(1), Jankovic J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex 77030, USA.

BACKGROUND: Parkinsonism may be due to other causes besides Parkinson disease 
(PD). Vascular parkinsonism (VP) has not been well defined and the clinical 
correlates of VP have not been clarified.
OBJECTIVES: To seek evidence for or against the role of cerebrovascular disease 
in parkinsonism, and to identify clinical features that suggest a vascular 
origin.
DESIGN: Retrospective chart review of patients with parkinsonism. A vascular 
rating scale was used to identify 2 patient groups, 1 with strong evidence of 
cerebrovascular disease (VP), and 1 with idiopathic PD. Clinical features of 
parkinsonism were then compared between the 2 patient groups.
SETTING: A Movement Disorders Clinic, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Tex, 
a tertiary referral center.
PATIENTS: Three hundred forty-six patients, 69 with VP and 277 with PD.
RESULTS: The VP and PD groups were clearly differentiated in terms of evidence 
of cerebrovascular disease (P<.001 to P<.00001). Patients with VP were older, 
more likely to present with gait difficulty rather than tremor, and less likely 
to respond to the use of levodopa compared with patients with PD (P<.00001). 
Patients with VP were also significantly more likely to have predominant lower 
body involvement, postural instability, a history of falling, dementia, 
corticospinal findings, incontinence (P<.00001), and pseudobulbar effect 
(P<.05).
CONCLUSIONS: These differences in clinical features suggest a different 
pathogenesis of parkinsonism in these 2 patient groups. The strong evidence of 
cerebrovascular disease in the VP group and the differences in clinical features 
support the concept of VP as a distinct clinical entity. We conclude that 
compared with PD, patients with parkinsonism associated with vascular disease 
are more likely to present with gait difficulty and postural instability rather 
than tremor, have a history of stroke and risk factors for stroke, and fail to 
respond to levodopa therapy.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.56.1.98
PMID: 9923767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


518. J Neurol. 1999 Jan;246(1):6-15. doi: 10.1007/s004150050299.

Early diagnosis of dementia: neuropsychology.

Pasquier F(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Memory Clinic, Centre Hospitalier Régional et 
Universitaire, Lille, France. pasquier@chru-lille.fr

Neuropsychology contributes greatly to the diagnosis of dementia. Cognitive 
deficits can be detected several years before the clinical diagnosis of 
dementia. The neuropsychological profile may indicate the underlying 
neuropathology. Neuropsychological assessment at an early stage of dementia has 
two goals: (a) to determine a memory disorder, not always associated with a 
memory complaint, and (b) to characterize the memory disorder in light of the 
cognitive neuropsychology and to assess other cognitive (and noncognitive) 
functions toward integrating the memory disorder in a syndrome. We review the 
global tools, the memory tests that describe the memory profile and indicate the 
underlying pathology, the assessment of other cognitive functions, and the 
neuropsychological patterns of typical Alzheimer's disease, frontotemporal 
dementia, primary progressive aphasia, semantic dementia, Lewy body dementia, 
subcortical dementia, and vascular dementia. These patterns must be interpreted 
in the light of the history, rate of progression, imaging results, and nature of 
existing behavioral disturbances. Moreover, there may be overlap between two or 
more pathologies, which complicates the diagnostic process. Follow-up of 
patients is necessary to improve diagnostic accuracy.

DOI: 10.1007/s004150050299
PMID: 9987708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


519. Neurology. 1999 Feb;52(3):541-6. doi: 10.1212/wnl.52.3.541.

Motor correlates of occipital glucose hypometabolism in Parkinson's disease 
without dementia.

Bohnen NI(1), Minoshima S, Giordani B, Frey KA, Kuhl DE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, The University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 
48109-0028, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether occipital reduction in regional cerebral glucose 
metabolism in PD reflects retinal versus nigrostriatal dopaminergic 
degeneration. We hypothesized that occipital glucose metabolic reduction should 
be symmetric if parkinsonian retinopathy is responsible for the reduction.
METHODS: PD patients without dementia (n = 29; age 63 +/- 10 years) and normal 
controls (n = 27; age 60 +/- 12 years) underwent [18F]fluorodeoxyglucose PET 
imaging. Regional cerebral glucose metabolic rates were assessed quantitatively.
RESULTS: When compared with normal controls, PD patients showed most severe 
glucose metabolic reduction in the primary visual cortex (mean -15%, p < 0.001). 
Occipital glucose metabolic reduction was greater in the hemisphere 
contralateral to the side of the body affected initially or more severely in PD. 
There was an inverse correlation between side-to-side asymmetries in 
finger-tapping performance and occipital glucose metabolic reduction (r = -0.45, 
p < 0.05; n = 28). The correlation was strongest in patients with a relatively 
early stage of PD with more unilateral motor impairment (Hoehn and Yahr stage I, 
r = -0.74, p < 0.01; n = 10).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate a pathophysiologic association between 
nigrostriatal dysfunction and occipital glucose metabolic reduction in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.52.3.541
PMID: 10025784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


520. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1999 Mar-Apr;10(2):97-103. doi: 10.1159/000017108.

The prevalence, assessment and associations of falls in dementia with Lewy 
bodies and Alzheimer's disease.

Ballard CG(1), Shaw F, Lowery K, McKeith I, Kenny R.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Royal Victoria Infirmary, University of 
Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Falls were assessed for 3 months using a daily fall diary in 65 (30 dementia 
with Lewy bodies, DLB; 35 Alzheimer's disease, AD) dementia patients from a case 
register, diagnosed using operationalised clinical criteria, with established 
accuracy against post-mortem. Multiple falls (>5) occurred in 37% of DLB 
patients and 6% of those with AD, often resulting in injury. None of the 
standard risk assessment tools identified fallers, but they did identify 
multiple fallers. More detailed evaluation methods examining gait patterns, sway 
and neurovascular instability were not helpful. Multiple falls were associated 
with DLB, parkinsonism, previous falls, greater impairment of activities of 
daily living and older age. Falls are particularly common in DLB sufferers and 
may aid diagnosis. Treatment studies evaluating fall reduction strategies are a 
priority.

DOI: 10.1159/000017108
PMID: 10026382 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


521. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 1999 Mar-Apr;10(2):158-65. doi: 10.1159/000017098.

Oxidation of cytosolic proteins and expression of creatine kinase BB in frontal 
lobe in different neurodegenerative disorders.

Aksenova MV(1), Aksenov MY, Payne RM, Trojanowski JQ, Schmidt ML, Carney JM, 
Butterfield DA, Markesbery WR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY, USA.

The presence of the biomarkers of oxidative damage, protein carbonyl formation 
and the inactivation of oxidatively sensitive brain creatine kinase (CK BB, 
cytosolic isoform), were studied in frontal lobe autopsy specimens obtained from 
patients with different age-related neurodegenerative diseases: Alzheimer's 
disease (AD), Pick's disease (PkD), diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD), 
Parkinson's disease (PD), and age-matched control subjects. The CK activity was 
significantly reduced in the frontal lobe of AD, PkD and DLBD subjects, and CK 
BB-specific mRNA was significantly reduced in AD and DLBD. Protein carbonyl 
content was significantly increased in AD, PkD and DLBD. The results of this 
study confirm that the presence of biomarkers of oxidative damage is related to 
the presence of histopathological markers of neurodegeneration. Our data suggest 
that oxidative damage contributes to the development of the symptoms of frontal 
dysfunction in AD, PkD and DLBD. The development of frontal dysfunction in 
idiopathic PD might be secondary to oxidative damage and neuronal loss primarily 
located in the nigrostriatal system. The results of CK BB expression analysis 
demonstrate that the loss of the isoenzyme in different neurodegenerative 
diseases is likely the consequence of its posttranslational modification, 
possibly oxidative damage. Changes in CK BB expression may be an early indicator 
of oxidative stress in neurons.

DOI: 10.1159/000017098
PMID: 10026391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


522. Drugs Aging. 1999 Jan;14(1):41-54. doi: 10.2165/00002512-199914010-00003.

Behavioural problems associated with dementia: the role of newer antipsychotics.

Stoppe G(1), Brandt CA, Staedt JH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Georg-August-University, Goettingen, Germany. 
gstoppe@gwdg.de

Behavioural disorders are a common feature in dementia, especially in the later 
stages of the disease. The most frequent disorders are agitation, aggression, 
paranoid delusions, hallucinations, sleep disorders, including nocturnal 
wandering, incontinence and (stereotyped) vocalisations or screaming. 
Behavioural disorders, rather than cognitive disorders, are the main reason why 
caregivers place patients with dementia in a nursing home. However, although 
behavioural disorders are important, there is still no international agreement 
with respect to the description and definition of symptoms and syndromes. This 
also holds true for the wide variety of scales for quantification and 
measurement of behavioural disorders. Drug therapy should be considered after 
possible underlying causes such as physical illness, drug adverse effects and 
environmental stressors have been ruled out, or specifically addressed, and a 
behavioural approach has also failed. This article briefly reviews the evidence 
for non-antipsychotic drug therapies, which include a variety of substances. 
However, antipsychotics are the group of drugs which have been most frequently 
studied for the treatment of behavioural syndromes in dementia. Drug responsive 
symptoms include anxiety, verbal and physical agitation, hallucinations, 
delusions, uncooperativeness and hostility, whereas wandering, hoarding, 
unsociability, poor self-care, screaming and other stereotyped behaviour seem to 
be unresponsive to all drugs. Although the use of classical antipsychotics is 
limited by extrapyramidal symptoms, anticholinergic adverse effects, sedation 
and postural hypotension, the newer antipsychotics offer the chance of a better 
risk:benefit ratio. This article reviews the small amount of data published on 
the use of the newer antipsychotics, and concludes that risperidone at low 
dosages (0.5 to 2 mg/day) seems to be especially useful for the treatment of 
behavioural symptoms in dementia because of its negligible anticholinergic 
adverse effects. The use of clozapine is limited by its anticholinergic 
activity, at least in dementia of the Alzheimer and Lewy body types. However, in 
patients with psychosis arising from Parkinson's disease it seems to be the drug 
of choice, and similar activity is likely for olanzapine. There are no published 
data on other newer drugs, such as sertindole, quetiapine or ziprasidone. Future 
studies should also address questions of dementia heterogeneity and should 
compare different drug treatments and treatment combinations.

DOI: 10.2165/00002512-199914010-00003
PMID: 10069407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


523. Biol Psychiatry. 1999 Feb 15;45(4):426-9. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00060-2.

CYP2D6 polymorphisms in Alzheimer's disease, with and without extrapyramidal 
signs, showing no apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 effect modification.

Cervilla JA(1), Russ C, Holmes C, Aitchison K, Smith CA, Powell J, Lovestone S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of Psychiatry, London, United 
Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Allelic variation at the CYP2D6 gene has been reported to be 
associated with Parkinsons' disease (PD) and Lewy body dementia (LBD), but not 
with Alzheimer's disease (AD). AD has been associated with apolipoprotein E 
(apoE) epsilon 4 allele loading.
METHODS: We examined CYP2D6 and apoE polimorphisms in a sample of 259 patients 
with dementia, 210 of whom had a diagnosis of AD, and 107 healthy controls.
RESULTS: We found that the allelic frequency in our AD sample did not vary from 
that in the controls. The debrisoquine hydroxylase poor metabolize phenotype was 
not more prevalent among AD cases than among controls in contrast to that 
reported for PD and LBD. We also found that CYP2D6 status does not modify the 
risk effect for AD conferred by apoE epsilon 4 alleles.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide some support to the notion that, at a 
genetic level, at least at this locus, AD could be distinct from PD and LBD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(98)00060-2
PMID: 10071712 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


524. Neurology. 1999 Mar 10;52(4):719-24. doi: 10.1212/wnl.52.4.719.

Risk of Alzheimer's disease in relatives of Parkinson's disease patients with 
and without dementia.

Marder K(1), Tang MX, Alfaro B, Mejia H, Cote L, Louis E, Stern Y, Mayeux R.

Author information:
(1)Gertrude H. Sergievsky Center, Department of Neurology, College of Physicians 
and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2000 Mar 14;54(5):1208-9.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether first-degree relatives of PD patients with 
dementia were at increased risk for the development of AD compared with 
first-degree relatives of nondemented PD patients and nondemented normal 
subjects from the community.
METHODS: A structured family history interview was administered to 146 
nondemented PD patients, 120 patients with PD and dementia, and 903 normal 
subjects from the community to ascertain the presence of AD among parents and 
siblings of these subjects. Cox proportional hazards models with double 
censoring techniques for missing information were used to model the risk of AD 
among relatives.
RESULTS: No increase in risk of AD was found among parents of patients with PD 
and dementia or parents of nondemented PD patients compared with parents of 
normal subjects. However, siblings of demented PD patients were three times as 
likely (relative risk [RR] = 3.2, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.1 to 9.4, p < 
0.04) as siblings of normal subjects to develop AD. When only siblings >65 years 
of age were considered, there was a fivefold increase in risk of AD among 
siblings of demented PD patients compared with siblings of normal subjects (RR = 
4.9, 95% CI = 1.1 to 21.4, p < 0.03). The risk of AD was also increased for 
female relatives, regardless of whether the woman was a relative of a demented 
PD patient, a nondemented PD patient, or a normal subject. Ethnicity and APOE 
genotype did not affect dementia status among relatives.
CONCLUSIONS: The increased risk of AD in siblings of demented PD patients 
compared with siblings of normal subjects supports the possibility of familial 
aggregation of AD and PD with dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.52.4.719
PMID: 10078716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


525. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1999 Mar;47(3):319-22. doi: 
10.1111/j.1532-5415.1999.tb02995.x.

The effect of major depression on functional status in patients with coronary 
artery disease.

Steffens DC(1), O'Connor CM, Jiang WJ, Pieper CF, Kuchibhatla MN, Arias RM, Look 
A, Davenport C, Gonzalez MB, Krishnan KR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Duke University Medical 
Center, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To examine the effect of major depression on reported functional 
status in a group of patients with coronary artery disease (CAD).
SETTING: An inpatient cardiology service.
PARTICIPANTS: Three hundred thirty-five inpatients with coronary artery disease 
who were free of dementia, Parkinson's disease, and other primary neurological 
illnesses.
MEASUREMENTS: Duke Depression Evaluation Schedule, a structured psychiatric 
interview which included the Diagnostic Interview Schedule depression subscale, 
the Cumulative Illness Rating Scale, and two scales for measuring instrumental 
and self-maintenance activities of daily living.
RESULTS: Twenty-seven subjects met DSM-IV criteria for major depression. 
Compared with subjects without major depression, depressed subjects were more 
than twice as likely to report a self-maintenance ADL deficit and were 
significantly more likely to report an IADL deficit than were nondepressed 
subjects (93 vs 71%). In regression models, female gender, older age, greater 
medical illness severity, and presence of major depression were significant 
predictors of self-maintenance ADL disability; and female gender, older age, 
greater medical severity, and presence of major depression significantly 
predicted greater IADL impairment.
CONCLUSION: The presence of major depression was associated with functional 
disability in patients with CAD. Further research is needed to clarify whether 
antidepressant treatment significantly impacts both affective symptoms and 
functional status in patients with coronary heart disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1999.tb02995.x
PMID: 10078894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


526. Nat Med. 1999 Apr;5(4):448-53. doi: 10.1038/7449.

Environmental enrichment inhibits spontaneous apoptosis, prevents seizures and 
is neuroprotective.

Young D(1), Lawlor PA, Leone P, Dragunow M, During MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Auckland School of Medicine, 
New Zealand.

The mammalian brain has a high degree of plasticity, with dentate granule cell 
neurogenesis and glial proliferation stimulated by an enriched environment 
combining both complex inanimate and social stimulation. Moreover, rodents 
exposed to an enriched environment both before and after a cerebral insult show 
improved cognitive performance. One of the most robust associations of 
environmental enrichment is improved learning and memory in the Morris water 
maze, a spatial task that mainly involves the hippocampus. Furthermore, clinical 
evidence showing an association between higher educational attainment and 
reduced risk of Alzheimer and Parkinson-related dementia indicates that a 
stimulating environment has positive effects on cerebral health that may provide 
some resilience to cerebral insults. Here we show that in addition to its 
effects on neurogenesis, an enriched environment reduces spontaneous apoptotic 
cell death in the rat hippocampus by 45%. Moreover, these environmental 
conditions protect against kainate-induced seizures and excitotoxic injury. The 
enriched environment induces expression of glial-derived neurotrophic factor and 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and increases phosphorylation of the 
transcription factor cyclic-AMP response element binding protein, indicating 
that the influence of the environment on spontaneous apoptosis and cerebral 
resistance to insults may be mediated through transcription factor activation 
and induction of growth factor expression.

DOI: 10.1038/7449
PMID: 10202938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


527. Nat Med. 1999 Apr;5(4):454-7. doi: 10.1038/7454.

Tau gene mutation in familial progressive subcortical gliosis.

Goedert M(1), Spillantini MG, Crowther RA, Chen SG, Parchi P, Tabaton M, Lanska 
DJ, Markesbery WR, Wilhelmsen KC, Dickson DW, Petersen RB, Gambetti P.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK.

Familial forms of frontotemporal dementias are associated with mutations in the 
tau gene. A kindred affected by progressive subcortical gliosis (PSG), a rare 
form of presenile dementia, has genetic linkage to chromosome 17q21-22. This 
kindred (PSG-1) is included in the 'frontotemporal dementias and Parkinsonism 
linked to chromosome 17' group along with kindreds affected by apparently 
different forms of atypical dementias. Some of these kindreds have mutations in 
the tau gene. We report here that PSG-1 has a tau mutation at position +16 of 
the intron after exon 10. The mutation destabilizes a predicted stem-loop 
structure and leads to an over-representation of the soluble four-repeat tau 
isoforms, which assemble into wide, twisted, ribbon-like filaments and 
ultimately result in abundant neuronal and glial tau pathology. The mutations 
associated with PSG and other atypical dementias can be subdivided into three 
groups according to their tau gene locations and effects on tau. The existence 
of tau mutations with distinct pathogenetic mechanisms may explain the 
phenotypic heterogeneity of atypical dementias that previously led to their 
classification into separate disease entities.

DOI: 10.1038/7454
PMID: 10202939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


528. Age Ageing. 1999 Jan;28(1):39-43. doi: 10.1093/ageing/28.1.39.

The detection of dementia and cognitive impairment in a community population of 
elderly people with Parkinson's disease by use of the CAMCOG neuropsychological 
test.

Hobson P(1), Meara J.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Geriatric Medicine (North Wales), Glan Clwyd 
District General Hospital, Rhyl, Denbighshire, UK.

AIM: To assess cognitive function in elderly subjects with clinically probable 
Parkinson's disease (PD).
METHODS: A community sample of 126 patients with probable PD completed the 
CAMCOG, which is the cognitive section of the Cambridge Examination for Mental 
Disorders, and the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE). The performance of the 
CAMCOG and the MMSE in detecting dementia in this subject group was compared 
with the results of applying the DSM-IV criteria for dementia to this 
population.
RESULTS: A total of 44% of the group met DSM-IV criteria for dementia, which is 
higher than most previous prevalence figures for dementia in PD. The CAMCOG was 
more sensitive than the MMSE in detecting cognitive impairment and more specific 
than the MMSE in detecting dementia as defined by DSM-IV criteria. Poorer 
performance on the CAMCOG was related to gender, social class and age (P<0.05). 
Among subjects with PD, those with dementia, as defined by DSM-IV criteria, were 
significantly older, had greater depressive symptomatology and had greater motor 
deficits. A greater proportion of the group with dementia were living in 
residential care (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: The CAMCOG appears to be a useful screening instrument for dementia 
and cognitive impairment in PD. Furthermore, it may prove helpful in detecting 
those with PD who may be at risk of developing dementia and in longitudinal 
studies of cognitive function in PD.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/28.1.39
PMID: 10203203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


529. Neuroreport. 1999 Feb 25;10(3):497-501. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199902250-00010.

A distinct familial presenile dementia with a novel missense mutation in the tau 
gene.

Iijima M(1), Tabira T, Poorkaj P, Schellenberg GD, Trojanowski JQ, Lee VM, 
Schmidt ML, Takahashi K, Nabika T, Matsumoto T, Yamashita Y, Yoshioka S, Ishino 
H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Shimane Medical University, Izumo, Japan.

We report a Japanese family with early onset hereditary frontotemporal dementia 
and a novel missense mutation (Ser305Asn) in the tau gene. The patients 
presented with personality changes followed by impaired cognition and memory as 
well as disorientation, but minimal Parkinsonism. Imaging studies showed 
fronto-temporal atrophy with ventricular dilatation more on the left, and 
postmortem examination of the brain revealed numerous neurofibrillary tangles 
(NFTs) with an unusual morphology and distribution. Silver-stained sections 
showed ring-shaped NFTs partially surrounding the nucleus that were most 
prominent in frontal, temporal, insular and postcentral cortices, as well as in 
dentate gyrus. Cortical NFTs were restricted primarily to layer II, and were 
composed of straight tubules. Numerous glial cells containing coiled bodies and 
abundant neuropil threads were detected in cerebral white matter, hippocampus, 
basal ganglia, diencephalon and brain stem, but no senile plaques or other 
diagnostic lesions were seen. Both the glial and neuronal tangles were stained 
by antibodies to phosphorylation-independent and phosphorylation-dependent 
epitopes in tau. Thus, this novel mutation causes a distinct familial tauopathy.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199902250-00010
PMID: 10208578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


530. Eur J Neurol. 1998 Sep;5(5):451-457. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.1998.550451.x.

Accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of postencephalitic parkinsonism: a 
clinicopathologic study.

Litvan I I(1), Jankovic J, Goetz CG, Wenning GK, Sastry N, Jellinger K, McKee A, 
Lai EC, Brandel JP, Verny M, Ray-Chaudhuri K, Pearce RK, Bartko JJ, Agid Y.

Author information:
(1)Neuroepidemiology Branch, National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-9130, USA.

The accuracy of the clinical diagnosis of postencephalitic parkinsonism (PEP) is 
unknown. We determined the validity of the clinical diagnosis of PEP by 
presenting 105 records with neuropathologic diagnoses of PEP (n = 7), 
progressive supranuclear palsy (n = 24), Parkinson's disease (n = 15), dementia 
with Lewy bodies (n = 14), multiple system atrophy (n = 16), corticobasal 
degeneration (n = 10), Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (n = 4), and other dementia 
disorders (n = 15), as clinical vignettes to six neurologists unaware of the 
autopsy findings. The neurologists' own clinical diagnoses were compared with 
neuropathologic diagnoses for measures of diagnostic accuracy, including 
reliability (kappa statistics), sensitivity and positive predictive values for 
the first and last visits. The group reliability for the diagnosis of PEP was 
almost perfect (kappa = 0.91, 0.9). The mean sensitivity at the first visit was 
86% (range, 71-100%) with minimal change at the last visit (83%; range, 
71-100%). Positive predictive values remained unchanged (100%). The high 
reliability, sensitivity and positive predictive values of the clinical 
diagnosis of PEP indicate that neurologists identify this disorder even when 
they report that they have never evaluated a case. In our data set, the best 
predictors for the diagnosis of PEP included onset below middle age; symptom 
duration lasting more than 10 years, and the presence of oculogyric crisis. 
History of encephalitis lethargica, present in most PEP cases, was an important 
individual diagnostic predictor. Copyright 1998 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.1998.550451.x
PMID: 10210873


531. Br J Psychiatry. 1999 Jan;174:45-50. doi: 10.1192/bjp.174.1.45.

Validity of current clinical criteria for Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia 
and dementia with Lewy bodies.

Holmes C(1), Cairns N, Lantos P, Mann A.

Author information:
(1)University of Southnampton, Thornhill Research Unit, Moorgreen Hospital, 
London.

Comment in
    Br J Psychiatry. 1999 Jun;174:562-3.

BACKGROUND: Following the success of the NINCDS-ADRDA criteria for Alzheimer's 
disease, groups interested in vascular dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies 
have now adopted similar criteria.
AIMS: To assess whether the validity of these criteria are influenced by the 
prevalence of mixed pathologies or by the prevalence rate.
METHOD: A community based post-mortem study.
RESULTS: Mixed pathologies were common (33.8%). The high specificities obtained 
for the CDLB and NINDS-AIREN criteria (1.00 and 0.95, respectively) were 
associated with low sensitivities (0.22 and 0.43, respectively). Low prevalence 
and the presence of mixed pathologies had a deleterious effect on positive 
predictive values.
CONCLUSIONS: Current clinical diagnostic criteria are good at detecting 
pathology per se but not at detecting pure pathology. A large proportion of 
subjects from the general population fulfilling probable CDLB, probable 
NINCDS-ADRDA or probable NINDS-AIREN will have mixed pathologies.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.174.1.45
PMID: 10211150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


532. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1999 Apr;58(4):335-45. doi: 
10.1097/00005072-199904000-00004.

Tau pathology in a family with dementia and a P301L mutation in tau.

Mirra SS(1), Murrell JR, Gearing M, Spillantini MG, Goedert M, Crowther RA, 
Levey AI, Jones R, Green J, Shoffner JM, Wainer BH, Schmidt ML, Trojanowski JQ, 
Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, State University of New York, Health Science Center 
at Brooklyn, 11203, USA.

Familial forms of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 
17 (FTDP-17) have recently been associated with coding region and intronic 
mutations in the tau gene. Here we report our findings on 2 affected siblings 
from a family with early-onset dementia, characterized by extensive tau 
pathology and a Pro to Leu mutation at codon 301 of tau. The proband, a 
55-year-old woman, and her 63-year-old brother died after a progressive 
dementing illness clinically diagnosed as Alzheimer disease. Their mother, 2 
sisters, maternal aunt and uncle, and several cousins were also affected. 
Autopsy in both cases revealed frontotemporal atrophy and degeneration of basal 
ganglia and substantia nigra. Sequencing of exon 10 of the tau gene revealed a C 
to T transition at codon 301, resulting in a Pro to Leu substitution. Widespread 
neuronal and glial inclusions, neuropil threads, and astrocytic plaques similar 
to those seen in corticobasal degeneration were labeled with a battery of 
antibodies to phosphorylation-dependent and phosphorylation-independent epitopes 
spanning the entire tau sequence. Isolated tau filaments had the morphology of 
narrow twisted ribbons. Sarkosyl-insoluble tau exhibited 2 major bands of 64 and 
68 kDa and a minor 72 kDa band, similar to the pattern seen in a familial 
tauopathy associated with an intronic tau mutation. These pathological tau bands 
predominantly contained the subset of tau isoforms with 4 microtubule-binding 
repeats selectively affected by the P301L missense mutation. Our findings 
emphasize the phenotypic and genetic heterogeneity of tauopathies and highlight 
intriguing links between FTDP-17 and other neurodegenerative diseases.

DOI: 10.1097/00005072-199904000-00004
PMID: 10218629 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


533. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 1999 Apr;58(4):376-88. doi: 
10.1097/00005072-199904000-00008.

Alzheimer neuropathologic alterations in aged cognitively normal subjects.

Davis DG(1), Schmitt FA, Wekstein DR, Markesbery WR.

Author information:
(1)Sanders-Brown Center on Aging, and Department of Pathology and Laboratory 
Medicine, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington 40536, USA.

The histopathologic changes distinguishing early Alzheimer disease (AD) from 
normal or pathologic aging are not clearly defined. This report describes the 
autopsy findings of 59 elderly, well-educated, volunteers. They were examined 
longitudinally with mental status testing, some for up to 8 years, as part of 
our normal aging study. This study reveals that (1) the brains of many subjects 
who did not show cognitive impairment on neuropsychologic testing contain 
abundant senile plaques (SP) and/or neurofibrillary tangles (NFT); (2) 29 
subjects met Khachaturian criteria for AD, 15 met CERAD and 7 met National 
Institute on Aging-Reagan Institute guidelines; (3) Braak and Braak staging 
method included 9 in stage IV subjects, 4 in stage V, and 1 in stage VI; (4) 
there was a progression of NFT from entorhinal cortex to hippocampus and 
amygdala as a function of age; (5) 2 subjects met criteria for a diagnosis of 
dementia with Lewy bodies but were not demented; (6) cerebral amyloid angiopathy 
was present in leptomeningeal vessels in 75% of subjects and in parenchymal 
vessels in 62% of subjects; (7) only 10 of 59 subjects (17%) had no or few 
degenerative brain changes. Our study demonstrates that the brains of a large 
percentage of cognitively normal, relatively well-educated individuals contain 
numerous degenerative changes and only a small percentage are relatively free of 
these changes.

DOI: 10.1097/00005072-199904000-00008
PMID: 10218633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


534. Semin Clin Neuropsychiatry. 1999 Jan;4(1):34-40. doi: 10.1053/SCNP00400034.

Executive function in Parkinson's disease and subcortical disorders.

Elias JW(1), Treland JE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79409-2051, USA.

Changes in cognitive function that accompany the progression of subcortical 
disorders such as Parkinson's disease are often overlooked in the early stages 
because of a "context of discovery" that accompanies the diagnostic progress. 
This article discusses the nature of that context, a subcortical cognitive 
profile, and the contribution of executive function failure to that profile. The 
utility of using brief assessments of executive function and other measures, 
such as a brief screen for apathy, are shown with Parkinson's disease patients. 
Several suggestions are provided for means by which clinicians can help 
patients, caregivers, and families adjust to patients' impairments in executive 
function.

DOI: 10.1053/SCNP00400034
PMID: 10229791 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


535. Rev Neurol. 1999 Mar 1-15;28(5):439-43.

[Cognition deterioration in Parkinson's disease: associated risk factors].

[Article in Spanish]

Errea JM(1), Ara JR.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Comarcal de Barbastro, Huesca, España.

INTRODUCTION: Frequency estimation of dementia in Parkinson's disease (PD) has 
often been the source of controversy owing to variations in the case selection 
methods and diagnosis criteria used. We examined the frequency of dementia and 
differences found in some clinical features between PD patients with or without 
cognitive impairment, to determine the risk factors for incident dementia in PD 
patients.
METHODS: A diagnosis of PD was taken according to the United Kingdom Parkinson's 
Disease Society Brain Bank criteria. Subjects were considered as affected from 
cognitive impairment if Minimental State Examination score was below to 21.
RESULTS: Cognitive impairment was present in 36% of PD patients. The mean age 
was higher in PD patients with cognitive impairment (76 vs 69 years old, 
respectively; p < 0.001). The age onset of PD was higher in patients with 
cognitive impairment (68 vs 63 years old, respectively; p < 0.01). The rate of 
PD patients with low educational level were higher in patients with cognitive 
impairment (59 vs 30%, respectively; p < 0.01). Patients with cognitive 
impairment had higher rating scale score (p < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive impairment was present in 36% of examined PD patients, 
based in our operative diagnostic criteria. The cognitive status decrease 
continuously with age. It's also evidence an inverse relation between 
educational level and rating scale score with cognitive impairment.

PMID: 10229953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


536. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 21;274(21):15134-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.274.21.15134.

5' splice site mutations in tau associated with the inherited dementia FTDP-17 
affect a stem-loop structure that regulates alternative splicing of exon 10.

Grover A(1), Houlden H, Baker M, Adamson J, Lewis J, Prihar G, Pickering-Brown 
S, Duff K, Hutton M.

Author information:
(1)Mayo Clinic Jacksonville, Jacksonville, Florida 32224, USA.

Missense and splice site mutations in the microtubule-associated protein tau 
gene were recently found associated with fronto-temporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (Poorkaj et al. (1998) Ann. Neurol. 43, 
815-825; Hutton et al. (1998) Nature 393, 702-705; Spillantini et al. (1998) 
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 95, 7737-7741). The mutations in the 5' splice 
site of exon 10 were shown to increase the ratio of tau mRNAs containing exon 10 
and thus the proportion of Tau protein isoforms with 4 microtubule binding 
repeat domains, although how this increase leads to neurodegeneration is 
presently unclear. The mechanism by which these mutations increase tau exon 10 
splicing was not determined, although the mutations were predicted to disrupt a 
potential stem-loop structure that was likely involved in the regulation of exon 
10 alternative splicing. Here we describe in vitro splicing assays and RNA 
structural analysis that demonstrate that the mutations do indeed act through 
disruption of the stem-loop structure and that the stability of this secondary 
structure feature at least partially determines the ratio of tau exon 10+/- 
transcripts. In addition, we provide evidence that the stability of the 
stem-loop structure underlies the alternative splicing of this exon in other 
species.

DOI: 10.1074/jbc.274.21.15134
PMID: 10329720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


537. J Clin Psychiatry. 1999;60 Suppl 8:42-53.

Management of psychotic aspects of Parkinson's disease.

Juncos JL(1).

Author information:
(1)Emory University School of Medicine Movement Disorders Program and the Wesley 
Woods Center of Aging, Atlanta, GA 30329, USA. jjuncos@emory.edu

Psychotic symptoms have become increasingly common in patients with idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease and other parkinsonian syndromes. This increased prevalence 
of psychoses is in part a reflection of the greater longevity of people with 
Parkinson's disease and, to a certain extent, is a consequence of our success in 
treating the motor symptoms of these syndromes. The psychotic symptoms 
associated with Parkinson's disease can be as varied as the motor symptoms. They 
stem from interactions between the underlying neuropathologies of the syndromes 
and the adverse effects associated with chronic antiparkinsonian drug 
administration. In patients with advanced Parkinson's disease, there is also a 
high prevalence of affective comorbidity. This increase in affective symptoms 
and the relatively high incidence of cognitive and affective side effects of the 
antiparkinsonian medications contribute to the increase in psychoses observed in 
these older patients. The most significant risk factors for developing psychosis 
in Parkinson's disease are (1) coexistence of dementia, (2) protracted sleep 
disturbances, and (3) nighttime use of long-acting dopaminomimetics. This 
article reviews the phenomenology, pathophysiology, and treatment of psychosis 
associated with parkinsonism and discusses how atypical antipsychotic 
medications have revolutionized the management of the symptoms and improved the 
quality of life of those affected.

PMID: 10335670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


538. Biomed Pharmacother. 1999 Apr;53(3):109-16. doi: 10.1016/S0753-3322(99)80075-4.

Genetics of Parkinson's disease.

Mizuno Y(1), Hattori N, Mori H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

Here we review familial Parkinson's disease from clinical, as well as molecular 
genetic aspects. To date, two genes responsible for familial Parkinson's disease 
have been identified: one is the alpha-synuclein gene located in the long arm of 
chromosome 4, and the other is the parkin gene located in the long arm of 
chromosome 6. The mode of inheritance of the former is autosomal dominant and 
clinical features consist of levodopa-responsive parkinsonism; the age of onset 
is younger than that of the sporadic cases (in their 40s), and the progression 
is faster (average disease duration approximately nine years). The latter form 
is transmitted as an autosomal recessive, and clinical features consist of early 
onset (in their 20s), levodopa-responsive parkinsonism, and a slow progression 
of the disease. In addition, the tau gene has been shown to be the disease gene 
for familial frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. 
There are many other clinical phenotypes of familial Parkinson's disease among 
which three forms have been mapped to certain chromosome loci: one is in the 
short arm of chromosome 2, the two other forms are in the different loci of the 
short arm of chromosome 4. All of them are transmitted as autosomal dominant 
traits manifesting levodopa responsive parkinsonism. There still exists however, 
other clinical phenotypes of chromosome loci which are not known. Molecular 
cloning of these familial Parkinson's disease genes and the elucidation of the 
functions of the proteins encoded will certainly contribute greatly to the 
investigation of the etiology and pathogenesis of more common sporadic form of 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1016/S0753-3322(99)80075-4
PMID: 10349506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


539. Biochem J. 1999 Jun 15;340 ( Pt 3)(Pt 3):821-8.

Copper(II)-induced self-oligomerization of alpha-synuclein.

Paik SR(1), Shin HJ, Lee JH, Chang CS, Kim J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, College of Medicine, Inha University, 253 
Yonghyun-Dong, Nam-Ku, Inchon 402-751, Korea. srpaik@dragon.inha.ac.kr

alpha-Synuclein is a component of the abnormal protein depositions in senile 
plaques and Lewy bodies of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease 
respectively. The protein was suggested to provide a possible nucleation centre 
for plaque formation in AD via selective interaction with amyloid beta/A4 
protein (Abeta). We have shown previously that alpha-synuclein has experienced 
self-oligomerization when Abeta25-35 was present in an orientation-specific 
manner in the sequence. Here we examine this biochemically specific 
self-oligomerization with the use of various metals. Strikingly, copper(II) was 
the most effective metal ion affecting alpha-synuclein to form self-oligomers in 
the presence of coupling reagents such as dicyclohexylcarbodi-imide or 
N-(ethoxycarbonyl)-2-ethoxy-1,2-dihydroquinoline. The size distribution of the 
oligomers indicated that monomeric alpha-synuclein was oligomerized 
sequentially. The copper-induced oligomerization was shown to be suppressed as 
the acidic C-terminus of alpha-synuclein was truncated by treatment with 
endoproteinase Asp-N. In contrast, the Abeta25-35-induced oligomerizations of 
the intact and truncated forms of alpha-synuclein were not affected. This 
clearly indicated that the copper-induced oligomerization was dependent on the 
acidic C-terminal region and that its underlying biochemical mechanism was 
distinct from that of the Abeta25-35-induced oligomerization. Although the 
physiological or pathological relevance of the oligomerization remains currently 
elusive, the common outcome of alpha-synuclein on treatment with copper or 
Abeta25-35 might be useful in understanding neurodegenerative disorders in 
molecular terms. In addition, abnormal copper homoeostasis could be considered 
as one of the risk factors for the development of disorders such as AD or 
Parkinson's disease.

PMCID: PMC1220316
PMID: 10359669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


540. Eur J Neurol. 1999 Jul;6(4):431-5. doi: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.1999.640431.x.

Positive association between an estrogen receptor gene polymorphism and 
Parkinson's disease with dementia.

Isoe-Wada K(1), Maeda M, Yong J, Adachi Y, Harada H, Urakami K, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Institute of Neurological Sciences, Faculty of 
Medicine, Tottori University, Nishimachi 36-1, Yonago, Tottori, Japan.

Parkinson's disease (PD) is a common cause of dementia in the elderly. Dementia 
in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and PD share common biologic and clinical features. 
The estrogen receptor (ER) gene is one of the susceptibility genes for AD. In 
order to test the hypothesis that the overlap between AD and PD may have a 
genetic basis, we determined ER gene polymorphisms in 13 PD patients with 
dementia (PDD) (age +/- SD; 71.9 +/- 5.5 years), 71 PD patients without dementia 
(PDND) (68.4 +/- 7.5 years), 86 AD patients (76.8 +/- 8.0 years) and 51 control 
subjects (CTL) (74.9 +/- 6.9 years). ER genotypes were classified as a P or p 
allele on the basis of a Pvu II-RFLP, and X and x on the basis of a Xba I-RFLP. 
The frequency of the P allele in the PDD group as well as the AD group was 
higher than that in CTL. There was no significant difference in the distribution 
of the P allele between CTL and PDND. There were no significant differences in 
the distribution of the X allele among the PDD, PDND and CTL groups, whereas a 
higher incidence was found in AD. We conclude that the ER gene may be a common 
susceptibility gene for dementia in PD as well as AD.

Copyright 1999 Lippincott Williams & Wilkins

DOI: 10.1046/j.1468-1331.1999.640431.x
PMID: 10362895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


541. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1999 Jul;67(1):20-6. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.67.1.20.

Evidence for cortical dysfunction in clinically non-demented patients with 
Parkinson's disease: a proton MR spectroscopy study.

Hu MT(1), Taylor-Robinson SD, Chaudhuri KR, Bell JD, Morris RG, Clough C, Brooks 
DJ, Turjanski N.

Author information:
(1)Robert Steiner MR Unit, Imperial College School of Medicine, Hammersmith 
Hospital, Du Cane Road, London W12 0NN, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate whether proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy (1H 
MRS) can detect cortical dysfunction in non-demented patients with Parkinson's 
disease, and to correlate changes with cognitive function on formal 
neuropsychological testing.
METHODS: Multivoxel 1H MRS was performed in 17 patients with levodopa treated 
idiopathic Parkinson's disease with out clinical dementia, and 10 age match ed 
control subjects. Measurements of N-acetylaspartate (NAA)/choline (Cho), 
NAA/creatine+phosphocreatine (Cr), and Cho/Cr were obtained from right and left 
temporoparietal cortex and occipital cortex. Fourteen patients with Parkinson's 
disease underwent a full battery of neuropsychological testing including 
performance and verbal subtests of the WAIS-R, Boston naming test, FAS test, and 
California verbal learning test.
RESULTS: There were significant temporoparietal cortex reductions in NAA/Cr 
ratios in right and left averaged spectra of the patients with Parkinson's 
disease (p=0.012 after Bonferroni correction) and in spectra contralateral to 
the worst clinically affected limbs of the patients with Parkinson's disease 
compared with controls (p = 0.003 after Bonferroni correction). There was a 
significant correlation between reduction in NAA/Cr ratios and measures of 
global cognitive decline, occurring independently of motor impairment (p=0.019).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that 1H MRS can detect temporoparietal cortical 
dysfunction in non-demented patients with Parkinson's disease. Further 
longitudinal studies are needed to investigate whether these 1H MRS changes are 
predictive of future cognitive impairment in the subset of patients with 
Parkinson's disease who go on to develop dementia, or occur as part of the 
normal Parkinson's disease process.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.67.1.20
PMCID: PMC1736418
PMID: 10369817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


542. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1999 Jul;67(1):59-65. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.67.1.59.

Predictors of mortality in patients with Alzheimer's disease living in nursing 
homes.

Gambassi G(1), Landi F, Lapane KL, Sgadari A, Mor V, Bernabei R.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Medicina Interna e Geriatria, Università Cattolica del Sacro 
Cuore, Rome, Italy. Giovanni_Gambassi@brown.edu

OBJECTIVES: To identify factors associated with mortality in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease, and to evaluate whether these factors vary according to 
severity of cognitive impairment.
METHODS: Data were from the SAGE database which includes information on all 
residents admitted between 1992 and 1995 to all Medicare/ Medicaid certified 
nursing homes of five US states. We conducted a longitudinal follow up study 
(median 23 months) on 9264 patients aged 65 years and above with a diagnosis of 
Alzheimer's disease. Patient data including demographic characteristics, 
dementia severity, comorbidity, and other clinical and treatment variables were 
collected with the Minimum Data Set. Information on death was derived through 
linkage to Medicare files. Baseline characteristics were used to predict 
survival in univariate and multivariate Cox proportional hazard models.
RESULTS: Overall mortality rate was 50%, with a first year rate of 25.7%. 
Increased age (risk ratio (RR) 1. 83; 95% confidence interval (95% CI) 
1.65-2.03, for patients 85+ years), male sex (RR 1.81; 95% CI 1.70-1.94), 
limitation in physical function (RR 1.45; 95% CI 1.27-1.66), a condition of 
malnutrition (RR 1.31; 95%CI 1.23-1.39), the presence of pressure ulcers (RR 
1.24; 95% CI 1.13-1.36), a diagnosis of diabetes mellitus (RR 1.32; 95% CI 
1.21-1.43), and of cardiovascular diseases (RR 1.22; 95% CI 1. 14-1.30) were 
independent predictors of death, regardless of the severity of baseline 
dementia. Sensory problems (hearing and vision) and urinary incontinence were 
associated with increased mortality only among patients with less severe 
dementia. The presence of disruptive behaviour, aphasia, and a diagnosis of 
Parkinson's disease were not related to survival. African-Americans and other 
minority groups were less likely to die relative to white people.
CONCLUSIONS: Age, sex, functional limitation, and malnutrition seem to be the 
strongest predictors of death for patients with Alzheimer's disease in nursing 
homes. Altogether, severity of dementia has no influence on survival, yet the 
predictive role of certain variables depends on the degree of impairment. 
Minority groups have a reduced risk of death relative to white people.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.67.1.59
PMCID: PMC1736445
PMID: 10369823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


543. Neurologia. 1999 May;14 Suppl 1:3-16.

[The problem of accurate diagnosis of Parkinson disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Giménez Roldán S(1), Mateo D, Martínez Ginés M, Iniesta I.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital General Universitario Gregorio Marañón, 
Madrid. sgimenez@meditex.es

A definite diagnosis of Parkinson's disease cannot be made solely on clinical 
grounds. None of the cardinal signs (tremor, rigidity, or bradykinesia) is 
entirely specific, including asymmetric presentation. A favourable response to 
levodopa may be found in different degenerative parkinsonisms or there may be 
drug-induced dyskinesias and fluctuations. "Probable" or "possible" as 
diagnostic categories depend on the presence or one or more cardinal signs, 
absence of potential etiologic factors (exposure to antidopaminergic drugs, 
among others), and atypical clinical manifestations early in disease course as 
dementia, falls and instability, erectile and micturition disturbances and 
unilateral neglect. Preclinical detection (positron emission tomography and 
molecular genetics in some familial forms) is a desirable goal with a view to 
neuroprotection. We emphasise some prodromal and early complaints as well as 
clinical skills to detect cardinal signs during early.

PMID: 10377726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


544. Neurologia. 1999 May;14 Suppl 1:72-81.

[Parkinson disease and cognition].

[Article in Spanish]

Kulisevsky J(1), Pascual-Sedano B.

Author information:
(1)Sección de Trastornos del Movimiento, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, 
Barcelona.

Parkinson's Disease patients may have cognitive deficits, which may vary from 
mild focal specific deficits to global dementia. Executive functions, working 
memory, visuoespatial functions and internal control of attention are the main 
affected cognitive areas. The dopaminergic hypothesis suggests that dopaminergic 
transmission is involved in most altered cognitive processes. However, other 
neuronal systems are probably implicated, and the improvement of the cognitive 
function after dopaminergic replacement is incomplete and not seen in all 
cognitive tasks. The prevalence of dementia in Parkinson's disease is estimated 
in 15-25%. The pathologic hallmarks may be similar to that seen in Alzheimer's 
disease. However, in Parkinson's disease patients pure subcortical alterations 
are able to produce a severe cognitive impairment, such as lost of dopaminergic 
neurones from substantia nigra to caudate nucleus and frontal areas. 
Comprehension of the relationship between depression and dementia in Parkinson's 
disease patients is incomplete. Parkinson's disease patients with depression 
show poor neuropsychological performance, especially in frontal tasks, but it is 
unclear whether depression can be considered a risk factor for the development 
of dementia in Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 10377731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


545. Neuroreport. 1999 May 14;10(7):1507-10. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199905140-00021.

Alpha2-macroglobulin polymorphisms in Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Singleton AB(1), Gibson AM, McKeith IG, Ballard CA, Perry RH, Ince PG, Edwardson 
JA, Morris CM.

Author information:
(1)MRC Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Institute for the Health of the Elderly, 
Newcastle General Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common cause of dementia in 
the elderly after Alzheimer's disease (AD). The apolipoprotein E gene (APOE) is 
a major risk factor, but can only account for approximately 50% of AD cases. 
Whole genome scanning in late-onset AD families has suggested that a locus on 
chromosome 12 may contribute significantly to disease development. Recently the 
alpha2-macroglobulin gene (A2M) on chromosome 12 has been suggested as a 
candidate locus for AD. We therefore determined the influence of two 
polymorphisms in A2M, a pentanucleotide deletion 5' to the bait domain exon, and 
a valine to isoleucine polymorphism in the thiolester site of the protein, in AD 
and DLB cohorts. No evidence was observed for an association between the 
thiolester or deletion polymorphisms and AD or DLB alone or when accounting for 
the APOE epsilon4 allele. We did, however, identify a non-significant excess of 
deletion homozygotes in the AD and DLB groups. This genotype accounted for 4% of 
disease cases but was absent in the control population. Given that the A2M 
deletion polymorphism is non-functional, the chromosome 12 AD/DLB locus may be 
situated elsewhere and not with these A2M polymorphisms.

DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199905140-00021
PMID: 10380971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


546. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Jul 7;1454(2):143-52. doi: 
10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00029-0.

In vitro and in vivo studies investigating possible antioxidant actions of 
nicotine: relevance to Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases.

Linert W(1), Bridge MH, Huber M, Bjugstad KB, Grossman S, Arendash GW.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Inorganic Chemistry, Technical University of Vienna, 
Getreidemarkt 9, A-1060, Vienna, Austria. wlinert@fbch.tuwien.ac.at

An inverse relationship appears to exist between cigarette smoking and the risk 
of Parkinson's and Alzheimer's diseases. Since both diseases are characterized 
by enhanced oxidative stress, we investigated the antioxidant potential of 
nicotine, a primary component of cigarette smoke. Initial chromatographic 
studies suggest that nicotine can affect the formation of the neurotoxin 
6-hydroxydopamine resulting from the addition of dopamine to Fenton's reagent 
(i.e., Fe2+ and H2O2). Thus, under certain circumstances, nicotine can strongly 
affect the course of the Fenton reaction. In in vivo studies, adult male rats 
being treated with nicotine showed greater memory retention than controls in a 
water maze task. However, neurochemical analysis of neocortex, hippocampus, and 
neostriatum from these same animals revealed that nicotine treatment had no 
effect on the formation of reactive oxygen species or on lipid peroxidation for 
any brain region studied. In an in vitro study, addition of various 
concentrations of nicotine to rat neocortical homogenates had no effect on lipid 
peroxidation compared to saline controls. The results of these studies suggest 
that the beneficial/protective effects of nicotine in both Parkinson's disease 
and Alzheimer's disease may be, at least partly, due to antioxidant mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1016/s0925-4439(99)00029-0
PMID: 10381559 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


547. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jul 6;96(14):8229-34. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.96.14.8229.

Structure of tau exon 10 splicing regulatory element RNA and destabilization by 
mutations of frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17.

Varani L(1), Hasegawa M, Spillantini MG, Smith MJ, Murrell JR, Ghetti B, Klug A, 
Goedert M, Varani G.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, 
Cambridge CB2 2QH, United Kingdom.

Coding region and intronic mutations in the tau gene cause frontotemporal 
dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17. Intronic mutations and some 
missense mutations increase splicing in of exon 10, leading to an increased 
ratio of four-repeat to three-repeat tau isoforms. Secondary structure 
predictions have led to the proposal that intronic mutations and one missense 
mutation destabilize a putative RNA stem-loop structure located close to the 
splice-donor site of the intron after exon 10. We have determined the 
three-dimensional structure of this tau exon 10 splicing regulatory element RNA 
by NMR spectroscopy. We show that it forms a stable, folded stem-loop structure 
whose thermodynamic stability is reduced by frontotemporal dementia and 
parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 mutations and increased by compensatory 
mutations. By exon trapping, the reduction in thermodynamic stability is 
correlated with increased splicing in of exon 10.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.96.14.8229
PMCID: PMC22217
PMID: 10393977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


548. Am J Psychiatry. 1999 Jul;156(7):1039-45. doi: 10.1176/ajp.156.7.1039.

Psychiatric morbidity in dementia with Lewy bodies: a prospective clinical and 
neuropathological comparative study with Alzheimer's disease.

Ballard C(1), Holmes C, McKeith I, Neill D, O'Brien J, Cairns N, Lantos P, Perry 
E, Ince P, Perry R.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Neurochemical Pathology Unit, Newcastle General 
Hospital, U.K. m.p.walker@ncl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: The literature reports considerable variation in the rates of 
psychiatric morbidity for patients with dementia with Lewy bodies. The authors 
intended to clarify the frequency of psychiatric morbidity in dementia with Lewy 
bodies and how it differs from probable Alzheimer's disease.
METHOD: The study incorporated two groups--a clinical case register cohort (98 
with dementia with Lewy bodies; 92 with Alzheimer's disease) and 80 (40 with 
dementia with Lewy bodies: 40 with Alzheimer's disease) prospectively studied, 
neuropathologically confirmed cases. Diagnoses were made by using the McKeith et 
al. consensus criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies and the National Institute 
of Neurological and Communicative Disorders and Stroke and the Alzheimer's 
Disease and Related Disorders Association criteria for Alzheimer's disease. 
Neuropathological diagnoses were made by using the consensus criteria for 
dementia with Lewy bodies and the Mirra et al. protocol for Alzheimer's disease.
RESULTS: The occurrence of psychiatric symptoms was reported over 1 month. 
Hallucinations, depression, delusions, and delusional misidentification were all 
significantly higher for patients with dementia with Lewy bodies. The 
differences in frequency between dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's 
disease for auditory and visual hallucinations were especially pronounced for 
patients with mild cognitive impairment. The presence of psychiatric symptoms at 
presentation was a better discriminator between dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer's disease than occurrence over the course of dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Delusional misidentification and hallucinations in the early stages 
of dementia may improve differentiation between patients with dementia with Lewy 
bodies and those with Alzheimer's disease and have important treatment 
implications.

DOI: 10.1176/ajp.156.7.1039
PMID: 10401449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


549. Behav Brain Res. 1999 Jul;102(1-2):1-16. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(98)00160-0.

Incomplete nigrostriatal dopaminergic cell loss and partial reductions in 
striatal dopamine produce akinesia, rigidity, tremor and cognitive deficits in 
middle-aged rats.

Lindner MD(1), Cain CK, Plone MA, Frydel BR, Blaney TJ, Emerich DF, Hoane MR.

Author information:
(1)CytoTherapeutics, Inc., Lincoln, RI 02865, USA. mlindner@neurocrine.com

The present study was conducted to determine if the full array of parkinsonian 
symptoms could be detected in rats with nigrostriatal cell loss and striatal 
dopamine depletions similar to levels reported in the clinical setting, and to 
determine if older rats exhibit more robust parkinsonian deficits than younger 
rats. Young (2 months old) and middle-aged (12 months old) rats received 
bilateral striatal infusions of 6-OHDA, over the next 3 months they were 
assessed with a battery of behavioral tests, and then dopaminergic nigrostriatal 
cells and striatal dopamine and DOPAC levels were quantified. The results of the 
present study suggest that: (1) the full array of parkinsonian symptoms (i.e. 
akinesia, rigidity, tremor and visuospatial cognitive deficits) can be 
quantified in rats with incomplete nigrostriatal dopaminergic cell loss and 
partial reductions in striatal dopamine levels (2) parkinsonian symptoms were 
more evident in middle-aged rats with 6-OHDA infusions, and (3) there was 
evidence of substantial neuroplasticity in the older rats, but regardless of the 
age of the animal, endogenous compensatory mechanisms were unable to maintain 
striatal dopamine levels after rapid, lesion-induced nigrostriatal cell loss. 
These results suggest that using older rats with nigrostriatal dopaminergic cell 
loss and reductions in striatal dopamine levels similar to those in the clinical 
condition, and measuring behavioral deficits analogous to parkinsonian symptoms, 
might increase the predictive validity of pre-clinical rodent models.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-4328(98)00160-0
PMID: 10403011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


550. Behav Brain Res. 1999 Jul;102(1-2):115-27. doi: 10.1016/s0166-4328(99)00005-4.

Motor learning by imagery is differentially affected in Parkinson's and 
Huntington's diseases.

Yágüez L(1), Canavan AG, Lange HW, Hömberg V.

Author information:
(1)Neurological Therapy Centre, University of Düsseldorf, Germany. 
l.yaguez@iop.bpmf.ac.uk

Studies of motor imagery and motor learning have thus far been concerned only 
with its effects on healthy subjects. Therefore, in order to investigate the 
possible involvement of the basal ganglia, the effectiveness of motor imagery in 
the acquisition of motor constants in a graphomotor trajectorial learning task 
was examined in 11 non-demented mildly affected Huntington's disease (HD) 
patients and 12 non-demented Parkinson's disease (PD) patients. The patients 
received, after baseline, 10 min of motor imagery training, followed by a motor 
practice phase. Additionally, a test battery for visual imagery abilities was 
administered in order to investigate possible relations between visual and motor 
imagery. The results showed that imagery training alone enabled the HD patients 
to achieve a significant approach to movement isochrony, whereas the PD patients 
showed no marked improvements, either with motor imagery or with motor practice. 
Furthermore, the PD patients had more difficulties than the HD patients in 
solving the visual imagery tasks. Subsequent correlational analysis revealed 
significant relationships between the degree of caudate atrophy in the HD 
patients and their performance in the visual imagery tasks. However, there were 
no substantial correlations between the performance on the visual imagery tasks 
and the improvement of motor performance through motor imagery, which indicates 
that visual and motor imagery are independent processes. It is suggested that 
the dopaminergic input to the basal ganglia plays an important role in the 
translation of motor representations into motor performance, whereas the caudate 
nucleus atrophy of the HD patients does not seem to affect motor imagery, but 
only the visual imagery process. Furthermore, the deficits found in PD patients 
might also be related to their limited attentional resources and difficulties in 
employing predictive motor strategies.

DOI: 10.1016/s0166-4328(99)00005-4
PMID: 10403020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


551. Sportverletz Sportschaden. 1999 Mar;13(1):30-5. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-993311.

[Craniocerebral trauma in sports. With recommendations for prevention].

[Article in German]

Weber J(1), Jaksche H.

Author information:
(1)Neurochirurgische Abteilung, BG-Unfallklinik Murnau.

Traumatic brain injury (TBI) is found in many sports. A mild head injury 
(concussion of brain) is found in more than 80%, mainly in sports with contact 
to others. Especially affected by death are air sports, horse riding and 
cycling, whereby brain damage often is the leading injury. With the example of a 
cycling accident the possible processing dynamics of a mild head injury with 
secondary brain damage through an intracranial hematoma is demonstrated in the 
following. For the assessment of sports ability, there is often made the 
division with symptoms as confusion, amnesia and unconsciousness after a mild 
head injury (scale 1-3). According to the gravitational scale of cerebral 
concussion, an adequate sports break should be kept. Postcommotional symptoms 
prove sports inability. A chronic brain damage is not rarely found in some 
combative sports. In this case the injury may result in a traumatic 
encephalopathia with the evaluation of dementia and in some cases also 
Parkinson's disease is observed. To prevent a TBI there should be worn an 
adequate protective headgear especially by children in training and in sports 
contests concerning risk sports. Further recommendations for prevention are 
presented and with them there will also be responded to sports ability in 
neurosurgical diseases.

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-993311
PMID: 10407962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


552. Acta Neuropathol. 1999 Jul;98(1):62-77. doi: 10.1007/s004010051052.

A mutation at codon 279 (N279K) in exon 10 of the Tau gene causes a tauopathy 
with dementia and supranuclear palsy.

Delisle MB(1), Murrell JR, Richardson R, Trofatter JA, Rascol O, Soulages X, 
Mohr M, Calvas P, Ghetti B.

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Laboratory, INSERM U466, University Hospital, University Paul 
Sabatier, Toulouse, France.

Recently intronic and exonic mutations in the Tau gene have been found to be 
associated with familial neurodegenerative syndromes characterized not only by a 
predominantly frontotemporal dementia but also by the presence of neurological 
signs consistent with the dysfunction of multiple subcortical neuronal 
circuitries. Among families, the symptomatology appears to vary in quality and 
severity in relation to the specific Tau gene mutation and often may include 
parkinsonism, supranuclear palsies, and/or myoclonus, in addition to dementia. 
We carried out molecular genetic and neuropathological studies on two patients 
from a French family presenting, early in their fifth decade, a cognitive 
impairment and supranuclear palsy followed by an akinetic rigid syndrome and 
dementia. The proband died severely demented 7 years after the onset of the 
symptoms; currently, his brother is still alive although his disease is 
progressing. In both patients, we found a Tau gene mutation in exon 10 at codon 
279, resulting in an asparagine to lysine substitution (N279K). 
Neuropathologically, widespread neuronal and glial tau accumulation in the 
cortex, basal ganglia, brain stem nuclei as well as in the white matter were the 
hallmark of the disease. These deposits were shown by immunohistochemistry and 
immunoelectron microscopy, using a battery of antibodies to 
phosphorylation-dependent and phosphorylation-independent epitopes present in 
multiple tau regions. In the neocortex, tau-immunopositive glial cells were more 
numerous than immunopositive neurons; the deeper cortical layers as well as the 
white matter adjacent to the cortex contained the largest amount of 
immunolabeled glial cells. In contrast, some brain stem nuclei contained more 
neurons with tau deposits than immunolabeled glial cells. The correlation of 
clinical, neuropathological and molecular genetic findings emphasize the 
phenotypic heterogeneity of diseases caused by Tau gene mutations. Furthermore, 
to test the effect of the N279K mutation and compare it with the effect of the 
P301L exon 10 mutation on alternative splicing of Tau exon 10, we used an exon 
amplification assay. Our results suggest that the N279K mutation affects 
splicing similar to the intronic mutations, allowing exon 10 to be incorporated 
more frequently in the Tau transcript.

DOI: 10.1007/s004010051052
PMID: 10412802 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


553. Pharmacotherapy. 1999 Jul;19(7):795-803. doi: 10.1592/phco.19.10.795.31555.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: review and pharmacotherapeutic implications.

Rojas-Fernandez CH(1), MacKnight C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, Texas Tech University 
Health Sciences Center, Amarillo 79106-1712, USA.

Alzheimer's disease accounts for 50-60% of dementia cases in older people. 
Dementia with Lewy bodies is now recognized as the second most common type of 
dementia. It is different from Alzheimer's disease and has important 
pharmacotherapeutic implications. Key features include early-onset, persistent, 
well-formed, visual hallucinations and motor features of parkinsonism. 
Pharmacologic management of neurobehavioral symptoms is complicated by an 
exaggerated response to neuroleptics, which causes excessive morbidity and 
mortality. Patients with dementia with Lewy bodies may be particularly 
responsive to cholinesterase inhibitors. When neurobehavioral symptoms are 
severe enough to require pharmacologic intervention, it is recommended that 
agents such as trazodone or cholinesterase inhibitors be considered first-line 
therapy. If these fail, neuroleptics may be prescribed with caution.

DOI: 10.1592/phco.19.10.795.31555
PMID: 10417027 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


554. J Neurol. 1999 Jun;246(6):462-6. doi: 10.1007/s004150050384.

An early description of striatonigral degeneration.

Berciano J(1), Combarros O, Polo JM, Pascual J, Oterino A.

Author information:
(1)Service of Neurology, University Hospital, Marqués de Valdecilla, Santander, 
Spain.

Comment in
    J Neurol. 2000 Apr;247(4):309-12.

Our aim was to revisit the papers published by Scherer 1933 describing four 
cases of sporadic olivopontocerebellar atrophy (OPCA) thought to represent the 
earliest description of striatonigral degeneration. One should note that 
extrapyramidal rigidity associated with OPCA was then considered a type of 
cerebellar parkinsonism. Two of Scherer's four patients had severe parkinsonism 
masking cerebellar signs. Pathologically both cases displayed marked 
degeneration of the striatum and nigra and partially developed pontocerebellar 
atrophy. Cerebellar ataxia was the outstanding feature in the other two, their 
pathological study showing severe pontocerebellar lesions and incipient 
striatonigral atrophy. Scherer stated that the severity of parkinsonism in OPCA 
is not correlated with the degree of cerebellar degeneration but with that of 
striatum and nigra. We conclude that Scherer gave the first accurate description 
of striatonigral degeneration. Moreover, his contribution was essential in 
ruling out the prevalent notion of cerebellar parkinsonism in OPCA.

DOI: 10.1007/s004150050384
PMID: 10431772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


555. J Neurosurg. 1999 Aug;91(2):313-21. doi: 10.3171/jns.1999.91.2.0313.

Bilateral contemporaneous posteroventral pallidotomy for the treatment of 
Parkinson's disease: neuropsychological and neurological side effects. Report of 
four cases and review of the literature.

Ghika J(1), Ghika-Schmid F, Fankhauser H, Assal G, Vingerhoets F, Albanese A, 
Bogousslavsky J, Favre J.

Author information:
(1)Division Autonome de Neuropsychologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire 
Vaudois, Lausanne, Switzerland. joseph.ghika@chuv.hospvd.ch

Comment in
    J Neurosurg. 2000 Mar;92(3):509.

The authors report the underestimated cognitive, mood, and behavioral 
complications in patients who have undergone bilateral contemporaneous 
pallidotomy, as seen in their early experience with functional neurosurgery for 
Parkinson's disease (PD) that is accompanied by severe motor fluctuations before 
pallidal stimulation. Four patients, not suffering from dementia, with advanced 
(Hoehn and Yahr Stages III-IV), medically untreatable PD featuring severe 
"on-off" fluctuations underwent bilateral contemporaneous posteroventral 
pallidotomy (PVP). All patients were evaluated according to the Core Assessment 
Program for Intracerebral Transplantations (CAPIT) protocol without positron 
emission tomography scans but with additional neuropsychological cognitive, 
mood, and behavior testing. For the first 3 to 6 months postoperatively, all 
patients showed a mean improvement of motor scores on the Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS), in the best "on" (21%) and worst "off" (40%) UPDRS 
III motor subscale, a mean 30% improvement in the UPDRS II activities of daily 
living (ADL) subscore, and 60% on the UPDRS IV complications of treatment 
subscale. Dyskinesia disappeared almost completely, and the mean daily duration 
of the off time was reduced by an average of 60%. Despite these good results in 
the CAPIT scores, one patient experienced a partially regressive corticobulbar 
syndrome with dysphagia, dysarthria, and increased drooling. No emotional 
lability was found in this patient, but he did demonstrate severe bilateral 
postoperative pretarsal blepharospasm (apraxia of eyelid opening), which 
interfered with walking and which required treatment with high-dose subcutaneous 
injections of botulinum toxin. No patient showed visual field defects or 
hemiparesis, but postoperative depression, changes in personality, behavior, and 
executive functions were seen in two individuals. Postoperative abulia was 
reported by the family of one patient, who lost his preoperative aggressiveness 
and drive in terms of ADL, speech, business, family life, and hobbies, and 
became more sleepy and fatigued. One patient reported postoperative mental 
automatisms, such as compulsive mental counting, and circular thoughts and 
reasoning during off phases; postoperative depression was found in two patients. 
However, none of the patients demonstrated these symptoms during intraoperative 
microelectrode stimulation. These findings are compatible with previous reports 
on bilateral pallidal lesions. A progressive lowering of UPDRS subscores was 
seen after 12 months, consistent with the progression of the disease. Bilateral 
simultaneous pallidotomy may be followed by emotional, behavioral, and cognitive 
deficits such as depression, obsessive-compulsive disorders, and loss of psychic 
autoactivation-abulia, as well as disabling corticobulbar dysfunction and 
apraxia of eyelid opening, in addition to previously described motor and visual 
field deficits, which make this surgery undesirable even though significant 
improvement in motor deficits can be achieved.

DOI: 10.3171/jns.1999.91.2.0313
PMID: 10433321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


556. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 1999 Jun;32(3):153-8. doi: 10.1007/s003910050099.

[Psychopharmacotherapy of behavioral disorders in patients with dementia].

[Article in German]

Stoppe G(1), Staedt J.

Author information:
(1)Psychiatrische Klinik und Poliklinik Georg-August-Universität, Göttingen.

Behavioral disorders in dementia are common and are the most important symptoms 
with regard to socio-economic burden. Up to now there is no common international 
agreement of how to define and measure these disorders. Antidementia trials 
focus mainly on cognition. Investigations of neurobiological corrolaries of 
disturbed behavior in the dementias are rare. The same holds true for studies on 
the longitudinal course of behavioral disorders and their interrelation. Many 
symptoms may be the expression of variable conditions, e.g., agitation may be 
related to anxiety or akathisia. In primary care, hospitals and nursing homes, 
antipsychotics are most often chosen for their treatment. The available data 
demonstrate at least a modest efficacy. New neuroleptics (risperidone, 
clozapine, olanzapine) offer some advantages with regard to the risk benefit 
ratio. Benzodiazepines are frequently prescribed, but seem to be superior to 
neuroleptics only for the treatment of sleep disorders. Antidepressants, 
carbamazepine or valproic acid offer some benefits, but do not provide immediate 
effects, which may the reason why they are used much less. For long-term 
treatment of many behavioral symptoms, they may however be superior. Drugs 
should also be chosen with regard to dementia etiology. For example, physicians 
should consider the high neuroleptic sensitivity in dementia of Lewy body type 
and the anticholinergic sensitivity in dementia of Alzheimer type. Empirical 
evidence indicates overtreatment of the demented population with sedating 
psychotropic drugs. With regard to the instability of behavioral disorders in 
the time course the necessity of drug treatment should always be (re)evaluated.

DOI: 10.1007/s003910050099
PMID: 10436494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


557. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 1999 Aug;19(4):322-8. doi: 
10.1097/00004714-199908000-00007.

Incidence and predictors of drug-induced parkinsonism in older psychiatric 
patients treated with very low doses of neuroleptics.

Caligiuri MP(1), Lacro JP, Jeste DV.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 
92053, USA. mcaligiuri@ucsd.edu

The available literature suggests that a sizable proportion of patients placed 
on neuroleptics develop acute and subacute extrapyramidal side effects, 
including neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism (NIP). The presence of mild, 
spontaneous extrapyramidal signs in the elderly makes it difficult to accurately 
estimate the incidence of NIP in this subgroup of patients. We examined the 
incidence of NIP in 56 older, newly medicated, psychiatric patients. Fifteen 
age-comparable, unmedicated psychiatric patients underwent 2 assessments to 
estimate natural fluctuation in extrapyramidal signs, and 49 normal, healthy, 
elderly individuals were also studied to establish age-comparable norms for the 
assessment of parkinsonism. Potential pretreatment predictor variables included 
instrumental measures of motor function, age, cognitive status, and psychiatric 
diagnosis. After controlling for spontaneous parkinsonism, 32% of patients met 
strict criteria for NIP after receiving an average of 43 mg/day chlorpromazine 
equivalents of a typical neuroleptic. Factors contributing to the development of 
NIP included older age, instrumentally derived tremor, baseline extrapyramidal 
signs, type of neuroleptic, and severity of dementia. The use of risperidone in 
a small subsample was not associated with NIP. These findings indicate that even 
after controlling for spontaneous extrapyramidal signs at baseline and their 
natural fluctuations, there is a substantial risk of NIP in older patients who 
are treated with very low doses of typical neuroleptics.

DOI: 10.1097/00004714-199908000-00007
PMID: 10440459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


558. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 1999 Jul;14(7):526-33.

Sensitivity and specificity of three clinical criteria for dementia with Lewy 
bodies in an autopsy-verified sample.

Luis CA(1), Barker WW, Gajaraj K, Harwood D, Petersen R, Kashuba A, Waters C, 
Jimison P, Pearl G, Petito C, Dickson D, Duara R.

Author information:
(1)Wien Center for Alzheimer's Disease and Memory Disorders, Mount Sinai Medical 
Center, Miami Beach, FL 33141, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of the clinical features 
of three published diagnostic criteria for diffuse Lewy body disease (DLBD) 
using autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer's (AD), DLBD and AD+DLBD (mixed) dementia 
cases.
DESIGN: Retrospective chart review of an autopsy series of 56 patients selected 
from the State of Florida Brain Bank on the basis of a pathological diagnosis of 
either pure AD, DLBD (pure and common forms) or AD+DLBD (mixed) dementia. 
Clinical features were assessed by three raters blind to the pathological 
diagnosis.
RESULTS: The existing criteria for a clinical diagnosis of DLBD were highly 
specific (90-100%) but not very sensitive (49-63%) in the differential diagnosis 
of DLBD versus AD; sensitivity did improve (61-74%) when mixed AD+DLBD cases 
were eliminated. Clinical features that occur more frequently in DLBD than in AD 
were unspecified hallucinations, unspecified EPS, fluctuating course and rapid 
progression. Post-hoc analysis also indicated that hallucinations and EPS were 
more common early in the disease course of DLBD than in AD. Empirically derived 
criteria, formulated using the most prevalent clinical features, demonstrated 
sensitivity values of 57-96% for pure forms and 43-91% for mixed forms.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that additional improvements in the 
established criteria for DLBD are needed. Our empirically derived criteria 
enhanced the distinction of DLBD from AD while allowing the clinician the choice 
of maximizing sensitivity with acceptable specificity, and vice versa.

Copyright 1999 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 10440972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


559. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1999 Jul-Aug;22(4):226-30.

The apolipoprotein E epsilon 4 allele increases the risk of drug-induced 
hallucinations in Parkinson's disease.

de la Fuente-Fernández R(1), Núñez MA, López E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, EuroEspes Biomedical Research Center, La Coruña, 
Spain.

Comment in
    Clin Neuropharmacol. 2000 Jul-Aug;23(4):230-1.

To determine whether the apolipoprotein E (APOE) epsilon 4 allele is a risk 
factor of drug-induced hallucinations in nondemented patients with Parkinson's 
disease (PD), the proportions of patients with hallucinations in groups with and 
without the APOE epsilon 4 allele were compared with a chi 2 test. The 
contribution of the APOE epsilon 4 allele to the occurrence of hallucinations 
was further evaluated by means of logistic regression models, adjusting for 
potential prognostic variables. Thirteen (76%) of the 17 patients who had the 
epsilon 4 allele had visual hallucinations, compared with 20 (23%) of the 88 
patients without the epsilon 4 allele (p < 0.0001; odds ratio = 11.05; 95% CI 
3.24-37.67). In addition, treatment with dopamine agonists also contributed to 
an increased risk of hallucinations (p = 0.0011). After adjustment for age, 
severity of parkinsonism, duration of treatment, dose of levodopa, and treatment 
with dopamine agonists, the association between the presence of the epsilon 4 
allele and the occurrence of visual hallucinations remained significant (p = 
0.0003). Nondemented PD patients with the APOE epsilon 4 allele have a high risk 
of developing drug-induced visual hallucinations. Further studies are needed to 
evaluate which proportion of these patients will end up developing dementia.

PMID: 10442253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


560. Ann Neurol. 1999 Aug;46(2):217-23. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8249(199908)46:2<217::aid-ana11>3.0.co;2-z.

Bilateral subthalamic or pallidal stimulation for Parkinson's disease affects 
neither memory nor executive functions: a consecutive series of 62 patients.

Ardouin C(1), Pillon B, Peiffer E, Bejjani P, Limousin P, Damier P, Arnulf I, 
Benabid AL, Agid Y, Pollak P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Biological Neurosciences, Centre Hospitalier, 
Grenoble, France.

There is a renewal of interest in surgical approaches including lesions and deep 
brain stimulation directed at motor subcorticofrontal loops. Bilateral lesioning 
presents a far greater risk of adverse effects, especially cognitive impairment. 
Furthermore, the main advantages of the stimulation procedure over lesioning are 
adaptability and reversibility of effects. The aim of this study was to assess 
the influence of bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or internal 
globus pallidus on memory and executive functions in Parkinson's disease. 
Sixty-two patients were assessed before and after 3 to 6 months of chronic 
bilateral stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus (n = 49) or internal globus 
pallidus (n = 13). The neuropsychological tests used were the Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale, the Grober and Buschke Verbal Learning Test, the Wisconsin Card 
Sorting Test, category and literal fluency, graphic and motor series, the Stroop 
Test, and the Trail Making Test. Mood was evaluated by the Beck Depression 
Inventory. Only 4 of 25 cognitive variables were affected by deep brain 
stimulation. Under stimulation, performance improved for Parts A and B of the 
Trail Making Test, but there was a deterioration in literal and total lexical 
fluency. There was also a mild but significant improvement in mood. It may 
therefore be concluded that stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus or internal 
globus pallidus does not change the overall cognitive performance in Parkinson's 
disease and does not greatly affect the functioning of subcorticofrontal loops 
involved in cognition in humans. This relative absence of cognitive impairment 
in bilateral deep brain stimulation is likely because of the accurate 
positioning of the electrodes, allowing the effects of stimulation to be 
confined to sensorimotor circuits.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8249(199908)46:2<217::aid-ana11>3.0.co;2-z
PMID: 10443887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


561. Arch Neurol. 1999 Aug;56(8):961-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.8.961.

Apolipoprotein E epsilon4 allele, temporal lobe atrophy, and white matter 
lesions in late-life dementias.

Barber R(1), Gholkar A, Scheltens P, Ballard C, McKeith IG, Morris CM, O'Brien 
JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for the Health of the Elderly, Newcastle General Hospital, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, England. Robert.Barber@ncl.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between the apolipoprotein E (APOE) 
epsilon4 genotype, medial temporal lobe atrophy, and white matter 
hyperintensities on magnetic resonance imaging in late-life dementias.
DESIGN: Structural magnetic resonance imaging study using T2-weighted and proton 
density-weighted axial scans and T1-weighted coronal scans.
SETTING: Community-dwelling population of elderly patients prospectively chosen 
from a clinical case register of consecutive referrals to old age psychiatry 
services.
SUBJECTS: Twenty-five subjects with Alzheimer disease (by criteria of the 
National Institute of Neurological and Communication Disorders and Stroke and 
the Alzheimer's Disease and Related Disorders Association; mean age, 77.8 
years), 22 subjects with dementia with Lewy bodies (consensus criteria; mean 
age, 77.2 years), and 24 subjects with vascular dementia (by criteria of the 
National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke and the Association 
International pour la Recherche et l'Enseignement en Neurosciences; mean age, 
76.9 years) were selected. Subjects were well matched for age, sex, duration of 
illness, and cognitive function.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The APOE genotype was determined using the polymerase 
chain reaction method, and medial temporal lobe atrophy and white matter 
hyperintensities (periventricular and deep white matter) were visually rated 
using standardized scales.
RESULTS: In all subjects with dementia, no significant associations were noted 
between APOE epsilon4 status and medial temporal lobe atrophy (mean score: 0 
epsilon4 = 4.5, 1 epsilon4 = 4.5, and 2 epsilon4 = 4.3; P = .90), 
periventricular hyperintensities (0 epsilon4 = 3.3, 1 epsilon4 = 3.1, and 2 
epsilon4 = 2.9; P = .83), and white matter hyperintensities (0 epsilon4 = 5.3, 1 
epsilon4 = 4.9, and 2 epsilon4 = 4.9; P = .79).
CONCLUSIONS: The APOE epsilon4 allele does not determine medial temporal lobe 
atrophy or white matter lesions, as measured by magnetic resonance imaging in 
patients with Alzheimer disease, vascular dementia, or dementia with Lewy 
bodies. Although APOE epsilon4 may modify the risk for acquiring dementia, this 
finding provides further evidence that APOE epsilon4 does not influence 
pathological processes thereafter.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.56.8.961
PMID: 10448801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


562. Neurology. 1999 Aug 11;53(3):566-72. doi: 10.1212/wnl.53.3.566.

Parkinson's disease in twins: a follow-up study.

Vieregge P(1), Hagenah J, Heberlein I, Klein C, Ludin HP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Medical University, Lübeck, Germany.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2000 Apr 25;54(8):1710-1.

OBJECTIVE: To reevaluate concordance rates in 9 monozygotic (MZ) and 12 
dizygotic (DZ) twin pairs with PD 8 years after the initial study.
BACKGROUND: Longitudinal investigations increase accuracy in clinical diagnosis 
of PD.
METHODS: Follow-up by personal interview and clinical examination.
RESULTS: Concordance rates were not different between MZ (3/9) and DZ (5/12) 
twin pairs at follow-up, even when PD-associated dementia and isolated postural 
tremor were considered diagnostic of familial Lewy body parkinsonism. Evaluation 
of medical history, personality traits, and blink rate did not reveal putative 
early or premorbid parkinsonism in 9 co-twins who were motor-asymptomatic during 
the follow-up interval. However, these co-twins had reduced semantic fluency in 
comparison with a healthy control group of similar age. None of 7 co-twins 
without motor signs who underwent PET investigation 6 years previously showed 
signs of extrapyramidal disease at follow-up, but verbal memory continued to be 
reduced in 5 of these co-twins.
CONCLUSION: Based on concordance rates only, the findings in our twin sample do 
not support a major genetic impact for the motor expression of PD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.53.3.566
PMID: 10449122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


563. J Nucl Med. 1999 Jun;40(6):956-62.

Technetium HMPAO SPECT study in dementia with Lewy bodies, Alzheimer's disease 
and idiopathic Parkinson's disease.

Defebvre LJ(1), Leduc V, Duhamel A, Lecouffe P, Pasquier F, Lamy-Lhullier C, 
Steinling M, Destée A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology A, Hôpital Roger Salengro, CHRU, Lille, France.

The aim of this study was to compare the regional cerebral blood flow 
measurements studied by SPECT in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD) to determine the contribution of SPECT to the differential 
diagnosis of these two diseases.
METHODS: SPECT analysis with 99mTc-hexamethyl propyleneamine oxime (HMPAO) was 
performed in 20 patients with probable DLB, 20 patients with probable AD and 20 
patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease (IPD). Ten pairs of regions of 
interest were analyzed. Tracer uptake was expressed as a corticocerebellar 
activity ratio.
RESULTS: Compared with IPD, in the DLB group there was a global decrease of 
HMPAO uptake in cortical regions of interest except in the posterior frontal and 
occipital regions; in the AD group there was limited left temporal and parietal 
hypoperfusion. In the DLB group, frontal HMPAO uptake was significantly lower 
than in the AD group. Two predictive scores were established by a factorial 
discriminant analysis from six left cortical indices (medial frontal, lateral 
frontal, posterior frontal, temporoparietal, parietal and parietooccipital) and 
the Mini-Mental State Examination, which correctly classified 53 of 60 patients 
(88%) (DLB, 18 of 20; AD, 16 of 20; IPD, 19 of 20).
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate the presence of diffuse cortical 
abnormalities in DLB and suggest that SPECT may be useful in discriminating in 
vivo DLB from AD, revealing mainly frontal hypoperfusion in the former group. We 
estimate that SPECT study increases the possibility of separating DLB and AD 
because both disorders share different patterns of cerebral blood flow 
abnormality.

PMID: 10452310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


564. Neuropsychiatry Neuropsychol Behav Neurol. 1999 Jul;12(3):184-92.

Dopamine systems in human immunodeficiency virus-associated dementia.

Lopez OL(1), Smith G, Meltzer CC, Becker JT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
Pennsylvania, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To provide an update of the neurobiologic basis of human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-associated dementia (HAD), with emphasis on the 
relationship between dopamine (DA) system dysfunction and behavioral 
manifestations.
BACKGROUND: HIV has a propensity to invade subcortical central nervous system 
areas, particularly the basal ganglia. Indeed, the core symptoms of HAD are 
similar to those seen in patients with frontal-striatal dysfunction, the 
"subcortical dementias" (e.g., Parkinson disease, Huntington disease, 
progressive supranuclear palsy).
FINDINGS: Damage to DA neurons appears to occur in early stages of the disease. 
Patients with HIV have decreased levels of cerebrospinal fluid DA, and patients 
with HAD have a reduction of the DA metabolite homovanillic acid but a relative 
preservation of other neurotransmitters, suggesting a loss of DA neurons. 
Neuropathologic examinations have shown neuronal loss of the globus pallidus, 
which is less severe in the neocortex. Furthermore, extrapyramidal signs and 
marked hypersensitivity to DA antagonists (e.g., neuroleptics) have a propensity 
to develop in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Neurobiologic investigations suggest that DA system dysfunction 
plays a critical role in the clinical manifestation of HIV infection, especially 
HAD. The causes of the vulnerability of this system to the infection are 
unknown. Understanding this mechanism is important to develop neuroprotective 
agents in the treatment of HAD and to design new therapies for HAD-related 
psychiatric symptoms.

PMID: 10456803 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


565. Arch Neurol. 1999 Sep;56(9):1111-8. doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.9.1111.

Deposition of beta-amyloid subtypes 40 and 42 differentiates dementia with Lewy 
bodies from Alzheimer disease.

Lippa CF(1), Ozawa K, Mann DM, Ishii K, Smith TW, Arawaka S, Mori H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, MCP-Hahnemann University, Philadelphia, PA 19129, 
USA. lippa@auhs.edu

BACKGROUND: Alterations in the metabolism of the amyloid precursor protein and 
the formation of beta-amyloid (Abeta) plaques are associated with neuronal death 
in Alzheimer disease (AD). The plaque subtype Abeta(x-42) occurs as an early 
event, with Abeta(x-40) plaques forming at a later stage. In dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB), an increase in the amount of cortical Abeta occurs without severe 
cortical neuronal losses.
OBJECTIVE: To advance our understanding of the natural history of Abeta in 
neurodegenerative diseases.
DESIGN: We evaluated the expression of Abeta(x-40) and Abeta(x-42) in DLB using 
monoclonal antibodies and immunohistochemical techniques in 5 brain regions. The 
data were compared with those elicited with normal aging and from patients with 
AD.
SETTING AND PATIENTS: A postmortem study involving 19 patients with DLB without 
concurrent neuritic degeneration, 10 patients with AD, and 17 aged persons 
without dementia for control subjects.
RESULTS: The Abeta plaques were more numerous in patients with DLB than in 
controls in most brain regions, although the Abeta(x-42) plaque subtype was 
predominant in both conditions. Overall, Abeta(x-42) plaque density was similar 
in patients with DLB and those with AD, but Abeta(x-40) plaques were more 
numerous in persons with AD than in those with DLB. The ratio of Abeta(x-40) to 
Abeta(x-42) plaques was significantly reduced in persons with DLB compared with 
patients with AD.
CONCLUSIONS: The Abeta plaques were more numerous in patients with DLB than 
persons with normal aging, but the plaque subtypes were similar. The relative 
proportion of the 2 Abeta plaque subtypes in DLB is distinguishable from that in 
AD.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.56.9.1111
PMID: 10488812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


566. Neurology. 1999 Sep 22;53(5):956-62. doi: 10.1212/wnl.53.5.956.

Motor dysfunction in mildly demented AD individuals without extrapyramidal 
signs.

Goldman WP(1), Baty JD, Buckles VD, Sahrmann S, Morris JC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, Washington 
University, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

BACKGROUND: Although not as prominent as cognitive decline, motor dysfunction 
occurs in AD, particularly in the later stages of the disease.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether early-stage AD is also characterized by motor 
impairment.
METHODS: We examined very mildly (Clinical Dementia Rating [CDR] 0.5) and mildly 
(CDR 1) demented AD individuals in comparison with healthy elderly control 
individuals (CDR 0) on a variety of nonmotor cognitive and psychomotor measures 
and on four motor measures (gait velocity, finger tapping, reaction time, 
movement time). To minimize the possibility of extrapyramidal dysfunction 
contaminating the groups, only individuals who were clinically free of 
extrapyramidal signs were included in the study.
RESULTS: Mildly demented AD individuals were slowed on all motor measures except 
for finger tapping. No evidence of motor dysfunction was found in the very 
mildly demented AD group. As expected, both AD groups were impaired on the 
nonmotor cognitive and psychomotor tests.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that AD alone, in the absence of clinically 
confirmed extrapyramidal dysfunction, is associated with motor slowing in a 
stage-dependent manner. It remains to be determined whether this motor slowing 
represents a general characteristic of mild AD or indicates other neuropathology 
such as PD or the Lewy body variant of AD.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.53.5.956
PMID: 10496252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


567. Clin Neuropathol. 1999 Sep-Oct;18(5):232-9.

Familial dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).

Ohara K(1), Takauchi S, Kokai M, Morimura Y, Nakajima T, Morita Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Hyogo College of Medicine, Japan.

We report a rare familial case of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). The patient 
was a man who died at the age of 51. His parents were first cousins. Among three 
siblings, two were diagnosed as probable cases of DLB, and one was a possible 
case, according to the clinical diagnostic criteria of the consortium on DLB. 
Following the patient's autopsy, he was found to have had DLB without 
neurofibrillary tangles or senile plaques (pure form of diffuse Lewy body 
disease). His other siblings have been followed for more than ten years. 
Although these patients with familial DLB displayed clinical variability, all 
three siblings showed progressive dementia of early onset and progressive 
language disorder with paraphasia and difficulty in finding words. Psychotic 
features were also seen in the three siblings. The patient's sister showed 
compulsive behavior, and the other two siblings showed symptoms of parkinsonism. 
Neuropathologically, in addition to the usual neuropathology of DLB, the autopsy 
findings showed numerous small spheroids in the stratum pyramidale from the 
subiculum to CA1 of the hippocampus. Significant neuronal loss in CA2-3 of the 
hippocampus was detected. Axonal flow disturbance may be involved in the 
hippocampal formations of this incidence of familial DLB.

PMID: 10505432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


568. Ann Neurol. 1999 Oct;46(4):617-26. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8249(199910)46:4<617::aid-ana10>3.0.co;2-i.

Phenotypic variation in hereditary frontotemporal dementia with tau mutations.

van Swieten JC(1), Stevens M, Rosso SM, Rizzu P, Joosse M, de Koning I, 
Kamphorst W, Ravid R, Spillantini MG, Niermeijer, Heutink P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Several mutations in the tau gene have been found in families with hereditary 
frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17q21-22 
(FTDP-17). This study is the first attempt to correlate genotype and phenotype 
in six families with FTDP-17 with mutations in the tau gene (deltaK280, G272V, 
P301L, and R406W). We have investigated tau pathology in 1 P301L and 1 R406W 
patient. The R406W family showed a significantly higher age at onset (59.2 +/- 
5.5 years) and longer duration of illness (12.7 +/- 1.5 years) than the families 
with the other mutations. The six families showed considerable variation in 
clinical presentation, but none of them had early parkinsonism. Mutism developed 
significantly later in the R406W family than in the other families. 
Frontotemporal atrophy on neuroimaging in the R406W family was less severe than 
in the P301L and deltaK280 families. The P301L brain contained many pretangles 
in the frontal and temporal cortex, and the dentate gyrus of hippocampus, 
showing three tau bands (64, 68, and 72 kd) of extracted tau from the frontal 
cortex. The presence of many neurofibrillary tangles, many diffuse and classic 
neuritic plaques in the temporal and parietal cortex, and the hippocampus of the 
same P301L brain correlated with the presence of four sarkosyl-insoluble (60, 
64, 68, and 72 kd) tau bands. The coexistence of characteristic P301L and 
Alzheimer pathology in the same brain needs further explanation. The R406W brain 
showed abundant neurofibrillary tangles in several brain regions, and four tau 
bands (60, 64, 68, and 72 kd) of extracted tau from these regions. The slower 
progression of the disease in the R406W family might be explained by the 
microtubule-binding properties of the mutant protein.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8249(199910)46:4<617::aid-ana10>3.0.co;2-i
PMID: 10514099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


569. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1999 Nov;67(5):620-3. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.67.5.620.

Time course of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension and urinary incontinence in 
patients with postmortem confirmed parkinsonian syndromes: a clinicopathological 
study.

Wenning GK(1), Scherfler C, Granata R, Bösch S, Verny M, Chaudhuri KR, Jellinger 
K, Poewe W, Litvan I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Innsbruck, Austria.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1999 Nov;67(5):566.

OBJECTIVE: Although both orthostatic hypotension and urinary incontinence have 
been reported in a number of parkinsonian syndromes, such as Parkinson's disease 
(PD), multiple system atrophy (MSA), dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 
corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), 
differences in the evolution of these features have not been studied 
systematically in pathologically confirmed cases.
METHODS: 77 cases with pathologically confirmed parkinsonian syndromes (PD, 
n=11; MSA, n=15; DLB, n=14; CBD, n=13; PSP, n=24), collected up to 1994, formed 
the basis for a multicentre clinicopathological study organised by the NINDS to 
improve the differential diagnosis of parkinsonian disorders. The present study 
determined the time course-that is, latency to onset and duration from onset to 
death, of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension, and urinary incontinence in the 
NINDS series. Furthermore, the diagnostic validity of a predefined latency to 
onset within 1 year of disease onset of symptomatic orthostatic hypotension or 
urinary incontinence was analysed.
RESULTS: Significant group differences for latency, but not duration, of 
symptomatic orthostatic hypotension and urinary incontinence were found. 
Latencies to onset of either feature were short in patients with MSA, 
intermediate in patients with DLB, CBD, and PSP, and long in those with PD. 
Symptomatic orthostatic hypotension occurring within the first year after 
disease onset predicted MSA in 75% of cases; early urinary incontinence was less 
predictive for MSA (56%).
CONCLUSION: Latency to onset, but not duration, of symptomatic orthostatic 
hypotension or urinary incontinence differentiates PD from other parkinsonian 
syndromes, particularly MSA.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.67.5.620
PMCID: PMC1736638
PMID: 10519868 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


570. J Neurol. 1999 Sep;246 Suppl 2:II1-5. doi: 10.1007/BF03161075.

Clinical features differentiating patients with postmortem confirmed progressive 
supranuclear palsy and corticobasal degeneration.

Litvan I(1), Grimes DA, Lang AE, Jankovic J, McKee A, Verny M, Jellinger K, 
Chaudhuri KR, Pearce RK.

Author information:
(1)Neuropharmacology Unit Defense & Veteran Head Injury Program, Henry M. 
Jackson Foundation, Federal Building, Room 714, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-9130, 
USA, email: litvanI@helix.nih.gov.

Progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and cortocobasal degeneration (CBD) are 
often clinically confused with each other because they share a rapid disease 
progression, parkinsonism that responds poorly or transiently to levodopa 
therapy, and associated signs (e.g., ocular abnormalities, pyramidal signs and 
cognitive involvement). To improve the accuracy in diagnosing these disorders, 
this study examined the clinical features of 51 patients pathologically 
diagnosed with PSP and CBD. Logistic regression analysis identified two sets of 
predictors (models) for CBD patients, one consisting of asymmetric parkinsonism, 
cognitive disturbances at onset and instability and falls at first clinic visit, 
and the other one of asymmetric parkinsonism, cognitive disturbances at symptom 
onset and speech disturbances. While PSP patients often had severe postural 
instability at onset, symmetric parkinsonism, vertical supranuclear gaze palsy, 
speech and frontal lobe-type features, CBD patients presented with lateralized 
motor (e.g., parkinsonism, dystonia or myoclonus) and cognitive signs (e.g., 
ideomotor apraxia, aphasia or alien limb). On the other hand, CBD patients 
presenting with an alternate phenotype characterized by early severe frontal 
dementia and bilateral parkinsonism were generally misdiagnosed. PSP patients 
without vertical supranuclear gaze palsy were misdiagnosed. Recognizing the 
features which differentiate these disorders and the less obvious disease 
presentations as well as developing an increased index of suspicion will improve 
the diagnostic accuracy of these disorders.

DOI: 10.1007/BF03161075
PMID: 10525996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


571. J Neurol Sci. 1999 Oct 15;168(2):112-5. doi: 10.1016/s0022-510x(99)00167-7.

Normal cerebrospinal fluid glutathione concentrations in Parkinson's disease, 
Alzheimer's disease and multiple system atrophy.

Konings CH(1), Kuiper MA, Teerlink T, Mulder C, Scheltens P, Wolters EC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Academisch Ziekenhuis Vrije Universiteit, 
P.O. Box 7057, 1007 MG, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

We measured total glutathione concentrations in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) of 
non-demented Parkinson's disease patients (PD; n=71), demented PD patients (PDD; 
n=13), multiple system atrophy patients (MSA; n=10), Alzheimer's disease 
patients (AD; n=17) and age-matched controls (n=21). No statistically 
significant differences in the mean total CSF glutathione concentrations were 
found between groups and dopaminomimetic treatment was not found to have any 
effect on total CSF glutathione levels. Our main conclusion is that total 
glutathione is not useful as a CSF marker for assumed oxidative stress in 
patients with PD, MSA or AD.

DOI: 10.1016/s0022-510x(99)00167-7
PMID: 10526192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


572. Wien Klin Wochenschr. 1999 Sep 17;111(17):682-704.

What is new in degenerative dementia disorders?

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)L. Boltzmann-Institut für Klinische Neurobiologie, KH Wien-Lainz, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Alzheimer's disease and other degenerative disorders--dementia with Lewy bodies, 
frontotemporal dementia, etc.--causing about 90% of dementias in advanced age, 
are a major health problem of increasing practical, scientific, and 
socio-economic importance. Despite considerable progress in genetic, clinical 
and basic neurosciences, the aetiology and molecular mechanisms of these 
disorders are still unknown and their early diagnosis, due to lack of specific 
biomarkers, is still unsatisfactory. The epidemiology, risk factors, clinical 
and morphological diagnostic criteria, probable pathogenic factors, and 
molecular genetics of the major types of degenerative dementias are reviewed. 
Their management involves several pharmacologic, non-pharmacologic and 
psychosocial options. Modification of the disease by reducing known and 
presumable risk factors, cognitive enhancement with cholinomimetic drugs, and 
reduction of behavioural abnormalities with psychotropic drugs, together with 
informed community and private management are currently achievable goals that 
will serve to delay the progression of disease. In the future, these options 
will hopefully be replaced by more effective management strategies in order to 
improve the quality of life of both, patients and caregivers.

PMID: 10526393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


573. Arch Intern Med. 1999 Oct 11;159(18):2185-92. doi: 10.1001/archinte.159.18.2185.

Self-reported exercise tolerance and the risk of serious perioperative 
complications.

Reilly DF(1), McNeely MJ, Doerner D, Greenberg DL, Staiger TO, Geist MJ, 
Vedovatti PA, Coffey JE, Mora MW, Johnson TR, Guray ED, Van Norman GA, Fihn SD.

Author information:
(1)Division of General Internal Medicine, University of Washington Medical 
Center, Seattle 98195-6330, USA. dreilly@u.washington.edu

Comment in
    Arch Intern Med. 2000 May 22;160(10):1539.

BACKGROUND: Impaired exercise tolerance during formal testing is predictive of 
perioperative complications. However, for most patients, formal exercise testing 
is not indicated, and exercise tolerance is assessed by history.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the relationship between self-reported exercise 
tolerance and serious perioperative complications.
METHODS: Our study group consisted of 600 consecutive outpatients referred to a 
medical consultation clinic at a tertiary care medical center for preoperative 
evaluation before undergoing 612 major noncardiac procedures. Patients were 
asked to estimate the number of blocks they could walk and flights of stairs 
they could climb without experiencing symptomatic limitation. Patients who could 
not walk 4 blocks and climb 2 flights of stairs were considered to have poor 
exercise tolerance. All patients were evaluated for the development of 26 
serious complications that occurred during hospitalization.
RESULTS: Patients reporting poor exercise tolerance had more perioperative 
complications (20.4% vs 10.4%; P<.001). Specifically, they had more myocardial 
ischemia (P = .02) and more cardiovascular (P = .04) and neurologic (P = .03) 
events. Poor exercise tolerance predicted risk for serious complications 
independent of all other patient characteristics, including age (adjusted odds 
ratio, 1.94; 95% confidence interval, 1.19-3.17). The likelihood of a serious 
complication occurring was inversely related to the number blocks that could be 
walked (P = .006) or flights of stairs that could be climbed (P = .01). Other 
patient characteristics predicting serious complications in multivariable 
regression analysis included history of congestive heart failure, dementia, 
Parkinson disease, and smoking greater than or equal to 20 pack-years.
CONCLUSION: Self-reported exercise tolerance can be used to predict in-hospital 
perioperative risk, even when using relatively simple and familiar measures.

DOI: 10.1001/archinte.159.18.2185
PMID: 10527296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


574. Rev Neurol. 1999 Jul 16-31;29(2):152-7.

[Cognitive and behavioral disorders in Parkinson disease].

[Article in Spanish]

Pascual-Leone A(1), Press D.

Author information:
(1)Unidad de Neurología del Comportamiento, Universidad de Harvard, Boston, MA, 
USA. apleone@caregroup.harvard.edu

INTRODUCTION: Most patients with Parkinson's disease have cognitive and behavior 
disorders during the course of their illness.
OBJECTIVE: In this study we consider practical aspects of the treatment of 
patients with Parkinson's disease who have such problems.
DEVELOPMENT: Better understanding of both normal and abnormal physiology of the 
basal ganglia and their connections makes it possible to suggest hypotheses 
regarding the cause of these disorders. The combination of lesions of multiple 
subcorticocortical systems with different degrees of direct cortical pathology 
due to Lewy bodies and neuritic plaques may explain most of the changes, from 
depression to dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: It is necessary to test these concepts using studies based on 
specific predictions derived from pathophysiological models. Until this is done, 
the clinical treatment of cognitive and compartmental disorders in Parkinson's 
disease will continue to be symptomatic, complex and controversial.

PMID: 10528330 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


575. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 1999 Aug;21(4):435-43. doi: 10.1076/jcen.21.4.435.885.

Lexical, semantic, and action verbal fluency in Parkinson's disease with and 
without dementia.

Piatt AL(1), Fields JA, Paolo AM, Koller WC, Tröster AI.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, 
KS, USA.

Previous research suggests that lexical and semantic verbal fluency are 
differentially sensitive to the effects of cortical and subcortical dementias, 
but little is known about action fluency performance in dementias. The present 
study compared lexical, semantic, and action fluency in groups of patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) with and without dementia and an elderly control group. 
Findings revealed an interaction between fluency type and subject group. 
Although the demented PD (PDD) group performed significantly more poorly than 
their non-demented counterparts and normal controls on all three fluency tasks, 
a disproportionate disparity in scores was noted on the action fluency task. The 
findings suggest that action fluency may be particularly sensitive to 
PD-associated dementia and may be an early indicator of the conversion from PD 
to PDD. As reported elsewhere, PD without dementia was not associated with 
significant impairment on any of the fluency tasks.

DOI: 10.1076/jcen.21.4.435.885
PMID: 10550804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


576. Z Gerontol Geriatr. 1999 Oct;32(5):312-7. doi: 10.1007/s003910050122.

[Disabilities and handicaps due to hip fractures in the elderly].

[Article in German]

Becker C(1), Fleischer S, Hack A, Hinderer J, Horn A, Scheible S, Can H, Muche 
R, Gebhard F, Kinzl L, Nikolaus T.

Author information:
(1)Bethesda Geriatrische Klinik, Akademisches Krankenhaus der Universitätsklinik 
Ulm, Geriatrisches Zentrum Ulm/Alb-Donau, Zollernring 26-28, D-89073 Ulm. 
clemens.becker@medizin.uni-ulm.de

Comment in
    Z Gerontol Geriatr. 1999 Oct;32(5):305-6.

OBJECTIVE: to examine mortality, mobility, pain, institutionalization rates six 
month after hip fractures.
DESIGN: observational study, non-selected consecutive patients, time-set 
protocol.
SETTING: urban area (population n = 116,5000), five hospitals.
PARTICIPANTS: hip fracture patients (n = 214), age 65 + years (mean 82.4 years).
MEASUREMENTS: age, gender, prefracture status, operative procedures, 
complications, comorbidity, cognition (MMSE), depression (GDS), fear of falling, 
ADL (Barthel) and mobility and pain status (SAHFE protocol).
RESULTS: the incidence for this age group was 636.9/100,000, 31.8% were 
institutionalized elderly. 84% of the patients were female. Pre-existing 
comorbidity showed a high prevalence of neurodegenerative (cognitive deficits 
53. 6%, Parkinson's disease/syndrome 11.2%) and cerebrovascular diseases 
(16.8%). Six month postfracture, the mortality was 17.6%. From those surviving 
76.2% did walk indoors, 58.5% did also walk outdoors. Independent to dress were 
54.6%. Severe pain was reported by 10.2%, whereas 36.9% described no pain. The 
institutionalization rate at six month was 19.0%.
CONCLUSIONS: the study showed considerable mortality, a significant loss in 
function and social disintegration. Considerable differences were observed for 
subgroups of patients. Future treatment should focus on risk stratification and 
include postdischarge training programs. Moreover, preventive strategies should 
be implemented for high risk groups, such as ambulating patients with a history 
of stroke. Parkinson's disease and syndrome, dementia and nursing home 
residents.

DOI: 10.1007/s003910050122
PMID: 10552169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


577. Ann Neurol. 1999 Nov;46(5):708-15. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8249(199911)46:5<708::aid-ana5>3.0.co;2-k.

FTDP-17: an early-onset phenotype with parkinsonism and epileptic seizures 
caused by a novel mutation.

Sperfeld AD(1), Collatz MB, Baier H, Palmbach M, Storch A, Schwarz J, Tatsch K, 
Reske S, Joosse M, Heutink P, Ludolph AC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Ulm, Germany.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2000 Jul;48(1):126.

Recently, mutations in the tau gene on chromosome 17 were found causative for 
autosomal dominantly inherited frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism 
(FTDP-17). We describe a family carrying a missense mutation at nucleotide 1137 
C --> T, resulting in the amino acid substitution P301S. Methods of 
investigations include clinical, electrophysiological, and imaging techniques. 
This kindred presents with a novel phenotype characterized by an early onset of 
rapidly progressive frontotemporal dementia and parkinsonism in combination with 
epileptic seizures. We define the dopaminergic deficits as being predominantly 
presynaptic by the use of single-photon emission computed tomography with a 
dopamine transporter ligand. The association of this early-onset phenotype with 
P301S mutation is not entirely consistent with current criteria for the 
diagnosis of frontotemporal dementias and may encourage the search for tau 
mutations in diseases similar but not identical to FTDP-17. Also, the change 
from proline to serine suggests that this mutation might contribute to tau 
hyperphosphorylation.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8249(199911)46:5<708::aid-ana5>3.0.co;2-k
PMID: 10553987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


578. Brain. 1999 Dec;122 ( Pt 12):2309-19. doi: 10.1093/brain/122.12.2309.

An autopsy-verified study of the effect of education on degenerative dementia.

Del Ser T(1), Hachinski V, Merskey H, Munoz DG.

Author information:
(1)Sección de Neurología, Hospital Severo Ochoa, Leganés, Madrid, Spain.

A longitudinal study of the relationship between education and age of onset, 
rate of progression and cerebral lesion burden in a series of autopsy-confirmed 
demented patients with clinical and 6-monthly psychometric follow-up and autopsy 
was carried out. The study was conducted at the London Health Sciences Centre 
University Campus of the University of Western Ontario on 87 patients with 
pathologically confirmed Alzheimer's disease (60), dementia with Lewy bodies 
(11) or dementia with Lewy bodies plus Alzheimer's disease (16). Their 
educational attainment was classified as below high school, high school or above 
high school, and was similar to that of the age-adjusted general Ontario 
population. The age of onset of dementia, age at death, progression of cognitive 
decline, amount of neurodegenerative changes (senile plaques, neurofibrillary 
tangles and Lewy bodies) and cerebrovascular lesions (infarcts, lacunar state 
and white matter rarefaction) were assessed. Less educated patients became 
demented later and died later, but cognitive function declined at the same rate 
in all educational groups and there was no difference in the burden of 
neurodegenerative lesions between them. However, the less educated patients had 
more cerebrovascular lesions. It can be concluded that higher education does not 
modify the course of Alzheimer's disease, but lower education relates to the 
occurrence of cerebral infarcts. Our results suggest that a 'brain battering' 
model related to the higher prevalence of small vascular lesions in less 
educated individuals may explain their increased risk of dementia described by 
epidemiological studies better than the prevalent 'brain reserve' hypothesis.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/122.12.2309
PMID: 10581224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


579. Mov Disord. 1999 Nov;14(6):947-50. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(199911)14:6<947::aid-mds1006>3.0.co;2-o.

Progression of falls in postmortem-confirmed parkinsonian disorders.

Wenning GK(1), Ebersbach G, Verny M, Chaudhuri KR, Jellinger K, McKee A, Poewe 
W, Litvan I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Innsbruck, Austria.

Although falls are known to occur in several parkinsonian disorders, such as 
Parkinson's disease (PD), multiple system atrophy (MSA), dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB), corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP), differences in the evolution of this feature have not been studied 
systematically in pathologically confirmed cases. Seventy-seven cases with 
pathologically confirmed parkinsonian disorders (PD: n = 11, MSA: n = 15, DLB: n 
= 14, CBD: n = 13, PSP: n = 24), collected up to 1994, formed the basis for a 
multicenter clinicopathologic study organized by the National Institute of 
Neurological Disorders and Stroke to improve differential diagnosis of 
parkinsonian disorders. In the present study, we determined the time course, 
that is, the duration from first symptom to onset (latency) and duration from 
onset to death, of recurrent falls. Furthermore, we analyzed the diagnostic 
validity of a predefined latency to onset of recurrent falls within 1 year of 
symptom onset. Significant group differences for latency, but not duration, of 
recurrent falls were observed. Latencies to onset of falls were short in PSP 
patients, intermediate in MSA, DLB, and CBD, and long in PD. Recurrent falls 
occurring within the first year after disease onset predicted PSP in 68% of the 
patients. Our study demonstrates for the first time that latency to onset, but 
not duration, of recurrent falls differentiates PD from other parkinsonian 
disorders. Whereas early falls are important for the diagnosis of PSP, the 
addition of other features increases its diagnostic predictive value.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(199911)14:6<947::aid-mds1006>3.0.co;2-o
PMID: 10584668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


580. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1999 Nov;31(11):1544-9. doi: 
10.1097/00005768-199911000-00008.

Therapeutic value of exercise training in Parkinson's disease.

Reuter I(1), Engelhardt M, Stecker K, Baas H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurosciences, King's College Hospital, London, United 
Kingdom. I.Reuter@iop.kcl.ac.uk

PURPOSE: The objective of this study was to investigate the influence of an 
intensive exercise training on motor disability, mood, and subjective well-being 
in parkinsonian patients.
METHODS: The study was designed as an open long-term pilot trial over 20 wk. 
Sixteen slightly to moderately affected idiopathic parkinsonian patients (PD) 
were included. An intensive standardized exercise training was performed twice 
weekly over 14 wk in all patients. Evaluations were performed before the start 
of the study (exam. 1), after 7 wk (exam 2), 14 wk (exam 3), and 20 wk (exam 
4/long-term effect). The test battery included: 1) basic motor test (BMT) [test 
for muscle strength, flexibility, and coordination]; 2) Unified Parkinson's 
Disease Rating Scale (UPDRS) and Columbia University Rating Scale (CURS) for 
PD-specific motor disability; and 3) registration of psychometric data by Mini 
Mental State (MMS) for dementia and the Adjective Mood Questionnaire of Zeersen 
(AMQZ) and Sickness Impact Profile (SIP) for subjective well-being.
RESULTS: UPDRS sigma score (P < 0.0001), CURS sigma score (P < 0.0001) and BMT 2 
score (P < 0.0001) improved significantly by exercise training. Six weeks after 
termination of the training program, the majority of the patients had lost only 
minor components of their regained motor skills. There was no significant change 
in cognitive function during the study. The results of open interviews referring 
to subjective well-being were confirmed by the AMQZ and SIP. As an unexpected 
side effect, dyskinesias seemed to be better controlled.
CONCLUSION: Motor disability as well as mood and subjective well-being can be 
clearly improved by intensive sports activities in early to medium stage PD 
patients. A sustained ongoing benefit outlasting the active training period for 
at least 6 wk can be achieved but the exact duration of this benefit is open.

DOI: 10.1097/00005768-199911000-00008
PMID: 10589855 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


581. Arch Neurol. 1999 Dec;56(12):1458-61. doi: 10.1001/archneur.56.12.1458.

Neurochemical markers do not correlate with cognitive decline in the Lewy body 
variant of Alzheimer disease.

Sabbagh MN(1), Corey-Bloom J, Tiraboschi P, Thomas R, Masliah E, Thal LJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
USA.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 1999 Dec;56(12):1441-2.

BACKGROUND: Reductions in neocortical synapses and cholinergic function occur in 
patients with Alzheimer disease (AD) and in patients with the Lewy body variant 
of AD (LBV). The relation between these losses and cognitive decline has been 
reported frequently in patients with AD but remains unclear for patients with 
LBV.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the relation between clinical markers of disease 
progression and choline acetyltransferase activity or synaptic density, measured 
by synaptophysin (Syn) level, in patients with LBV, and to investigate the 
relation of these neurochemical markers with one another.
METHODS: Brain specimens of 41 patients with autopsy-confirmed (National 
Institute on Aging criteria for AD) LBV were examined. The last Mini-Mental 
State Examination and Blessed Information-Memory-Concentration test scores 
before death were reviewed. Midfrontal synapse counts were quantified by a 
dot-immunobinding assay for Syn. Choline acetyltransferase activity of the 
midfrontal cortex was assayed by established protocols.
RESULTS: The last Mini-Mental State Examination score before death did not 
correlate significantly with Syn level (n = 25, r = 0.25, P = .24); however, 
there was a trend toward significance for the relation between last Mini-Mental 
State Examination score and choline acetyltransferase activity (n = 39, r = 
0.31, P = .05). The last Blessed Information-Memory-Concentration test score did 
not correlate with either Syn level (n = 24, r = -0.17, P = .44) or choline 
acetyltransferase activity (n = 39, r = -0.16, P = .33). Finally, there was only 
a modest correlation between Syn level and choline acetyltransferase activity (n 
= 25, r = 0.38, P = .06), which did not reach statistical significance.
CONCLUSION: Unlike AD, neurochemical markers do not appear to correlate well 
with cognitive decline in LBV.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.56.12.1458
PMID: 10593300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


582. Neurology. 1999 Dec 10;53(9):1969-74. doi: 10.1212/wnl.53.9.1969.

Dementia as the most common presentation of cortical-basal ganglionic 
degeneration.

Grimes DA(1), Lang AE, Bergeron CB.

Author information:
(1)The Morton and Gloria Shulman Movement Disorder Centre, Toronto, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the clinical presentations and dominant symptoms of 
patients with postmortem proven cortical-basal ganglionic degeneration (CBGD) 
from one neuropathology center.
BACKGROUND: CBGD is a rare but increasingly recognized condition with clinical 
and pathologic features that continue to evolve. Attempts have been made to 
develop clinical criteria to enhance the specificity of diagnosis, but it is not 
clear what proportion of patients harboring CBGD disease present in the 
"classical" fashion versus other presentations. Previous large-case series that 
emphasize a parietal/perceptual-motor presentation may be biased because the 
cases mainly originate from movement disorder centers.
METHODS: Thirteen cases of pathologically confirmed CBGD with sufficient 
clinical data were identified from a single neuropathology center between 1981 
and 1996.
RESULTS: Before death, only 4 of the 13 patients had a clinical diagnosis of 
CBGD, 6 had a clinical diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease (AD), 1 had AD and 
parkinsonism, and 2 had an atypical dementia of the frontotemporal type. Nine of 
13 cases had early dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: Dementia was the most common presentation of CBGD in this study. 
Despite the best efforts to define criteria to enhance the specificity of a 
diagnosis of CBGD, it is becoming clear that the clinical syndrome that 
accompanies this disease is quite varied. Unfortunately, patients fulfilling 
classical diagnostic criteria may represent a minority of those with this 
pathologic diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.53.9.1969
PMID: 10599767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


583. Neurology. 1999 Dec 10;53(9):1974-82. doi: 10.1212/wnl.53.9.1974.

Validity of clinical criteria for the diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Verghese J(1), Crystal HA, Dickson DW, Lipton RB.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To assess the clinical validity of clinical diagnostic criteria for 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: We assessed the sensitivity, specificity, and positive and negative 
predictive values of the clinical criteria of the Consortium on dementia with 
Lewy Bodies (CDLB) in 18 patients with autopsy-proven DLB and in 76 patients 
with dementia not associated with Lewy bodies, using postmortem diagnosis as a 
gold standard.
RESULTS: CDLB criteria had either high sensitivity or high specificity, but no 
set of criteria simultaneously provided both high sensitivity and high 
specificity. Clinical criteria had higher predictive validity in patients with 
pure DLB than in patients with DLB and AD. Seventy-eight percent of patients 
with pure DLB had two or more major criteria, compared with 44% of patients with 
DLB and AD (p<0.02). If the nine patients with DLB and AD were excluded from the 
DLB group, the CDLB criteria for probable DLB had sensitivity of 78% and 
specificity of 85%. CDLB criteria for probable DLB (two or more major criteria) 
distinguished DLB from AD with a sensitivity of 78% and a specificity of 64%.
CONCLUSIONS: The proposed CDLB criteria have high negative predictive value and 
thus do well at excluding patients with DLB. Positive predictive value of 75% 
can be achieved by a combination of any three major or minor criteria, providing 
the analysis is confined to patients with mild to moderate dementia. Criteria 
were most accurate if confined to patients with pure DLB who had mild to 
moderate dementia.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.53.9.1974
PMID: 10599768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


584. Lancet. 1999 Dec 18-25;354(9196):2116-8. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(99)06264-9.

Mortality from Parkinson's disease and other causes in men who were prisoners of 
war in the Far East.

Gale CR(1), Braidwood EA, Winter PD, Martyn CN.

Author information:
(1)Medical Research Council Environmental Epidemiology Unit, University of 
Southampton, Southampton General Hospital, UK.

Comment in
    Lancet. 2000 Mar 4;355(9206):843.

BACKGROUND: During World War II, more than 140000 Allied prisoners of war (POWs) 
were held captive by the Japanese in conditions of extreme privation. There have 
been concerns that the survivors are at increased risk of degenerative 
neurological disorders, especially Parkinson's disease. We assembled a cohort of 
British ex-POWs and analysed their mortality in a 46-year follow-up study.
METHODS: Using records held by the War Pensions Agency, we abstracted data on 
11915 British former POWs. 11134 men were traced, and observed numbers of deaths 
between 1952 and 1997 were compared with those expected from national rates for 
the male population of England and Wales. Standardised mortality ratios (SMR) 
were calculated.
FINDINGS: Overall, mortality was lower than expected (7474 deaths vs 8796.2 
expected; SMR 0.85 [95% CI 0.83-0.87]). Death rates from Parkinson's disease 
among the former POWs were slightly below the national average, though this 
difference was not statistically significant (35 deaths vs 43.2 expected; SMR 
0.81 [0.56-1.13]). A similar pattern was seen for other degenerative 
neurological disorders (motorneuron disease 0.62 [0.31-1.11], multiple sclerosis 
0.88 [0.42-1.61], and dementia 0.88 [0.68-1.11]). The former POWs had 
significantly lower than expected mortality from all major causes of death 
(ischaemic heart disease 0.81 [0.78-0.85], cerebrovascular disease 0.88 
[0.81-0.95], all malignant neoplasms 0.92 [0.88-0.95], and respiratory disease 
0.79 [0.74-0.85]). They also had below average rates of death from tuberculosis 
(0.44 [0.26-0.71]) and suicide (0.77 [0.57-1.02]), though the latter relation 
was not statistically significant. Mortality from diseases of the liver was 
increased (chronic liver disease and cirrhosis 1.68 [1.28-2.17], primary 
carcinoma of the liver 2.42 [1.75-3.26]).
INTERPRETATION: There is little evidence that men who were POWs in the Far East 
have higher rates of death than the male population generally. The only 
exception is diseases of the liver, which may be due to infection with hepatitis 
B or C virus during captivity. Death-certification data cannot provide a 
complete picture of physical and mental health, but the period of severe 
malnutrition, frequent infections, exhaustion, and intense psychological stress 
seems not to have increased susceptibility to neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(99)06264-9
PMID: 10609817 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


585. Mov Disord. 2000 Jan;15(1):18-23. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200001)15:1<18::aid-mds1005>3.0.co;2-z.

Atypical parkinsonism in Afro-Caribbean and Indian origin immigrants to the UK.

Chaudhuri KR(1), Hu MT, Brooks DJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, King's College Hospital, Guy's, King's and St. 
Thomas' School of Medicine, London, UK.

This article reviews evidence for the occurrence of atypical parkinsonism in 
Afro-Caribbean and Indian ethnic minority subjects living in western countries, 
particularly the UK. Current information on the frequency, pattern, and 
prevalence of Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism in these communities is 
unclear and controversial. While several workers have suggested that there is a 
low prevalence of Parkinson's disease in populations of African origin, other 
workers have suggested a higher prevalence of Parkinson's disease in African 
Americans. Furthermore, little information is available in relation to the 
pattern of parkinsonism in these subjects. A recent phenomenologic study of 
parkinsonism in the French West Indies by Caparros-Lefebvre and colleagues has 
indicated a significantly increased frequency of atypical parkinsonism in local 
non-white subjects. Since 1995, we have been studying the pattern and frequency 
of parkinsonism in Afro-Caribbean and Indian (originating from the Indian 
subcontinent) patients living in the UK, with London serving as the coordinating 
center. Our results indicate that there is a three- to fourfold increase in the 
frequency of occurrence of sporadic atypical parkinsonism characterized by 
levodopa hyporesponsiveness, bradykinesia-dominant disease, and early cognitive 
dysfunction in these patients even after exclusion of patients with clinically 
probable multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear palsy, and Lewy body 
dementia. These findings are similar to observations made in the French West 
Indies. Ongoing studies in India suggest that atypical parkinsonism also affects 
local patients, and the pattern of parkinsonism tends to differ from 
Afro-Caribbean subjects in the UK. Studies are currently underway to unravel the 
mechanism of increased frequency of atypical parkinsonism in these ethnic groups 
and include genetic studies addressing polymorphisms of enzymes metabolizing 
levodopa, dietary neurotoxin screen and functional imaging studies of the 
striatum using positron emission tomography. Furthermore, the contribution of 
diabetes mellitus and hypertension, commonly seen in these ethnic groups, is 
also being examined.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200001)15:1<18::aid-mds1005>3.0.co;2-z
PMID: 10634237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


586. Mov Disord. 2000 Jan;15(1):24-9. doi: 
10.1002/1531-8257(200001)15:1<24::aid-mds1006>3.0.co;2-x.

Movement disorders in Alzheimer's disease: more rigidity of definitions is 
needed.

Kurlan R(1), Richard IH, Papka M, Marshall F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Rochester School of Medicine, New York 
14642, USA.

Rigidity, slowness, gait impairment, and other disorders of movement accompany 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) at various stages of the illness. The presence of these 
so-called extrapyramidal features have been reported to predict disease 
prognosis and pathologic localization. Unfortunately, failure to accurately 
characterize the movement disorder, particularly to distinguish parkinsonism 
from cortically based motor disturbances (that is, paratonia, apraxia), makes 
the results of many published studies difficult to interpret. There is an 
important need to precisely characterize movement disorders in studies of AD to 
clarify the clinical phenomenology and neurobiology of the condition and to 
accurately distinguish AD from other degenerative dementias, such as dementia 
with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1002/1531-8257(200001)15:1<24::aid-mds1006>3.0.co;2-x
PMID: 10634238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


587. Neurology. 2000 Jan 11;54(1):90-4. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.1.90.

Does leukoaraiosis predict morbidity and mortality?

Briley DP(1), Haroon S, Sergent SM, Thomas S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Marshall University School of Medicine, and 
Huntington VAMC, WV, USA. dbriley@nildram.co.uk

Comment in
    Neurology. 2002 Jun 11;58(11):1704.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether leukoaraiosis predicts morbidity and mortality.
BACKGROUND: Gait disturbance and leukoaraiosis both are common in the elderly. 
Gait disturbance predicts mortality. Leukoaraiosis may be a unifying factor to 
both gait disturbance and mortality.
METHODS: We followed 221 patients prospectively evaluated for severity of 
neurologic deficits by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) stroke scale and 
for leukoaraiosis in seven brain regions by CT, graded as absent (n = 119, 54%), 
mild (in at least one of seven brain regions; n = 54, 24%), or severe (present 
in all seven brain regions; n = 48, 22%). Pneumonia (n = 27, 12%), falls 
resulting in fracture requiring hospitalization (n = 7, 3%), and death (n = 38, 
17%) were end points.
RESULTS: Severe leukoaraiosis predicted death (Cox hazard ratio [HR] = 2.91; 95% 
CI = 1.5 - 5.6), pneumonia (HR = 5.1; 95% CI = 2.4 - 10.9), death from pneumonia 
(HR = 8.3; 95% CI = 1.5 - 46), and falls (HR = 6.8; 95% CI = 1.5 - 30). Severe 
leukoaraiosis predicted a combined end point of death, pneumonia, and falls (HR 
= 3.5; 95% CI = 2 - 6). Other predictors were NIH stroke scale score, age, 
smoking, diabetes, gait score, and referral diagnosis of either dementia or 
Parkinsonism. Severe leukoaraiosis remained a predictor after adjustment for 
these other factors (HR = 2.2; 95% CI = 1.2 - 3.9), but was borderline after 
adjusting for gait (HR = 1.96; 95% CI = 0.97 - 3.94; p = 0.061). The combination 
of severe leukoaraiosis and gait disturbance had the highest risk (HR = 4.4; 95% 
CI = 2.4 - 7.9).
CONCLUSION: Severe leukoaraiosis predicts morbidity and mortality independently 
of preexisting neurologic deficits. The combination of leukoaraiosis and gait 
disturbance carries a poor prognosis.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.1.90
PMID: 10636131 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


588. Ann Neurol. 2000 Feb;47(2):242-5.

Significant association between the tau gene A0/A0 genotype and Parkinson's 
disease.

Pastor P(1), Ezquerra M, Muñoz E, Martí MJ, Blesa R, Tolosa E, Oliva R.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic Universitari, Institut d'Investigacions 
Biomèdique August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

A significant association between the tau gene A0/A0 genotype and progressive 
supranuclear palsy has been reported recently. To determine if the presence of a 
tau polymorphism could constitute a risk factor for the development of sporadic 
and familial Parkinson's disease, a dinucleotide repeat marker at intron 11 was 
genotyped in 152 patients with PD, 52 patients with Alzheimer's disease, and 150 
healthy controls. We detected a significant difference in A0 allelic frequency 
in the Parkinson's disease group (79.27%) compared with the control group (71%) 
and the Alzheimer's disease group (73.07%). Individuals homozygous for the A0 
allele were also detected significantly more frequently in the Parkinson's 
disease group (63.8%) compared with the control group (52.66%) and the 
Alzheimer's disease group (48.07%). These results suggest a possible involvement 
of the tau gene in the pathogenesis of some cases of Parkinson's disease.

PMID: 10665497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


589. Acta Neuropathol. 2000 Feb;99(2):199-208. doi: 10.1007/pl00007425.

Practical measures to simplify the Braak tangle staging method for routine 
pathological screening.

Harding AJ(1), Kril JJ, Halliday GM.

Author information:
(1)Prince of Wales Medical Research Institute, Randwick, NSW, Australia.

The examination of neurofibrillary tangles is now recommended for the diagnosis 
of Alzheimer's disease as their location and density can distinguish early, 
intermediate and late disease stages. While the Braak tangle staging protocol 
can identify these stages, it uses an uncommon silver stain and hippocampal 
sample. The present study evaluates the Braak protocol using commonly used 
methods and cases fulfilling either CERAD criteria for Alzheimer's disease, 
criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies or without neurological disease. Temporal 
and occipital cortices from 72 cases were stained using tau immunohistochemistry 
and the Gallyas and modified Bielschowsky silver stains. The modified 
Bielschowsky silver stain was equivalent to the Gallyas silver stain for tangle 
staging. Semiquantitative evaluation of neurofibrillary tangles in the 
hippocampus and the inferior temporal cortex provided equivalent information to 
that obtained using the original Braak tangle staging protocol (kappa statistic 
of 0.97). Comparison of this modification with the CERAD criteria provided 
moderate agreement (0.51) between diagnostic categories when cases with dementia 
with Lewy bodies were included, but substantially increased agreement (0.74) 
when they were excluded. This simplification of the Braak tangle staging 
protocol is easy to apply, can be readily incorporated into existing CERAD 
procedures, and helps to distinguish cases with neurofibrillary tangles from 
those with Lewy bodies.

DOI: 10.1007/pl00007425
PMID: 10672328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


590. Curr Opin Neurol. 1999 Dec;12(6):761-70. doi: 10.1097/00019052-199912000-00017.

Multiple antioxidants in the prevention and treatment of neurodegenerative 
disease: analysis of biologic rationale.

Prasad KN(1), Cole WC, Hovland AR, Prasad KC, Nahreini P, Kumar B, 
Edwards-Prasad J, Andreatta CP.

Author information:
(1)Center for Vitamins and Cancer Research, Department of Radiology, School of 
Medicine, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Denver 80262, USA. 
Kedar.Prasad@UCHSC.edu

Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's disease are major progressive neurologic 
disorders, the risk of which increases with advancing age (65 years and over). 
In familial cases, however, early onset of disease (35-65 years) is observed. In 
spite of extensive basic and chemical research on Parkinson's disease and 
Alzheimer's disease, no preventive or long-term effective treatment strategies 
are available. The analysis of existing literature suggests that oxidative 
stress is a major intermediary risk factor for the action of diverse groups of 
neurotoxins that are involved in these neurodegenerative diseases. In this 
review, it is proposed that the epigenetic components (mitochondria, other 
organelles, membranes, protein modification) rather than nuclear genes of 
neurons are the primary targets for the action of neurotoxins, including free 
radicals. In addition, a scientific rationale for using multiple antioxidants in 
clinical trials for the prevention of Parkinson's disease and Alzheimer's 
disease among high-risk populations, and as an adjunct to standard therapy in 
the treatment of these diseases is presented.

DOI: 10.1097/00019052-199912000-00017
PMID: 10676761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


591. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2000 Feb;15(2):120-4. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1099-1166(200002)15:2<120::aid-gps84>3.0.co;2-7.

Do personality traits predict the occurrence of Alzheimer's disease?

Meins W(1), Dammast J.

Author information:
(1)Memory Clinic, Department of Geriatric Medicine, Albertinen Hospital, 
Hamburg, Germany. memory-clinic@albertinen.de

OBJECTIVE: To identify specific premorbid personality traits in patients with 
Alzheimer's disease (AD).
DESIGN: A prospective case-control study.
SETTING: A memory clinic of a department of geriatric medicine in a teaching 
hospital.
PATIENTS: Fifty-six consecutive patients with probable AD. Sixty-five controls 
with Parkinson's disease (PD).
MEASURES: Premorbid personality traits were assessed using the relative rating 
version of the Munich Personality Test (MPT).
RESULTS: The AD patients showed higher neuroticism than the controls with PD 
(p=0.013). In comparison with MPT normative values for psychiatric inpatients, 
the AD patients scored significantly (p<0.05) lower on neuroticism and higher on 
frustration tolerance and rigidity.
CONCLUSION: Our results support the assumption of specific premorbid 
characteristics in AD patients, ie increased neuroticism and rigidity. More 
research is needed to confirm the existence of typical premorbid personality 
traits in AD.

Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1099-1166(200002)15:2<120::aid-gps84>3.0.co;2-7
PMID: 10679843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


592. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 1998;23(3):281-4.

[Parkinson's disease and dementia].

[Article in Chinese]

Jin L(1), Zhang W, Ye H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xiangya Hospital, Hunan Medical University, 
Changsha.

Neuropsychological tests were carried out in 30 patients with Parkinson's 
disease and 26 healthy controls. The results showed that the average scores of 
HRB(A)-RC test were above the limited scores, 45.45%-86.36% cases being over the 
limited scores (P < 0.01), except speech sound perception test. Damage degrees 
(DQ) from the least to the most serious were 63.64%. WAIS-RC test and WMS test 
showed that the average scores of IQ and MQ in patients were lower than those in 
the normal. The difference of IQ, MQ scores between patients and controls was 
very significant (P < 0.01). The damaged cases of IQ, MQ from the least to the 
most serious were 20% and 60%, respectively. This indicated that the patients 
with Parkinson's disease were obviously damaged in intelligence and memory. In 
this article, there were 6 cases (20%) fitted the diagnostic standard of 
dementia, among them, 4 were subcortical dementia and 2 cases were complex 
dementia. We found that the differences between the course and IQ, MQ were very 
significant (P < 0.05), but not between the course and DQ. It is implied that in 
the very early stage, the patients could appear abnormal in neuropsychology, and 
the intelligence and memory may be damaged more seriously in longer course. The 
result suggests that the early diagnosis and prompt intervention is important to 
prevent the occurrence and advance of dementia.

PMID: 10681760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


593. Exp Neurol. 2000 Feb;161(2):527-34. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1999.7307.

Abeta42-carboxy-terminal-like immunoreactivity is associated with intracellular 
neurofibrillary tangles and pick bodies.

Schwab C(1), McGeer PL.

Author information:
(1)Kinsmen Laboratory of Neurological Research, the Neurodegenerative Disorders 
Centre, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, V6T 1Z3, 
Canada.

Co-occurrence of neurofibrillary tangles (NFTs) and beta-amyloid 
(Abeta)-containing plaques is the pathological hallmark of Alzheimer's disease 
(AD). Much research has been carried out to elucidate the possible interactions 
of these two characteristic lesions. Here we show by immunohistochemistry that 
an Abeta42-carboxy-terminal-like epitope (tAbeta42) is associated with NFTs at 
an early, intraneuronal stage. The NFTs immunoreactive for tAbeta42 were also 
positive for tau2. tAbeta42 NFTs occurred even in cases without plaques or any 
other form of extracellular Abeta deposits. NFTs were tAbeta42 immunoreactive 
under all tangle forming conditions studied: AD, the parkinsonism dementia 
complex of Guam, progressive supranuclear palsy, and elderly controls. In Pick 
disease, which is another "tauopathy" Pick bodies and ballooned neurons were 
found to be immunoreactive for tAbeta42. Appearance of an epitope of Abeta in 
neurons at such an early stage of tangle formation and in Pick bodies may 
indicate a direct connection of Abeta42 and cytoskeletal disarrangement, 
although cross-reactivity with other epitopes cannot be ruled out.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1999.7307
PMID: 10686074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


594. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 1999 Nov;39(11):1118-24.

[An autopsy case of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/parkinsonism-dementia complex 
with family history and living history in the Kii Peninsula focus].

[Article in Japanese]

Konagaya M(1), Kato T, Sakai M, Kuru S, Matsuoka Y, Hashizume Y.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Suzuka National Hospital.

The patient was 68 year-old woman with an 8-year history of parkinsonism which 
was followed by psychiatric symptoms and neurogenic amyotrophy 5 years after the 
onset. She had a family history of parkinsonism associated with dementia in all 
of her three siblings. They grew up in Hobara village, a focus of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis (ALS) in the Kii Peninsula of Japan, in their childhood. Their 
parents were neither consanguineous nor natives of the Kii Peninsula. The brain 
weight was 1,040 g, and there were mild frontal lobe atrophy, moderate atrophy 
of pes hippocampi, decoloration of the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus, and 
anterior spinal root atrophy. The microscopic examinations revealed degeneration 
of CA 1 portion of the hippocampus to parahippocampal gyrus, substantia nigra, 
locus ceruleus and spinal anterior horn with Bunina body. The spinal pyramidal 
tracts also degenerated mildly. The neurofibrillary tangles (NFT) were observed 
in the cerebral cortex, especially in the cortices through hippocampus to 
lateral occipitotemporal gyri, basal nucleus of Meynert, basal ganglia, 
thalamus, substantia nigra and widespread regions of the central nervous system 
through the brainstem to the spinal cord including the nucleus of Onufrowicz. In 
spite of a few amount of the senile plaques in the cerebral cortex and Lewy 
bodies in the substantia nigra and locus ceruleus, abundant NFT distributed 
mainly in the third layer of the cerebral cortex, which is the characteristic 
finding of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis/Parkinsonism-dementia Complex (ALS/PDC) 
in the island of Guam. Thus this was verified ALS/PDC case outside the Guam 
island. The high incidence of neurological disease in her siblings and their 
history of living in the focus region in childhood suggest the genetic factor of 
ALS/PDC which is sensitive to certain environmental agents in the early stage of 
the life.

PMID: 10689933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


595. Neurology. 2000 Feb 22;54(4):818-27. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.4.818.

Familial frontotemporal dementia with ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative 
inclusions.

Kertesz A(1), Kawarai T, Rogaeva E, St George-Hyslop P, Poorkaj P, Bird TD, 
Munoz DG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurological Sciences, St. Joseph's Health Centre, 
University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. 
kertesz@lri.stjosephs.london.on.ca

Comment in
    Neurology. 2000 Feb 22;54(4):784-5.

OBJECTIVE: To describe the clinical features, neuropathology, and genetic 
studies in a family with autosomal dominant frontotemporal dementia (FTD).
BACKGROUND: Clinical Pick's disease, or FTD with parkinsonism, has been 
described in several families linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17). Most of these 
have shown tau protein mutations. The clinical and pathologic variations in 
these families resemble the spectrum of sporadic FTD or "Pick complex."
METHODS: Clinical and behavioral analysis of the affected members with extensive 
histochemical and neuropathologic description of three cases, genetic analysis 
of three clinically affected members and seven at risk members to assess linkage 
to chromosome 17, and sequencing of the tau gene in two patients were performed.
RESULTS: The clinical pattern shows a highly stereotypic disinhibition dementia 
with late extrapyramidal features, progressive mutism, and terminal dysphagia in 
three generations of affected individuals. Neuropathology showed frontotemporal 
atrophy, and microscopically tau- and synuclein-negative and ubiquitin-positive 
neuronal inclusions, in the background of superficial cortical spongiosis, 
neuronal loss, and gliosis. Tau expression was restricted to oligodendroglia. 
All exons and surrounding introns of the tau gene were sequenced, and no 
mutation or disease-related polymorphisms were detected in either of two 
affected pedigree members.
CONCLUSION: This family with autosomal dominant frontotemporal dementia (FTD) 
shows no tau expression in neurons. The ubiquitin-positive, tau-negative 
inclusions have been described before in FTD with and without motor neuron 
disease, but not in a familial form. The clinical and some pathologic features 
are similar to those of several of the families included in descriptions of FTD 
with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17, but the linkage to tau has been 
excluded. The defect in this family, however, could be functionally related to 
tau mutations.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.4.818
PMID: 10690970 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


596. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Mar;66(3):922-32. doi: 10.1086/302828.

Fine mapping of the chromosome 12 late-onset Alzheimer disease locus: potential 
genetic and phenotypic heterogeneity.

Scott WK(1), Grubber JM, Conneally PM, Small GW, Hulette CM, Rosenberg CK, 
Saunders AM, Roses AD, Haines JL, Pericak-Vance MA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

Apolipoprotein E (APOE) is the only confirmed susceptibility gene for late-onset 
Alzheimer disease (AD). In a recent genomic screen of 54 families with 
late-onset AD, we detected significant evidence for a second late-onset AD locus 
located on chromosome 12 between D12S373 and D12S390. Linkage to this region was 
strongest in 27 large families with at least one affected individual without an 
APOE-4 allele, suggesting that APOE and the chromosome 12 locus might have 
independent effects. We have since genotyped several additional markers across 
the region, to refine the linkage results. In analyzing these additional data, 
we have addressed the issue of heterogeneity in the data set by weighting 
results by clinical and neuropathologic features, sibship size, and APOE 
genotype. When considering all possible affected sib pairs (ASPs) per nuclear 
family, we obtained a peak maximum LOD score between D12S1057 and D12S1042. The 
magnitude and location of the maximum LOD score changed when different weighting 
schemes were used to control for the number of ASPs contributed by each nuclear 
family. Using the affected-relative-pair method implemented in GENEHUNTER-PLUS, 
we obtained a maximum LOD score between D12S398 and D12S1632, 25 cM from the 
original maximum LOD score. These results indicate that family size influences 
the location estimate for the chromosome 12 AD gene. The results of conditional 
linkage analysis by use of GENEHUNTER-PLUS indicated that evidence for linkage 
to chromosome 12 was stronger in families with affected individuals lacking an 
APOE-4 allele; much of this evidence came from families with affected 
individuals with neuropathologic diagnosis of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). 
Taken together, these results indicate that the chromosome 12 locus acts 
independently of APOE to increase the risk of late-onset familial AD and that it 
may be associated with the DLB variant of AD.

DOI: 10.1086/302828
PMCID: PMC1288173
PMID: 10712207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


597. Arch Neurol. 2000 Mar;57(3):347-51. doi: 10.1001/archneur.57.3.347.

Diagnostic accuracy of dementia with Lewy bodies.

Hohl U(1), Tiraboschi P, Hansen LA, Thal LJ, Corey-Bloom J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
USA.

Comment in
    Arch Neurol. 2000 Dec;57(12):1792.

BACKGROUND: Diagnostic criteria for dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) are still 
evolving. No data exist on prospective differentiation of DLB and Alzheimer 
disease (AD).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the clinician's diagnostic accuracy for DLB and analyze 
factors contributing to false-positive DLB diagnoses.
METHODS: A prospective series of 10 patients with clinically diagnosed DLB who 
came to autopsy was compared with 32 autopsy-confirmed cases of DLB (27 Lewy 
body variant, 5 diffuse Lewy body disease) and 20 autopsy-confirmed cases of AD 
(matched on age, sex, education, and initial Mini-Mental State Examination 
score) with regard to distinguishing and/or confounding clinical features.
RESULTS: The clinical diagnostic accuracy for DLB was 50%, with 5 of the 10 
patients clinically presumed to have DLB confirmed at autopsy. Of the 5 
misdiagnosed cases, 4 had AD and 1 had progressive supranuclear palsy. The 
misdiagnosed DLB cases who had pure AD had fewer hallucinations (25%) than those 
with Lewy body variant (63%) or diffuse Lewy body disease (100%) (P = .048); 
however, an equal amount of spontaneous (in the absence of neuroleptics) 
extrapyramidal signs was found. There were no differences among groups with 
regard to daily fluctuations in cognition or falls. Compared with the AD control 
group, the misdiagnosed DLB cases with pure AD showed significantly more 
spontaneous extrapyramidal signs (P< or =.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The clinician's diagnostic accuracy for DLB was poor. Early 
spontaneous extrapyramidal signs in AD were associated with false-positive 
clinical diagnoses of DLB. The distinction between DLB and AD may be improved by 
greater emphasis on hallucinations.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.57.3.347
PMID: 10714660 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


598. Neurology. 2000 Mar 14;54(5):1208-9. doi: 10.1212/wnl.54.5.1208.

Risk of Alzheimer's disease in relatives of Parkinson's disease patients with 
and without dementia.

Jacobs H, Vieregge P.

Comment on
    Neurology. 1999 Mar 10;52(4):719-24.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.54.5.1208
PMID: 10720310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


599. J Neurosci Res. 2000 Apr 1;60(1):73-86. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000401)60:1<73::AID-JNR8>3.0.CO;2-S.

Broadly altered expression of the mRNA isoforms of FE65, a facilitator of beta 
amyloidogenesis, in Alzheimer cerebellum and other brain regions.

Hu Q(1), Jin LW, Starbuck MY, Martin GM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle 98195, USA. 
qhu@u.washington.edu

FE65 is a key "adapter" protein that links a multiprotein complex to an 
intracellular domain of beta-amyloid precursor protein (betaPP). Its 
overexpression modulates the trafficking of betaPP and facilitates the 
generation of beta-amyloid (Abeta). FE65 is predominantly expressed in brain 
tissues. An exon 9-inclusive isoform is exclusively expressed in neurons, and an 
exon 9-exclusive isoform is only expressed in non-neuronal cells. We quantitated 
the two isoforms in middle temporal cortex, middle frontal cortex, cerebellar 
cortex and caudate nucleus of 17 Alzheimer disease (AD) patients, 12 normal 
controls and 9 non-AD neurodegenerative disease controls by reverse 
transcription-competitive polymerase chain reaction (RT-cPCR). Expression of the 
two isoforms was significantly and differentially altered, with a 30-57% 
decrease in levels of the neuronal form (P < 0.05-0.002) and a 73-135% increase 
in levels of non-neuronal form (P < 0.02-0.001), in the temporal and frontal 
cortex of AD brains. These alterations presumably reflect advanced 
neurodegenerative processes of these regions. Surprisingly, expression of both 
isoforms was significantly up-regulated by 42-66% in the cerebellar cortex and 
caudate nucleus of AD brains when compared to normal brains (P < 0.05-0.005). 
Diffuse Abeta-positive plaques were observed in the cerebellum of these AD 
subjects but not in the normal controls. Selective up-regulation of only the 
FE65 neuronal isoform was seen in the cerebellar cortex in association with 
other neurodegenerative diseases (largely Parkinson's disease). Because FE65 
modulates trafficking of betaPP toward the production of Abeta, the 
up-regulation of FE65 in AD cerebellum may be relevant to the genesis of diffuse 
plaques. Thus, early biochemical alterations in AD, not complicated by advanced 
pathology, may be beneficially investigated in the less-affected regions of the 
brain, such as the cerebellum.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1097-4547(20000401)60:1<73::AID-JNR8>3.0.CO;2-S
PMID: 10723070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


600. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2000 Apr;68(4):434-40. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.68.4.434.

What clinical features are most useful to distinguish definite multiple system 
atrophy from Parkinson's disease?

Wenning GK(1), Ben-Shlomo Y, Hughes A, Daniel SE, Lees A, Quinn NP.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital, Innsbruck, Austria.

OBJECTIVES: Few studies have attempted to identify what premortem features best 
differentiate multiple system atrophy (MSA) from Parkinson's disease (PD). These 
studies are limited by small sample size, clinical heterogeneity, or lack of 
postmortem validation. We evaluated the sensitivity and specificity of different 
clinical features in distinguishing pathologically established MSA from PD.
METHODS: One hundred consecutive cases of pathologically confirmed PD and 38 
cases of pathologically confirmed MSA in one Parkinson's disease brain bank were 
included. All cases had their clinical notes reviewed by one observer (AH). 
Clinical features were divided into two groups: those occurring up to 5 years 
after onset of disease and those occurring up to death. Statistical analysis 
comprised multivariate logistic regression analysis to choose and weight key 
variables for the optimum predictive model.
RESULTS: The selected early features and their weightings were: autonomic 
features (2), poor initial levodopa response (2), early motor fluctuations (2), 
and initial rigidity (2). A cut off of 4 or more on the ROC curve resulted in a 
sensitivity of 87.1% and specificity of 70.5%. A better predictive model 
occurred if the following features up to death were included: poor response to 
levodopa (2), autonomic features (2), speech or bulbar dysfunction (3), absence 
of dementia (2), absence of levodopa induced confusion (4), and falls (4). The 
resulting ROC curve based on individual scores showed a best cut off score of at 
least 11 of 17 (sensitivity 90.3%, specificity 92.6%).
CONCLUSIONS: Predictive models may help differentiate MSA and PD premortem. 
Hitherto poorly recognised features, suggestive of MSA, included preserved 
cognitive function and absence of psychiatric effects from antiparkinsonian 
medication. Diagnostic accuracy was higher in those models taking into account 
all clinical features occurring up to death. Further studies need to be based on 
new incident cohorts of parkinsonian patients with subsequent neuropathological 
evaluation.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.68.4.434
PMCID: PMC1736862
PMID: 10727478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


