3001. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013 Apr;120(4):571-6. doi: 10.1007/s00702-012-0956-y. 
Epub 2012 Dec 21.

In vivo neurochemical imaging of olfactory dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.

Bohnen NI(1), Müller ML.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA. 
nbohnen@umich.edu

Olfactory dysfunction is common in Parkinson's disease (PD) and has been 
attributed to early deposition of α-synuclein pathology in olfactory areas. The 
pathophysiology of olfactory dysfunction in PD, however, remains poorly 
understood. Changes in odor identification suggest in part impairment in odor 
memory, possibly due to hippocampal dysfunction. Olfactory dysfunction occurs 
also in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and increases with severity of dementia. 
Cholinergic degeneration is not only a feature of AD but can also occur in PD, 
at least in a subset of patients with cognitive changes. We reported previously 
that impaired odor identification in early PD is more closely correlated with 
hippocampal dopaminergic than nigrostriatal dopaminergic denervation. Results of 
our multi-tracer PET studies show that odor identification deficits in PD are 
best predicted by cholinergic denervation and to a lesser extent by dopaminergic 
denervation. These results suggest that olfactory dysfunction in PD may have 
multiple components including hippocampal dysfunction secondary to cholinergic 
and dopaminergic denervations. Olfactory dysfunction in PD may be the most 
marked in subjects at risk of incipient dementia, and may reflect the transition 
of PD toward a stage with more heterogeneous multi-system neurodegenerations. 
Our preliminary imaging data do not support a significant contribution of 
amyloidopathy or serotoninergic denervation to abnormal olfactory functions in 
PD, at least in the absence of dementia. We outline how progressive changes in 
olfaction may be used as a biomarker of cholinergic denervation and cognitive 
decline in PD patients. We will discuss also the utility of olfactory testing as 
an early screening test for neurodegeneration.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0956-y
PMCID: PMC3612386
PMID: 23263541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3002. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 May;84(5):505-10. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-304095. Epub 2012 Dec 21.

Clinical and cognitive correlates of visual hallucinations in dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Cagnin A(1), Gnoato F, Jelcic N, Favaretto S, Zarantonello G, Ermani M, Dam M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Sciences NPSRR, University of Padova Medical 
School, Via Giustiniani 5, Padova 35128, Italy. annachiara.cagnin@unipd.it

BACKGROUND: The presence of recurrent complex visual hallucinations (VHs) is a 
core feature of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). The aim of this study was to 
investigate which clinical and neuropsychological characteristics are associated 
with VHs and their predictive value over a 1 year follow-up.
METHODS: 81 DLB patients, 41 with (VH+) and 36 without (VH-) VHs, and 45 
patients with Alzheimer's disease (AD), were enrolled. All participants 
underwent extensive neuropsychological testing. Visual-spatial and perceptual 
abilities were evaluated with the Visual and Object Space Perception (VOSP) 
battery. Fluctuations in attention, rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder 
(RBD) symptoms, extrapyramidal signs and behavioural disturbances were studied 
with dedicated clinical scales.
RESULTS: The presence of VHs was associated with older age and later disease 
onset, but not with disease duration or with fluctuations, RBD or parkinsonism 
severity. Cognitive correlates of VHs were deficits in visual attention (digit 
cancellation: p<0.005) and executive functions (clock drawing: p<0.05; digit 
span forward: p<0.05) on a background of a slightly worse global cognitive 
performance (Mini-Mental State Examination: p=0.05). Visual-perceptual and 
visual-spatial deficits were significantly worse in DLB than in AD patients 
(VOSP subtests scores 1, 6, 7 and 8) but were not different in DLB VH+ and VH-, 
except for subtest 6. Poor performance in the visual attention task was an 
independent predictor of VHs.
DISCUSSION: Impairment of visual-spatial and perceptual abilities in DLB 
represents a disease related cognitive signature, independent of the presence of 
VHs, for which it may represent a predisposing condition. Visual attention, 
instead, is the main cognitive determinant for the genesis of VHs.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-304095
PMID: 23264688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3003. J Neurotrauma. 2013 Jun 1;30(11):981-97. doi: 10.1089/neu.2012.2699.

Neurochemical profile of dementia pugilistica.

Kokjohn TA(1), Maarouf CL, Daugs ID, Hunter JM, Whiteside CM, Malek-Ahmadi M, 
Rodriguez E, Kalback W, Jacobson SA, Sabbagh MN, Beach TG, Roher AE.

Author information:
(1)The Longtine Center for Neurodegenerative Biochemistry, Banner Sun Health 
Research Institute, Sun City, Arizona 85351, USA.

Dementia pugilistica (DP), a suite of neuropathological and cognitive function 
declines after chronic traumatic brain injury (TBI), is present in approximately 
20% of retired boxers. Epidemiological studies indicate TBI is a risk factor for 
neurodegenerative disorders including Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson 
disease (PD). Some biochemical alterations observed in AD and PD may be 
recapitulated in DP and other TBI persons. In this report, we investigate 
long-term biochemical changes in the brains of former boxers with 
neuropathologically confirmed DP. Our experiments revealed biochemical and 
cellular alterations in DP that are complementary to and extend information 
already provided by histological methods. ELISA and one-dimensional and two 
dimensional Western blot techniques revealed differential expression of select 
molecules between three patients with DP and three age-matched non-demented 
control (NDC) persons without a history of TBI. Structural changes such as 
disturbances in the expression and processing of glial fibrillary acidic 
protein, tau, and α-synuclein were evident. The levels of the Aβ-degrading 
enzyme neprilysin were reduced in the patients with DP. Amyloid-β levels were 
elevated in the DP participant with the concomitant diagnosis of AD. In 
addition, the levels of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and the axonal 
transport proteins kinesin and dynein were substantially decreased in DP 
relative to NDC participants. Traumatic brain injury is a risk factor for 
dementia development, and our findings are consistent with permanent structural 
and functional damage in the cerebral cortex and white matter of boxers. 
Understanding the precise threshold of damage needed for the induction of 
pathology in DP and TBI is vital.

DOI: 10.1089/neu.2012.2699
PMCID: PMC3684215
PMID: 23268705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3004. Neurol Sci. 2013 Sep;34(9):1537-41. doi: 10.1007/s10072-012-1276-6. Epub 2012 
Dec 30.

Diagnosis, assessment and management of delusional jealousy in Parkinson's 
disease with and without dementia.

Perugi G(1), Poletti M, Logi C, Berti C, Romano A, Del Dotto P, Lucetti C, 
Ceravolo R, Dell'Osso L, Bonuccelli U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

Comment in
    Neurol Sci. 2014 Aug;35(8):1307-8.

Patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) may present delusional jealousy (DJ). In 
a previous cross-sectional prevalence study we identified 15 cognitively 
preserved and five demented PD patients with DJ. The current study aimed at 
evaluating their clinical (motor and non-motor) characteristics and the 
pharmacological treatments associated with DJ, and its subsequent 
pharmacological management. Patients were assessed by neurologists and 
psychiatrists using the Hoehn and Yahr scale, the Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale, the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, the Beck Depression Inventory, 
the Hamilton Anxiety Scale and the Neuropsychiatric Inventory. Efficacy of DJ 
management was evaluated in follow-up visits. All patients were in therapy with 
dopamine agonists. A subgroup of five cognitively preserved patients developed 
DJ after a short period of treatment of therapy with dopamine agonists, while 
other patients developed DJ after a longer period of dopaminergic treatment. 
Psychiatric comorbidities were common in cognitively preserved and in demented 
patients. The pharmacological management included the interruption of dopamine 
agonists in two patients and the reduction of dopamine agonist dose plus the use 
of antipsychotics in other patients. These clinical data suggest that the 
management of medicated PD patients should include investigation for the 
presence of DJ and the evaluation of clinical characteristics potentially 
relevant to the prevention or the early recognition of delusions.

DOI: 10.1007/s10072-012-1276-6
PMID: 23274831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3005. Neurosci J. 2013;2013:424695. doi: 10.1155/2013/424695. Epub 2013 Jan 2.

Significance of Haemodynamic and Haemostatic Factors in the Course of Different 
Manifestations of Cerebral Small Vessel Disease: The SHEF-CSVD Study-Study 
Rationale and Protocol.

Staszewski J(1), Piusińska-Macoch R(1), Skrobowska E(2), Brodacki B(1), Pawlik 
R(3), Dutkiewicz T(2), Piechota W(4), Rączka A(4), Tomczykiewicz K(1), Stępień 
A(1).

Author information:
(1)Clinic of Neurology, Military Institute of Medicine, Szaserow 128, 04-141 
Warsaw, Poland.
(2)Department of Radiology, Military Institute of Medicine, Szaserow 128, 04-141 
Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Clinic of Ophthalmology, Military Institute of Medicine, Szaserow 128, 04-141 
Warsaw, Poland.
(4)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Military Institute of Medicine, Szaserow 
128, 04-141 Warsaw, Poland.

Rationale. This paper describes the rationale and design of the SHEF-CSVD Study, 
which aims to determine the long-term clinical and radiological course of 
cerebral small vessel disease (CSVD) and to evaluate haemostatic and 
haemodynamic prognostic factors of the condition. Design. This single-centre, 
prospective, non-interventional cohort study will follow 150 consecutive 
patients with different clinical manifestations of CSVD (lacunar ischaemic 
stroke, vascular dementia, vascular parkinsonism or spontaneous deep, 
intracerebral haemorrhage) and 50 age- and sex-matched controls over a period of 
24 months. The clinical and radiological course will be evaluated basing on a 
detailed neurological, neuropsychological and MRI examinations. Haemodynamic 
(cerebral vasoreactivity, 24 h blood pressure control) and haemostatic factors 
(markers of endothelial and platelet dysfunction, brachial artery flow-mediated 
dilatation test) will be determined. Discussion. The scheduled study will 
specifically address the issue of haemodynamic and haemostatic prognostic 
factors and their course over time in various clinical manifestations of CSVD. 
The findings may aid the development of prophylactic strategies and 
individualised treatment plans, which are critical during the early stages of 
the disease.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/424695
PMCID: PMC4437267
PMID: 26317092


3006. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2013 Jun;69(6):1247-60. doi: 10.1007/s00228-012-1459-3. 
Epub 2013 Jan 4.

Has inhibition of Aβ production adequately been tested as therapeutic approach 
in mild AD? A model-based meta-analysis of γ-secretase inhibitor data.

Niva C(1), Parkinson J, Olsson F, van Schaick E, Lundkvist J, Visser SA.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience, CNSP Innovative Medicines, AstraZeneca, Södertälje, Sweden.

PURPOSE: To date, γ-secretase inhibition is the most frequently studied 
mechanism of reducing Aβ in clinical trials with as yet no therapeutic success 
for AD patients, as measured by the slowing down of cognitive decline or an 
improvement in cognitive function. The aims of this investigation were to 
evaluate whether the amyloid hypothesis has been tested clinically, and to 
explore whether preclinical data are predictive of clinical Aβ effects.
METHODS: A model-based-meta analysis on Aβ levels and drug exposure over time 
was performed on published and in-house (pre-)clinical data with γ-secretase 
inhibitors (GSIs; semagacestat, avagacestat, begacestat, PF-3074014, and 
MK0752).
RESULTS: The clinical data available did not show any significant or robust 
reduction of CNS Aβ over time at dose levels intended for AD patients. In 
contrast, these doses resulted in an average increase in plasma Aβ levels over a 
24-h interval. A general agreement between preclinical and clinical data was 
found and allowed for interspecies extrapolations.
CONCLUSIONS: More substantially, CNS Aβ-lowering drugs are needed to test 
whether inhibition of Aβ production is efficacious in mild AD. Predictions based 
on preclinical data could assist in the selection of drug candidates and trial 
design.

DOI: 10.1007/s00228-012-1459-3
PMID: 23288352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3007. Zhonghua Nei Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Nov;51(11):885-8.

[A study on the cerebral glucose metabolism in progressive supranuclear palsy].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma AJ(1), Guo XJ, Li DC, Zhang BS, Pan XD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, the Affiliated Hospital of Qingdao University, 
Qingdao 266100, China. maaijun.cn@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the regional cerebral glucose utilization with 
(18)F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET and to investigate the correlation between 
cerebral glucose metabolism and the clinical characteristic of progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP).
METHODS: A total of 13 patients with PSP and 30 matched healthy controls were 
performed (18)F-FDG PET imaging at rest state. Visual inspection and statistical 
parametric mapping (SPM) were used to investigate regional cerebral metabolic 
rate of glucose (rCMRglc).
RESULTS: Based on the visual inspection, PET imaging in the PSP patients showed 
that the focal hypometabolic areas mainly included the bilateral frontal cortex, 
midbrain and subcortical structures. Compared to the controls, voxel-based 
analysis showed that the regional glucose metabolism decreased in bilateral 
superior, middle frontal gyrus, cingulate gyrus, midbrain and subcortical 
structures including basal ganglion and thalamus, which were consisted with the 
clinical characteristics, such as vertical gaze palsy, pseudobulbar palsy, 
postural instability, axial rigidity, dementia and so on.
CONCLUSION: (18)F-FDG PET imaging is helpful for the early diagnosis of PSP.

PMID: 23291028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3008. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 26;110(9):3537-42. doi: 
10.1073/pnas.1220464110. Epub 2013 Jan 7.

Augmenting CNS glucocerebrosidase activity as a therapeutic strategy for 
parkinsonism and other Gaucher-related synucleinopathies.

Sardi SP(1), Clarke J, Viel C, Chan M, Tamsett TJ, Treleaven CM, Bu J, Sweet L, 
Passini MA, Dodge JC, Yu WH, Sidman RL, Cheng SH, Shihabuddin LS.

Author information:
(1)Genzyme, a Sanofi Company, Framingham, MA 01701, USA. pablo.sardi@genzyme.com

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Feb 26;110(9):3214-5.
    J Neurol. 2013 May;260(5):1441-4.

Mutations of GBA1, the gene encoding glucocerebrosidase, represent a common 
genetic risk factor for developing the synucleinopathies Parkinson disease (PD) 
and dementia with Lewy bodies. PD patients with or without GBA1 mutations also 
exhibit lower enzymatic levels of glucocerebrosidase in the central nervous 
system (CNS), suggesting a possible link between the enzyme and the development 
of the disease. Previously, we have shown that early treatment with 
glucocerebrosidase can modulate α-synuclein aggregation in a presymptomatic 
mouse model of Gaucher-related synucleinopathy (Gba1(D409V/D409V)) and 
ameliorate the associated cognitive deficit. To probe this link further, we have 
now evaluated the efficacy of augmenting glucocerebrosidase activity in the CNS 
of symptomatic Gba1(D409V/D409V) mice and in a transgenic mouse model 
overexpressing A53T α-synuclein. Adeno-associated virus-mediated expression of 
glucocerebrosidase in the CNS of symptomatic Gba1(D409V/D409V) mice completely 
corrected the aberrant accumulation of the toxic lipid glucosylsphingosine and 
reduced the levels of ubiquitin, tau, and proteinase K-resistant α-synuclein 
aggregates. Importantly, hippocampal expression of glucocerebrosidase in 
Gba1(D409V/D409V) mice (starting at 4 or 12 mo of age) also reversed their 
cognitive impairment when examined using a novel object recognition test. 
Correspondingly, overexpression of glucocerebrosidase in the CNS of A53T 
α-synuclein mice reduced the levels of soluble α-synuclein, suggesting that 
increasing the glycosidase activity can modulate α-synuclein processing and may 
modulate the progression of α-synucleinopathies. Hence, increasing 
glucocerebrosidase activity in the CNS represents a potential therapeutic 
strategy for GBA1-related and non-GBA1-associated synucleinopathies, including 
PD.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1220464110
PMCID: PMC3587272
PMID: 23297226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3009. Brain Nerve. 2013 Jan;65(1):19-30.

[The genetics of corticobasal syndrome].

[Article in Japanese]

Doi H(1), Tanaka F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neurology and Stroke Medicine, Yokohama City 
University, Japan.

Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) is a clinical syndrome presenting with progressive 
asymmetric bradykinesia, rigidity, and dystonia accompanied by cortical signs, 
such as apraxia, alien limb phenomena, cortical sensory loss, myoclonus, and 
mirror movements. CBS is associated with different pathological conditions 
including FTLD-tau (corticobasal degeneration, CBD; progressive supranuclear 
palsy, PSP: and Pick disease), FTLD-TDP, Alzheimer disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob 
disease, and Parkinson disease/dementia with Lewy bodies. Among these, the most 
common pathology is CBD. In patients with familial and sporadic FTLD, MAPT, GRN 
and C9orf72 mutations are the three main causes of the disease, even though the 
C9orf72 mutation is rare in Japan. Patients with MAPT mutations present with 
FTLD-tau, and patients with GRN and C9orf72 mutations exhibit FTLD-TDP. FTLD is 
also associated with VCP, CHMP2B, TARDBP and FUS mutations, but each of these 
account for <1% of familial FTLD cases. In sporadic cases, the H1c haplotype and 
the rare p.A152T variant of MAPT are known to be associated with FTLD-tau, and 
the common genetic variant (rs5848) in the 3'-UTR of GRN is associated with 
FTLD-TDP. A recent genome-wide association study identified TMEM106B as a 
potential risk-modifying factor for FTLD-TDP, and STX6, EIF2AK3 and MOBP, for 
PSP. Despite major advances in genetic studies in recent years, the majority of 
sporadic CBS cases are genetically unsolved. Further studies are needed to 
unveil the genetic background of CBS. In this review, we discuss the recent 
advances related to the genetics of CBS, particularly about the genetics of 
FTLD.

PMID: 23300100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3010. BMC Neurosci. 2013 Jan 9;14:6. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-14-6.

Time course and progression of wild type α-synuclein accumulation in a 
transgenic mouse model.

Amschl D(1), Neddens J, Havas D, Flunkert S, Rabl R, Römer H, Rockenstein E, 
Masliah E, Windisch M, Hutter-Paier B.

Author information:
(1)QPS Austria GmbH, Parkring 12, Grambach 8074, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Progressive accumulation of α-synuclein (α-Syn) protein in different 
brain regions is a hallmark of synucleinopathic diseases, such as Parkinson's 
disease, dementia with Lewy bodies and multiple system atrophy. α-Syn transgenic 
mouse models have been developed to investigate the effects of α-Syn 
accumulation on behavioral deficits and neuropathology. However, the onset and 
progression of pathology in α-Syn transgenic mice have not been fully 
characterized. For this purpose we investigated the time course of behavioral 
deficits and neuropathology in PDGF-β human wild type α-Syn transgenic mice 
(D-Line) between 3 and 12 months of age.
RESULTS: These mice showed progressive impairment of motor coordination of the 
limbs that resulted in significant differences compared to non-transgenic 
littermates at 9 and 12 months of age. Biochemical and immunohistological 
analyses revealed constantly increasing levels of human α-Syn in different brain 
areas. Human α-Syn was expressed particularly in somata and neurites of a subset 
of neocortical and limbic system neurons. Most of these neurons showed 
immunoreactivity for phosphorylated human α-Syn confined to nuclei and 
perinuclear cytoplasm. Analyses of the phenotype of α-Syn expressing cells 
revealed strong expression in dopaminergic olfactory bulb neurons, subsets of 
GABAergic interneurons and glutamatergic principal cells throughout the 
telencephalon. We also found human α-Syn expression in immature neurons of both 
the ventricular zone and the rostral migratory stream, but not in the dentate 
gyrus.
CONCLUSION: The present study demonstrates that the PDGF-β α-Syn transgenic 
mouse model presents with early and progressive accumulation of human α-Syn that 
is accompanied by motor deficits. This information is essential for the design 
of therapeutical studies of synucleinopathies.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-14-6
PMCID: PMC3546911
PMID: 23302418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3011. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 May;38(6):938-49. doi: 10.1038/npp.2012.255. Epub 
2012 Dec 6.

Microglia, amyloid, and glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease with and 
without dementia.

Edison P(1), Ahmed I, Fan Z, Hinz R, Gelosa G, Ray Chaudhuri K, Walker Z, 
Turkheimer FE, Brooks DJ.

Author information:
(1)Centre of Neuroscience, Department of Medicine, Imperial College London, 
London, UK.

[(11)C](R)PK11195-PET measures upregulation of translocator protein, which is 
associated with microglial activation, [(11)C]PIB-PET is a marker of amyloid, 
while [(18)F]FDG-PET measures cerebral glucose metabolism (rCMRGlc). We 
hypothesize that microglial activation is an early event in the Parkinson's 
disease (PD) spectrum and is independent of the amyloid pathology. The aim of 
this study is to evaluate in vivo the relationship between microglial 
activation, amyloid deposition, and glucose metabolism in Parkinson's disease 
dementia (PDD) and PD subjects without dementia. Here, we evaluated 11 PDD 
subjects, 8 PD subjects without dementia, and 24 control subjects. Subjects 
underwent T1 and T2 MRI, [(11)C](R)PK11195, [(18)F]FDG, and [(11)C]PIB PET 
scans. Parametric maps of [(11)C](R)PK11195 binding potential, rCMRGlc, and 
[(11)C]PIB uptake were interrogated using region of interest and SPM 
(statistical parametric mapping) analysis. The PDD patients showed a significant 
increase of microglial activation in anterior and posterior cingulate, striatum, 
frontal, temporal, parietal, and occipital cortical regions compared with the 
controls. The PD subjects also showed a statistically significant increase in 
microglial activation in temporal, parietal, and occipital regions. [(11)C]PIB 
uptake was marginally increased in PDD and PD. There was a significant reduction 
in glucose metabolism in PDD and PD. We have also demonstrated pixel-by-pixel 
correlation between mini-mental state examination (MMSE) score and microglial 
activation, and MMSE score and rCMRGlc. In conclusion, we have demonstrated that 
cortical microglial activation and reduced glucose metabolism can be detected 
early on in this disease spectrum. Significant microglial activation may be a 
factor in driving the disease process in PDD. Given this, agents that affect 
microglial activation could have an influence on disease progression.

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2012.255
PMCID: PMC3629382
PMID: 23303049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3012. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Dec;84(12):1326-30. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-304381. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Early neuropsychological discriminants for Lewy body disease: an autopsy series.

Yoshizawa H(1), Vonsattel JP, Honig LS.

Author information:
(1)Taub Institute for Research on Alzheimer's Disease and the Aging Brain, 
Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, , New York, NY, USA.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Dec;84(12):1299-300.

OBJECTIVE: To determine which neuropsychological test measures and which 
symptoms at presentation might best differentiate dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) from Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Cases were from the Columbia University Alzheimer's Disease Research 
Center, and included cases with pathological diagnosis of pure DLB (n=12), mixed 
DLB and AD (DLB+AD n=23) and pure AD (n=89) who had Clinical Dementia Rating 0, 
0.5 or 1 at their first visit. Clinical symptoms and neuropsychological test 
measures were compared for pure DLB, DLB+AD and pure AD using univariate 
analysis of covariance and separate logistic regression analyses.
RESULTS: Visual hallucinations, illusions and extrapyramidal tract signs were 
more frequent as clinical features of the early stage of pure DLB compared with 
AD. The pure DLB patients showed more impaired visuospatial function than pure 
AD or DLB+AD patients whereas memory function was more severely impaired in pure 
AD or DLB+AD than in pure DLB. Analysis of memory subscores suggested that 
failure of retrieval was the major contributor to the memory deficit of DLB. 
Multiple logistic regression analysis showed that visuospatial function and 
delayed memory recognition were independent predictors of pure DLB from pure AD 
and from DLB+AD. But test measures did not discriminate between DLB+AD and pure 
AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Visuospatial function was more affected in pure DLB than in AD 
while memory retrieval deficit was more affected in AD than in pure DLB, in the 
early stages of dementia. However, DLB+AD did not show significant 
neuropsychological difference from pure AD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-304381
PMID: 23308020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3013. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Apr;1832(4):527-41. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.01.008. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Crosstalk between diabetes and brain: glucagon-like peptide-1 mimetics as a 
promising therapy against neurodegeneration.

Duarte AI(1), Candeias E, Correia SC, Santos RX, Carvalho C, Cardoso S, Plácido 
A, Santos MS, Oliveira CR, Moreira PI.

Author information:
(1)Life Sciences Department, University of Coimbra, Largo Marquês de Pombal, 
Coimbra, Portugal. anaimduarte@gmail.com

According to World Health Organization estimates, type 2 diabetes (T2D) is an 
epidemic (particularly in under development countries) and a socio-economic 
challenge. This is even more relevant since increasing evidence points T2D as a 
risk factor for Alzheimer's disease (AD), supporting the hypothesis that AD is a 
"type 3 diabetes" or "brain insulin resistant state". Despite the limited 
knowledge on the molecular mechanisms and the etiological complexity of both 
pathologies, evidence suggests that neurodegeneration/death underlying cognitive 
dysfunction (and ultimately dementia) upon long-term T2D may arise from a 
complex interplay between T2D and brain aging. Additionally, decreased brain 
insulin levels/signaling and glucose metabolism in both pathologies further 
suggests that an effective treatment strategy for one disorder may be also 
beneficial in the other. In this regard, one such promising strategy is a novel 
successful anti-T2D class of drugs, the glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) mimetics 
(e.g. exendin-4 or liraglutide), whose potential neuroprotective effects have 
been increasingly shown in the last years. In fact, several studies showed that, 
besides improving peripheral (and probably brain) insulin signaling, GLP-1 
analogs minimize cell loss and possibly rescue cognitive decline in models of 
AD, Parkinson's (PD) or Huntington's disease. Interestingly, exendin-4 is 
undergoing clinical trials to test its potential as an anti-PD therapy. 
Herewith, we aim to integrate the available data on the metabolic and 
neuroprotective effects of GLP-1 mimetics in the central nervous system (CNS) 
with the complex crosstalk between T2D-AD, as well as their potential 
therapeutic value against T2D-associated cognitive dysfunction.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbadis.2013.01.008
PMID: 23314196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3014. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2013;35(1):71-82. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2012.753037. 
Epub 2013 Jan 16.

Mood disturbances and cognitive functioning in Parkinson's disease: the effects 
of disease duration and side of onset of motor symptoms.

Foster PS(1), Drago V, Mendez K, Witt JC, Crucian GP, Heilman KM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Middle Tennessee State University, Murfreesboro, TN 
37132, USA. paul.foster@neurology.ufl.edu

Some research has supported differences in mood functioning in patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) whose motor symptoms begin at the left or right 
hemibody. Also, a relationship between disease duration and mood disturbances 
has been reported, but only for PD patients with right hemibody onset. There 
have been no investigations reported examining the potential interactions 
between side of onset of motor symptoms, mood, and disease duration on cognitive 
functioning. Hence, the purpose of this investigation was to determine whether 
the interaction between mood and disease duration differentially affects 
cognitive functioning in patients with PD whose motor symptoms begin at the left 
and right hemibody. A total of 33 PD patients with left hemibody onset and 29 PD 
patients with right hemibody onset were given a battery of tests to evaluate 
mood functioning and general cognitive functioning. As predicted, the results 
indicated that the interaction of disease duration and mood significantly 
predicted cognitive functioning for PD patients with right hemibody onset of 
symptoms but not for PD patients with left hemibody onset of symptoms. 
Interestingly, an unexpected finding was a significant positive relationship 
between disease duration and energy level for patients with left hemibody onset 
but not for patients with right hemibody onset. These results indicate that mood 
problems and disease duration interact to significantly affect cognitive 
functioning but only for those PD patients who experience a right hemibody onset 
of symptoms.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2012.753037
PMID: 23320400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3015. Ger Med Sci. 2013;11:Doc02. doi: 10.3205/000170. Epub 2013 Jan 14.

The risk of developing depression when suffering from neurological diseases.

Thielscher C(1), Thielscher S, Kostev K.

Author information:
(1)FOM University of Applied Sciences, Essen, Germany. 
christian.thielscher@fom.de

AIM OF THE STUDY: To investigate the comorbidity of Alzheimer's/dementia, 
epilepsy, multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's with depression.
METHODS: 42,914 patients who were newly diagnosed with the four comorbid 
diseases were included in the study. We analyzed how many of these patients 
developed depression within five years.
RESULTS: Between 21% (males with epilepsy) and 39% (women with Parkinson's)/44% 
(Alzheimer's patients under 60 years) developed depression within five years.
CONCLUSION: We recommend routine checks for depression in patients diagnosed 
with one of these diseases, especially in the most comorbid ones.

Publisher: Zweck der Untersuchung: Ermittlung der Häufigkeit des Auftretens von 
Depressionen im Gefolge von neurologischen Erkrankungen (M. Alzheimer, Demenz, 
Epilepsie, multiple Sklerose, M. Parkinson).Methodik: Wir beobachteten den 
Krankheitsverlauf von 42.914 Patienten, bei denen die genannten neurologischen 
Erkrankungen erstmals auftraten, über fünf Jahre, im Hinblick auf das Auftreten 
einer Depression.Ergebnisse: Bei 21% (männliche Patienten mit Epilepsie) bis 39% 
(weibliche Parkinson-Patientinnen) bzw. 44% (beide Geschlechter, Patienten unter 
60 Jahren mit Alzheimer-Diagnose) der Patientinnen und Patienten wurde innerhalb 
von fünf Jahren zusätzlich eine Depression diagnostiziert. Schlussfolgerung: Wir 
empfehlen, alle Patientinnen und Patienten mit einer der genannten Erkrankungen, 
v. a. den besonders komorbiden, auf Depression zu untersuchen.

DOI: 10.3205/000170
PMCID: PMC3546419
PMID: 23326249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3016. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54175. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054175. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

A consensus method for the prediction of 'aggregation-prone' peptides in 
globular proteins.

Tsolis AC(1), Papandreou NC, Iconomidou VA, Hamodrakas SJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Biophysics, Faculty of Biology, University of 
Athens, Panepistimiopolis, Athens, Greece.

The purpose of this work was to construct a consensus prediction algorithm of 
'aggregation-prone' peptides in globular proteins, combining existing tools. 
This allows comparison of the different algorithms and the production of more 
objective and accurate results. Eleven (11) individual methods are combined and 
produce AMYLPRED2, a publicly, freely available web tool to academic users 
(http://biophysics.biol.uoa.gr/AMYLPRED2), for the consensus prediction of 
amyloidogenic determinants/'aggregation-prone' peptides in proteins, from 
sequence alone. The performance of AMYLPRED2 indicates that it functions better 
than individual aggregation-prediction algorithms, as perhaps expected. 
AMYLPRED2 is a useful tool for identifying amyloid-forming regions in proteins 
that are associated with several conformational diseases, called amyloidoses, 
such as Altzheimer's, Parkinson's, prion diseases and type II diabetes. It may 
also be useful for understanding the properties of protein folding and 
misfolding and for helping to the control of protein aggregation/solubility in 
biotechnology (recombinant proteins forming bacterial inclusion bodies) and 
biotherapeutics (monoclonal antibodies and biopharmaceutical proteins).

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054175
PMCID: PMC3542318
PMID: 23326595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3017. Neuropathology. 2013 Jun;33(3):221-36. doi: 10.1111/neup.12016. Epub 2013 Jan 
20.

Human prion diseases: molecular, cellular and population biology.

Head MW(1).

Author information:
(1)National CJD Research & Surveillance Unit, Centre for Clinical Brain 
Sciences, School of Clinical Sciences, The University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, 
UK. m.w.head@ed.ac.uk

The past 20 years have witnessed a dramatic resurgence of interest in a hitherto 
obscure neurodegenerative disease, Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD). This was 
driven partly by the novelty of the prion hypothesis, which sought to provide an 
explanation for the pathogenesis of transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, 
involving a unique epigenetic mechanism, and partly by events in the UK, where 
an outbreak of a new prion disease in cattle (bovine spongiform encephalopathy 
or BSE) potentially exposed a large section of the UK population to prion 
infectivity through a dietary route. The numbers of cases of the resultant novel 
disease variant CJD (vCJD), have so far been limited and peaked in the UK in the 
year 2000 and have subsequently declined. However, the effects of BSE and vCJD 
have been far-reaching. The estimated prevalence of vCJD infection in the UK is 
substantially higher than the numbers of clinical cases would suggest, posing a 
difficult dilemma for those involved in blood transfusion, tissue 
transplantation and cellular therapies. The clinico-pathological phenotype of 
human prion diseases has come under close scrutiny and molecular classification 
systems have been developed to account for the different diseases and their 
phenotypic spectra. Moreover, enhanced human and animal surveillance and better 
diagnostic tools have identified new human and animal prion diseases. Lastly, as 
the prion hypothesis has gained widespread acceptance, the concepts involved 
have been applied to other areas, including extra-chromosomal inheritance in 
fungi, long-term potentiation in memory formation and the spread of molecular 
pathology in diverse conditions, such as Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's 
disease and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Studies at the molecular and cellular 
level have helped to provide a better understanding of human prion diseases, 
aided pathological diagnosis and helped inform public health decision-making.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12016
PMID: 23331517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3018. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2013 Feb;72(2):130-6. doi: 
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3182805c72.

Submandibular gland biopsy for the diagnosis of Parkinson disease.

Beach TG(1), Adler CH, Dugger BN, Serrano G, Hidalgo J, Henry-Watson J, Shill 
HA, Sue LI, Sabbagh MN, Akiyama H; Arizona Parkinson’s Disease Consortium.

Author information:
(1)Banner Sun Health Research Institute, Sun City, Arizona 85351, USA. 
thomas.beach@bannerhealth.com

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2013 Jun;28(6):734.

The clinical diagnosis of Parkinson disease (PD) is incorrect in 30% or more of 
subjects particularly at the time of symptom onset. Because Lewy-type 
α-synucleinopathy is present in the submandibular glands of PD patients, we 
assessed the feasibility of submandibular gland biopsy for diagnosing PD. We 
performed immunohistochemical staining for Lewy-type α-synucleinopathy in 
sections of large segments (simulating open biopsy) and needle cores of 
submandibular glands from 128 autopsied and neuropathologically classified 
subjects, including 28 PD, 5 incidental Lewy body disease, 5 progressive 
supranuclear palsy (3 with concurrent PD), 3 corticobasal degeneration, 2 
multiple system atrophy, 22 Alzheimer disease with Lewy bodies, 16 Alzheimer 
disease without Lewy bodies, and 50 normal elderly. Immunoreactive nerve fibers 
were present in large submandibular gland sections of all 28 PD subjects 
(including 3 that also had progressive supranuclear palsy); 3 Alzheimer disease 
with Lewy bodies subjects were also positive, but none of the other subjects 
were positive. Cores from frozen submandibular glands taken with 18-gauge 
needles (total length, 15-38 mm; between 10 and 118 sections per subject 
examined) were positive for Lewy-type α-synucleinopathy in 17 of 19 PD patients. 
These results suggest that biopsy of the submandibular gland may be a feasible 
means of improving PD clinical diagnostic accuracy. This would be particularly 
advantageous for subject selection in early-stage clinical trials for invasive 
therapies or for verifying other biomarker studies.

DOI: 10.1097/NEN.0b013e3182805c72
PMCID: PMC3571631
PMID: 23334596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3019. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;84(6):657-65. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-302441. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

The long-term safety and efficacy of bilateral transplantation of human fetal 
striatal tissue in patients with mild to moderate Huntington's disease.

Barker RA(1), Mason SL, Harrower TP, Swain RA, Ho AK, Sahakian BJ, Mathur R, 
Elneil S, Thornton S, Hurrelbrink C, Armstrong RJ, Tyers P, Smith E, Carpenter 
A, Piccini P, Tai YF, Brooks DJ, Pavese N, Watts C, Pickard JD, Rosser AE, 
Dunnett SB; NEST-UK collaboration.

Collaborators: Simpson SA, Moore J, Morrison PJ, Esmonde TF, Chada N, Craufurd 
D, Snowdon J, Thompson J, Harper P, Glew R, Harper R.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK. rab46@cam.ac.uk

Huntington's disease (HD) is a fatal autosomal dominant neurodegenerative 
disease involving progressive motor, cognitive and behavioural decline, leading 
to death approximately 20 years after motor onset. The disease is characterised 
pathologically by an early and progressive striatal neuronal cell loss and 
atrophy, which has provided the rationale for first clinical trials of neural 
repair using fetal striatal cell transplantation. Between 2000 and 2003, the 
'NEST-UK' consortium carried out bilateral striatal transplants of human fetal 
striatal tissue in five HD patients. This paper describes the long-term follow 
up over a 3-10-year postoperative period of the patients, grafted and 
non-grafted, recruited to this cohort using the 'Core assessment program for 
intracerebral transplantations-HD' assessment protocol. No significant 
differences were found over time between the patients, grafted and non-grafted, 
on any subscore of the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating Scale, nor on the 
Mini Mental State Examination. There was a trend towards a slowing of 
progression on some timed motor tasks in four of the five patients with 
transplants, but overall, the trial showed no significant benefit of striatal 
allografts in comparison with a reference cohort of patients without grafts. 
Importantly, no significant adverse or placebo effects were seen. Notably, the 
raclopride positron emission tomography (PET) signal in individuals with 
transplants, indicated that there was no obvious surviving striatal graft 
tissue. This study concludes that fetal striatal allografting in HD is safe. 
While no sustained functional benefit was seen, we conclude that this may relate 
to the small amount of tissue that was grafted in this safety study compared 
with other reports of more successful transplants in patients with HD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-302441
PMCID: PMC3646287
PMID: 23345280 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3020. Front Neurol. 2013 Jan 21;3:187. doi: 10.3389/fneur.2012.00187. eCollection 
2012.

Cerebrospinal fluid biomarker candidates for parkinsonian disorders.

Constantinescu R(1), Mondello S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The 
Sahlgrenska Academy, University of Gothenburg Gothenburg, Sweden.

The Parkinsonian disorders are a large group of neurodegenerative diseases 
including idiopathic Parkinson's disease (PD) and atypical Parkinsonian 
disorders (APD), such as multiple system atrophy, progressive supranuclear 
palsy, corticobasal degeneration, and dementia with Lewy bodies. The etiology of 
these disorders is not known although it is considered to be a combination of 
genetic and environmental factors. One of the greatest obstacles for developing 
efficacious disease-modifying treatment strategies is the lack of biomarkers. 
Reliable biomarkers are needed for early and accurate diagnosis, to measure 
disease progression, and response to therapy. In this review several of the most 
promising cerebrospinal biomarker candidates are discussed. Alpha-synuclein 
seems to be intimately involved in the pathogenesis of synucleinopathies and its 
levels can be measured in the cerebrospinal fluid and in plasma. In a similar 
way, tau protein accumulation seems to be involved in the pathogenesis of 
tauopathies. Urate, a potent antioxidant, seems to be associated to the risk of 
developing PD and with its progression. Neurofilament light chain levels are 
increased in APD compared with PD and healthy controls. The new "omics" 
techniques are potent tools offering new insights in the patho-etiology of these 
disorders. Some of the difficulties encountered in developing biomarkers are 
discussed together with future perspectives.

DOI: 10.3389/fneur.2012.00187
PMCID: PMC3549487
PMID: 23346074


3021. Sleep Med. 2013 Mar;14(3):229-36. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.11.019. Epub 2013 
Jan 23.

Sleep loss as risk factor for neurologic disorders: a review.

Palma JA(1), Urrestarazu E, Iriarte J.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Unit, Clinical Neurophysiology Section, University Clinic of Navarra, 
School of Medicine, University of Navarra, Pamplona, Spain.

Sleep loss refers to sleep of shorter duration than the average baseline need of 
seven to eight hours per night. Sleep loss and sleep deprivation have severe 
effects on human health. In this article, we review the main aspects of sleep 
loss, taking into account its effects on the central nervous system. The 
neurocognitive and behavioral effects of sleep loss are well known. However, 
there is an increasing amount of research pointing to sleep deprivation as a 
risk factor for neurologic diseases, namely stroke, multiple sclerosis, 
Alzheimer's disease, headache, epilepsy, pain, and somnambulism. Conversely, 
sleep loss has been reported to be a potential protective factor against 
Parkinson's disease. The pathophysiology involved in this relationship is 
multiple, comprising immune, neuroendocrine, autonomic, and vascular mechanisms. 
It is extremely important to identify the individuals at risk, since recognition 
and adequate treatment of their sleep problems may reduce the risk of certain 
neurologic disorders.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.11.019
PMID: 23352029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3022. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013 Jul;120(7):1109-25. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-012-0945-1. Epub 2013 Jan 25.

Organic bases of late-life depression: a critical update.

Jellinger KA(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neurobiology, Kenyongasse 18, 1070 Vienna, Austria. 
kurt.jellinger@univie.ac.at

Late-life depression (LLD) is frequently associated with cognitive impairment 
and increases the risk of subsequent dementia. Cerebrovascular disease, deep 
white matter lesions, Alzheimer disease (AD) and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) 
have all been hypothesized to contribute to this increased risk, and a host of 
studies have looked at the interplay between cerebrovascular disease and LLD. 
This has resulted in new concepts of LLD, such as "vascular depression", but 
despite multiple magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies in this field, the 
relationship between structural changes in human brain and LLD is still 
controversial. While pathological findings of suicide in some elderly persons 
revealed multiple lacunes, small vessel cerebrovascular disease, AD-related 
lesions or multiple neurodegenerative pathologies, recent autopsy data 
challenged the role of subcortical lacunes and white matter lesions as major 
morphological substrates of depressive symptoms as well as poorer executive 
function and memory. Several neuropathological studies, including a personal 
clinico-pathological study in a small cohort of elderly persons with LLD and 
age-matched controls confirmed that lacunes, periventricular and deep white 
matter demyelination as well as AD-related lesions are usually unrelated to the 
occurrence of LLD. In the same line, neuropathological data show that 
early-onset depression is not associated with an acceleration of age-related 
neurodegenerative changes. Very recent data on the critical role of 
glia-modulating neuronal dysfunction and degeneration in depression are 
discussed.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-012-0945-1
PMID: 23355089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3023. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54980. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054980. Epub 2013 Jan 24.

Pattern of regional cortical thinning associated with cognitive deterioration in 
Parkinson's disease.

Pagonabarraga J(1), Corcuera-Solano I, Vives-Gilabert Y, Llebaria G, 
García-Sánchez C, Pascual-Sedano B, Delfino M, Kulisevsky J, Gómez-Ansón B.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain.

BACKGROUND: Dementia is a frequent and devastating complication in Parkinson's 
disease (PD). There is an intensive search for biomarkers that may predict the 
progression from normal cognition (PD-NC) to dementia (PDD) in PD. Mild 
cognitive impairment in PD (PD-MCI) seems to represent a transitional state 
between PD-NC and PDD. Few studies have explored the structural changes that 
differentiate PD-NC from PD-MCI and PDD patients.
OBJECTIVES AND METHODS: We aimed to analyze changes in cortical thickness on 
3.0T Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) across stages of cognitive decline in a 
prospective sample of PD-NC (n = 26), PD-MCI (n = 26) and PDD (n = 20) patients, 
compared to a group of healthy subjects (HC) (n = 18). Cortical thickness 
measurements were made using the automatic software Freesurfer.
RESULTS: In a sample of 72 PD patients, a pattern of linear and progressive 
cortical thinning was observed between cognitive groups in cortical areas 
functionally specialized in declarative memory (entorhinal cortex, anterior 
temporal pole), semantic knowledge (parahippocampus, fusiform gyrus), and 
visuoperceptive integration (banks of the superior temporal sulcus, lingual 
gyrus, cuneus and precuneus). Positive correlation was observed between 
confrontation naming and thinning in the fusiform gyrus, parahippocampal gyrus 
and anterior temporal pole; clock copy with thinning of the precuneus, 
parahippocampal and lingual gyrus; and delayed memory with thinning of the 
bilateral anteromedial temporal cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: The pattern of regional decreased cortical thickness that relates 
to cognitive deterioration is present in PD-MCI patients, involving areas that 
play a central role in the storage of prior experiences, integration of external 
perceptions, and semantic processing.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054980
PMCID: PMC3554657
PMID: 23359616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3024. Semin Neurol. 2012 Sep;32(4):347-60. doi: 10.1055/s-0032-1331808. Epub 2013 Jan 
29.

Neuroimaging in neurodegenerative dementias.

McGinnis SM(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Cognitive and Behavioral Neurology, Department of Neurology, 
Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. 
smmcginnis@partners.org

Neurodegenerative dementias are characterized by insidious onset and gradual 
progression of cognitive dysfunction, initially relatively focal with respect to 
cognitive domains and brain regions involved. Neuroimaging techniques have 
contributed enormously to both our understanding of large-scale network 
specificity in neurodegenerative syndromes and our ability to make clinical 
diagnoses of syndromes such as Alzheimer's disease (AD), dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB), posterior cortical atrophy (PCA), logopenic primary progressive 
aphasia (PPA), agrammatic PPA, semantic dementia (SD), behavioral variant 
frontotemporal dementia (bvFTD), corticobasal syndrome (CBS), and progressive 
supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSPS). More importantly, rapid advances in imaging 
and computational techniques promise to improve our ability to make pathologic 
diagnoses of AD, DLB, and frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) pathologies 
in vivo at an early stage of illness. Neuroimaging is thus integral to the 
development and application of disease modifying therapies for neurodegenerative 
illnesses.

Thieme Medical Publishers 333 Seventh Avenue, New York, NY 10001, USA.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0032-1331808
PMID: 23361481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3025. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2013 Oct;39(6):644-53. doi: 10.1111/nan.12024.

Disturbed sleep in Parkinson's disease: anatomical and pathological correlates.

Kalaitzakis ME(1), Gentleman SM, Pearce RK.

Author information:
(1)Neuropathology Unit, Division of Brain Sciences, Department of Medicine, 
Imperial College London, London, UK.

AIMS: Abnormal sleep is a common feature of Parkinson's disease (PD) and 
prodromal disorders of sleep are frequent (e.g. restless legs syndrome and rapid 
eye movement sleep behaviour disorder). However, the exact pathological basis of 
disturbed sleep remains as yet undefined.
METHODS: To investigate this further, 32 PD cases were stratified into three 
groups: (1) PD with disturbed sleep, PD(S); (2) PD with dementia (PDD) and 
disturbed sleep, PDD(S); and (3) PD without disturbed sleep, PD(nS). The extent 
of α-synuclein (αSyn) and Alzheimer disease (AD)-type pathology [amyloid β 
peptide (Aβ) and tau] was assessed in 15 regions of the PD brain.
RESULTS: The results demonstrate a significant association between disturbed 
sleep in PD and αSyn pathology in specific brainstem [locus coeruleus 
(P = 0.006) and raphe nuclei (P = 0.02)], hypothalamic [paramammillary nuclei 
(P = 0.04) and posterior nucleus (P = 0.02)], subcortical/limbic [amygdala 
(P = 0.03), thalamus (P = 0.01)] and cortical [entorhinal cortex (P = 0.01)] 
regions. A statistically significant increase of tau pathology was observed in 
the amygdala (P = 0.03), CA2 sector of the hippocampus (P = 0.01) and entorhinal 
cortex (P = 0.04) in PD cases with disturbed sleep.
CONCLUSIONS: Pathological changes in these structures, residing in the brain 
circuitry relating to sleep physiology, strongly predict the presence of sleep 
disturbances in PD.

© 2013 British Neuropathological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/nan.12024
PMID: 23363035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3026. J Neurosci. 2013 Jan 30;33(5):2147-55. doi: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4437-12.2013.

Brain microstructure reveals early abnormalities more than two years prior to 
clinical progression from mild cognitive impairment to Alzheimer's disease.

Douaud G(1), Menke RA, Gass A, Monsch AU, Rao A, Whitcher B, Zamboni G, Matthews 
PM, Sollberger M, Smith S.

Author information:
(1)Functional MRI of the Brain (FMRIB) Centre, Nuffield Department of Clinical 
Neurosciences, University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 9DU, United Kingdom. 
douaud@fmrib.ox.ac.uk

Diffusion imaging is a promising marker of microstructural damage in 
neurodegenerative disorders, but interpretation of its relationship with 
underlying neuropathology can be complex. Here, we examined both volumetric and 
brain microstructure abnormalities in 13 amnestic patients with mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI), who progressed to probable Alzheimer's disease (AD) no earlier 
than 2 years after baseline scanning, in order to focus on early, and hence more 
sensitive, imaging markers. We compared them to 22 stable amnestic MCI patients 
with similar cognitive performance and episodic memory impairment but who did 
not show progression of symptoms for at least 3 years. Significant group 
differences were mainly found in the volume and microstructure of the left 
hippocampus, while white matter group differences were also found in the body of 
the fornix, left fimbria, and superior longitudinal fasciculus (SLF). Diffusion 
index abnormalities in the SLF were the sign of a subtle microstructural injury 
not detected by standard atrophy measures in the corresponding gray matter 
regions. The microstructural measure obtained in the left hippocampus using 
diffusion imaging showed the most substantial differences between the two groups 
and was the best single predictor of future progression to AD. An optimal 
prediction model (91% accuracy, 85% sensitivity, 96% specificity) was obtained 
by combining MRI measures and CSF protein biomarkers. These results highlight 
the benefit of using the information of brain microstructural damage, in 
addition to traditional gray matter volume, to detect early, subtle 
abnormalities in MCI prior to clinical progression to probable AD and, in 
combination with CSF markers, to accurately predict such progression.

DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4437-12.2013
PMCID: PMC6571077
PMID: 23365250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3027. Cent Nerv Syst Agents Med Chem. 2013 Mar;13(1):57-70. doi: 
10.2174/1871524911313010008.

Encephalopathy: a vicious cascade following forebrain ischemia and hypoxia.

Lin B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Miami Miller School of Medicine, PO 
Box 016960, Miami, FL 33101, USA. blin@med.miami.edu

Post ischemic/hypoxic encephalopathy is a progressive and widespread damage 
syndrome in human brain, which includes production of new ischemic foci as well 
as neurodegeneration associated with accumulation of amyloid protein (Aβ), which 
emerges within days after the primary ischemic or hypoxic ictus. Patients may 
suddenly suffer severe dementia and Parkinson's syndrome after a symptom-free 
period averaging 2 weeks following resuscitation. Death of neurons in the 
cortex, limbic system, globus pallidus (GP) and substantia nigra (SN) and damage 
to white matter are responsible. From experimental studies in animals evidence 
is obtained to reveal the mechanisms. Injured endothelia and activated platelets 
lead to secondary injury via thrombosis and vasoconstriction resulting in 
infarction and new foci of necrosis. Blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown allows 
penetration of blood-borne toxic substances into brain resulting in neuronal 
degeneration and enhanced inflammatory destruction. These secondary injuries 
happen within two weeks after moderate global ischemia. As these pathological 
changes cycle between the vascular and neuronal compartments, the damage expands 
and worsens. Aβ, β amyloid precursor protein (βAPP) and the inflammation 
mediator cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2) as well as γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) system 
degeneration participate in producing secondary injury. Thus, implementing 
multi-targeted prophylaxis before or at the brain-at-risk stage is desirable. A 
combination of protecting endothelia, inhibiting platelet activity and improving 
cerebral circulation is a fundamental strategy to block this vicious cascade, 
thereby ameliorating or preventing the encephalopathy.

DOI: 10.2174/1871524911313010008
PMID: 23369190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3028. Neurorehabil Neural Repair. 2013 Jun;27(5):448-59. doi: 
10.1177/1545968312471902. Epub 2013 Jan 31.

Cognitive rehabilitation changes memory-related brain activity in people with 
Alzheimer disease.

van Paasschen J(1), Clare L, Yuen KS, Woods RT, Evans SJ, Parkinson CH, Rugg MD, 
Linden DE.

Author information:
(1)Bangor University, Bangor, UK.

BACKGROUND: People with Alzheimer disease (AD) are capable of new learning when 
cognitive support is provided, suggesting that there is plasticity even in a 
degenerating brain. However, it is unclear how a cognition-focused intervention 
operates on a neural level.
OBJECTIVE: The present study examined the effects of cognitive rehabilitation 
(CR) on memory-related brain activation in people with early-stage AD, as 
measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
METHODS: A total of 19 participants either received 8 weeks of CR treatment (n = 
7) or formed a control group (n = 12). We scanned participants pretreatment and 
posttreatment while they learned and recognized unfamiliar face-name pairs.
RESULTS: Following treatment, the CR group showed higher brain activation during 
recognition of face-name pairs in the left middle and inferior frontal gyri, the 
left insula, and 2s regions in the right medial parietal cortex. The control 
group showed decreased activation in these areas during recognition after the 
intervention period. Neither group showed an activation change during encoding. 
Behavioral performance on face-name learning did not improve for either group.
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that CR may have operated on the process of recognition 
through partial restoration of function in frontal brain areas that are less 
compromised in early-stage AD and that physiological markers may be more 
sensitive indicators of brain plasticity than behavioral performance.

DOI: 10.1177/1545968312471902
PMID: 23369983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3029. Sleep Med. 2013 Aug;14(8):782-7. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.11.002. Epub 2013 Jan 
29.

Morbidities in rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder.

Jennum P(1), Mayer G, Ju YE, Postuma R.

Author information:
(1)Danish Center for Sleep Medicine, Department of Clinical Neurophysiology, 
University of Copenhagen, Glostrup, Copenhagen, Denmark. 
Poul.joergen.jennum@regionh.dk

Idiopathic rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (iRBD, RBD without 
any obvious comorbid major neurological disease), is strongly associated with 
numerous comorbid conditions. The most prominent is that with neurodegenerative 
disorders, especially synuclein-mediated disorders, above all Parkinson disease 
(PD). Idiopathic RBD is an important risk factor for the development of 
synucleinopathies. Comorbidity studies suggest that iRBD is associated with a 
number of other potential pre-motor manifestations of synucleinopathies such as, 
cognitive and olfactory impairment, reduced autonomic function, neuropsychiatric 
manifestations and sleep complaints. Furthermore, patients with PD and RBD may 
have worse prognosis in terms of impaired cognitive function and overall 
morbidity/mortality; in dementia, the presence of RBD is strongly associated 
with clinical hallmarks and pathological findings of dementia with Lewy bodies. 
These findings underline the progressive disease process, suggesting involvement 
of more brain regions in patients with a more advanced disease stage. RBD is 
also associated with narcolepsy, and it is likely that RBD associated with 
narcolepsy is a distinct subtype associated with different comorbidities. RBD is 
also associated with antidepressant medications, autoimmune conditions, and, in 
rare cases, brainstem lesions.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2012.11.002
PMCID: PMC3979349
PMID: 23375425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interests: none of the authors 
reported any conflicts of interest.


3030. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Apr;70(4):462-8. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1933.

Evaluation of potential infectivity of Alzheimer and Parkinson disease proteins 
in recipients of cadaver-derived human growth hormone.

Irwin DJ(1), Abrams JY, Schonberger LB, Leschek EW, Mills JL, Lee VM, 
Trojanowski JQ.

Author information:
(1)Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research and Institute on Aging, 
Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania 
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

IMPORTANCE: Growing evidence of cell-to-cell transmission of neurodegenerative 
disease (ND)-associated proteins (NDAPs) (ie, tau, Aβ, and α-synuclein) suggests 
possible similarities to the infectious prion protein (PrPsc) in spongiform 
encephalopathies. There are limited data on the potential human-to-human 
transmission of NDAPs associated with Alzheimer disease (AD) and other non-PrPsc 
ND.
OBJECTIVE: To examine evidence for human-to-human transmission of AD, Parkinson 
disease (PD), and related NDAPs in cadaveric human growth hormone (c-hGH) 
recipients.
DESIGN: We conducted a detailed immunohistochemical analysis of pathological 
NDAPs other than PrPsc in human pituitary glands. We also searched for ND in 
recipients of pituitary-derived c-hGH by reviewing the National Hormone and 
Pituitary Program (NHPP) cohort database and medical literature.
SETTING: University-based academic center and agencies of the US Department of 
Health and Human Services.
PARTICIPANTS: Thirty-four routine autopsy subjects (10 non-ND controls and 24 
patients with ND) and a US cohort of c-hGH recipients in the NHPP.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Detectable NDAPs in human pituitary sections and death 
certificate reports of non-PrPsc ND in the NHPP database.
RESULTS: We found mild amounts of pathological tau, Aβ, and α-synuclein deposits 
in the adeno/neurohypophysis of patients with ND and control patients. No cases 
of AD or PD were identified, and 3 deaths attributed to amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis (ALS) were found among US NHPP c-hGH recipients, including 2 of the 
796 decedents in the originally confirmed NHPP c-hGH cohort database.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Despite the likely frequent exposure of c-hGH 
recipients to NDAPs, and their markedly elevated risk of PrPsc-related disease, 
this population of NHPP c-hGH recipients does not appear to be at increased risk 
of AD or PD. We discovered 3 ALS cases of unclear significance among US c-hGH 
recipients despite the absence of pathological deposits of ALS-associated 
proteins (TDP-43, FUS, and ubiquilin) in human pituitary glands. In this unique 
in vivo model of human-to-human transmission, we found no evidence to support 
concerns that NDAPs underlying AD and PD transmit disease in humans despite 
evidence of their cell-to-cell transmission in model systems of these disorders. 
Further monitoring is required to confirm these conclusions.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1933
PMCID: PMC3678373
PMID: 23380910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: The authors 
report no financial disclosures related to the current study.


3031. Am J Neurodegener Dis. 2012;1(2):146-51. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

Amnestic mild cognitive impairment with low myocardial metaiodobenzylguanidine 
uptake.

Sakakibara R(1), Ogata T, Haruta M, Kishi M, Tsuyusaki Y, Tateno A, Tateno F, 
Mouri T.

Author information:
(1)Neurology, Internal Medicine, Sakura Medical Center, Toho University Sakura, 
Japan.

OBJECTIVES: We reported cases of amnestic mild cognitive impairment (MCI) 
without the core clinical features of dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) (dementia 
and spontaneous parkinsonism) with low uptake in (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine 
(MIBG) myocardial scintigraphy.
METHODS: During a 3-year period at a university clinic, we had 254 patients with 
memory complaints; 106 men, 148 women; mean age 72.5 years (48-95 years). In all 
patients we performed neurologic examination; memory tests including the MMSE, 
ADAScog, FAB and additional WMS-R; and imaging tests including brain MRI, SPECT 
and MIBG scintigraphy.
RESULTS: The criteria of amnestic MCI were fulfilled in 44 patients; and 13 of 
them (30%) showed low MIBG uptake. They had the following: uniformly elderly, 
with an equal sex ratio, have relatively slow progression, preserved general 
cognitive function (MMSE 24.8/30). In addition to memory impairment, they 
commonly showed low frontal function by FAB (12.5/18) and some had mild visual 
hallucination (5). Other than memory disorder, they had autonomic disorder 
(nocturia in 7, constipation in 2, postural hypotension in one), REM sleep 
behavioral disorder (in 3) and occipital hypoperfusion by SPECT (in 5).
CONCLUSION: This cohort of multidomain amnestic MCI cases may present with early 
stage DLB because of the presence of low MIBG uptake. Clinically, they commonly 
have low FAB, and may have visual hallucination, autonomic and sleep disorders.

PMCID: PMC3560457
PMID: 23383388


3032. BMJ Open. 2013 Feb 4;3(2):e001909. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001909. Print 2013.

Diagnosing Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI) in clinical trials: a systematic 
review.

Christa Maree Stephan B(1), Minett T, Pagett E, Siervo M, Brayne C, McKeith IG.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Health and Society, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK.

OBJECTIVE: To describe how criteria for amnestic Mild Cognitive Impairment 
(aMCI) have been operationalised in randomised controlled clinical trials 
(RCTs).
DESIGN: Systematic review.
INFORMATION SOURCES: EMBASE, PubMed and PSYCHInfo were searched from their 
inception to February 2012. Electronic clinical trial registries were also 
searched (February 2012).
STUDY SELECTION: RCTs were included where participant selection was made using 
Petersen et al-defined aMCI. There was no restriction on intervention type or 
the outcome tested.
DATA EXTRACTION: For each trial, we extracted information on study design, 
demographics, exclusion criteria and the operationalisation strategy for the 
five aMCI diagnostic criteria including: (1) memory complaint, (2) normal 
general cognitive function, (3) memory impairment, (4) no functional impairment 
and (5) no dementia.
RESULTS: 223 articles and 278 registered trials were reviewed, of which 22 met 
inclusion criteria. Various methods were applied for operationalising aMCI 
criteria resulting in variability in participant selection. Memory complaint and 
assessment of general cognitive function were the most consistently measured 
criteria. There was large heterogeneity in the neuropsychological methods used 
to determine memory impairment. It was not possible to assess the impact of 
these differences on case selection accuracy for dementia prediction. Further 
limitations include selective and unclear reporting of how each of the criteria 
was measured.
CONCLUSIONS: The results highlight the urgent need for a standardised approach 
to map aMCI. Lack of uniformity in clinical diagnosis, however, is not 
exclusively a problem for MCI but also for other clinical states such as 
dementia including Alzheimer's disease, Lewy Body, frontotemporal or vascular 
dementia. Defining a uniform approach to MCI classification, or indeed for any 
classification concept within the field of dementia, should be a priority if 
further trials are to be undertaken in the older aged population based on these 
concepts.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2012-001909
PMCID: PMC3586181
PMID: 23386579


3033. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2013;77(2):266-70. doi: 10.1271/bbb.120671. Epub 2013 
Feb 7.

Combined low calcium and lack magnesium is a risk factor for motor deficit in 
mice.

Taniguchi R(1), Nakagawasai O, Tan-no K, Yamadera F, Nemoto W, Sato S, Yaoita F, 
Tadano T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, Sendai, Japan.

The populations of the Kii Peninsula in Japan and of Guam present high 
incidences of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and Parkinsonism-dementia complex. 
It is thought that low levels of calcium (Ca) and magnesium (Mg) in the drinking 
water are involved in the pathogenesis of these diseases. The present study 
aimed to test the hypothesis that catalepsy, behavioral immobility and a 
Parkinsonian symptom results from functionally impaired dopaminergic neurons in 
mice fed low amounts of Ca and Mg (LCa/Mg). A group of mice fed a LCa/Mg diet 
for 6 weeks was compared to a control group on a standard diet. Cataleptic 
symptoms such as akinesia and rigidity were measured by the bar test. The 
anti-parkinsonian drugs dopamine (DA) precursor L-3,4-dihydroxy phenylamine 
(L-DOPA), the selective DA receptor D(2) agonist bromocriptine, and the DA 
releaser amantadine were tested for their effects on induced catalepsy. The mice 
developed catalepsy after 3 weeks on the LCa/Mg diet. LCa/Mg diet-induced 
catalepsy was improved by the administration of L-DOPA (50-200 mg/kg i.p.) in 
combination with benserazide (25 mg/kg i.p.), or of bromocriptine (0.25-4 mg/kg 
i.p.) or of amantadine (5-20 mg/kg i.p.). Immunohistochemical staining revealed 
that the intensity of tyrosine hydroxylase fluorescence was significantly 
decreased in the substantia nigra at the 6th week of LCa/Mg feeding in 
comparison with pair-fed controls. These results suggest that catalepsy in 
LCa/Mg mice results from hypofunction of the dopaminergic neurons. Moreover, our 
results support the hypothesis that LCa/Mg intake is one etiological factor in 
neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1271/bbb.120671
PMID: 23391905 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3034. Acta Neurol Scand. 2013 Sep;128(3):153-9. doi: 10.1111/ane.12089. Epub 2013 Feb 
7.

Depression and cognitive impairment in patients with mild parkinsonian signs.

Uemura Y(1), Wada-Isoe K, Nakashita S, Nakashima K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Matsue Seikyo General Hospital, Matsue, Japan. 
yskuemura@matsue-seikyo.jp

OBJECTIVES: Mild parkinsonian signs (MPS) are reported to be associated with 
increased risk of dementia, Parkinson's disease, parkinsonism, and vascular 
lesions of white matter and are also a significant predictor of mortality. 
Although more than 20% of subjects aged 60 years and older suffer from MPS in 
Japan, it is often unrecognized and underestimated by patients and medical 
physicians. We used neuropsychological methods to examine cognitive function and 
depressive symptoms in subjects with MPS.
METHODS: We performed a population-based study in Ama-cho, a rural island town 
in western Japan. Participants included 951 subjects aged 65 years and older, 
613 of whom completed all questionnaires, neurological examinations, and 
neuropsychological assessments and were included in the data analysis. Subjects 
were assessed for depression and subjective cognitive impairment using the 
Geriatric Depression Scale (GDS-15), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), 
Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR), and modified Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating 
Scale (mUPDRS).
RESULTS: Of the 613 participants, 143 were diagnosed with MPS. GDS scores were 
significantly higher in the MPS group compared with the motor control group, 
while MMSE scores were significantly lower.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that MPS correlate with both depressive symptoms 
and cognitive impairment.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

DOI: 10.1111/ane.12089
PMID: 23397887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3035. Behav Neurosci. 2013 Apr;127(2):175-183. doi: 10.1037/a0031357. Epub 2013 Feb 
11.

Frontal and posterior subtypes of neuropsychological deficit in Parkinson's 
disease.

Miller IN(1), Neargarder S(1), Risi MM(2), Cronin-Golomb A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology.
(2)Department of Psychology, Bridgewater State University.

Erratum in
    Behav Neurosci. 2013 Oct;127(5):743.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD) is heterogeneous in regard 
to affected domains. Although patterns of cognitive performance that may predict 
later dementia are as yet undetermined, posterior- versus frontal-type 
assessments show promise for differential predictive value. The present study 
included 70 individuals: 42 with idiopathic PD without dementia and 28 age- and 
education-matched healthy control adults (HC). Participants completed 
assessments of cognition with emphasis on tests that are sensitive to frontal 
and posterior deficits. PD patients were classified into cognitive subgroups and 
the subgroups were compared on demographic and disease variables. Individual 
performance across neuropsychological tests was evaluated for the PD group. 
Patients with PD performed more poorly than HC on several measures of cognition, 
and they were classified into frontal (12), posterior (3), both (10) and neither 
subgroups (17), the latter two in reference to frontal- and posterior-type 
deficits. The neither subgroup was distinguished by less motor impairment than 
the both subgroup, but the four subgroups did not otherwise differ on 
demographic or disease variables. Across patients, the tests most sensitive to 
cognitive impairment included measures of attention and executive functioning 
(frontal-type tests). Examination of individual test performance for PD revealed 
substantial heterogeneity across tests with respect to number and severity of 
deficits. The current study provides insight into which commonly used 
neuropsychological tests are most sensitive to cognitive deficits (strictly 
defined) in a nondemented, well characterized PD sample, and into the relation 
of cognitive subgroups to demographic and disease-specific variables.

DOI: 10.1037/a0031357
PMCID: PMC3819031
PMID: 23398433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3036. Brain Nerve. 2013 Feb;65(2):179-94.

[Role of oxidative RNA damage in aging and neurodegenerative disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Nunomura A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, University of Yamanashi, Japan.

It is now clear that RNA species not only encode proteins but also fulfill 
critical roles in regulating gene expression. Compared to other species, humans 
probably contain more non-coding RNAs, especially in the brain, where the 
non-coding RNAs may play a significant role in cognition. In neurons of human 
and rodent brains, oxidative damage to nucleic acids, predominantly to RNA, 
increases as a function of age; this may play a crucial role in the development 
of age-associated neurodegeneration. Indeed, compared to age-matched controls, 
patients with neurodegenerative disorders, including Alzheimer disease, 
Parkinson disease, dementia with Lewy bodies, and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 
show higher levels of neuronal RNA oxidation. Furthermore, oxidative damage to 
RNA has been found in cellular and animal models of neurodegeneration. RNA 
oxidation has been hypothesized to cause aberrant expression of microRNAs and 
proteins and subsequently initiate inappropriate cell fate pathways. 
Interestingly, accumulating evidence obtained from studies on either human 
samples or experimental models coincidentally suggests that RNA oxidation is a 
feature of neurons in the aging brain and more prominently observed in 
vulnerable neurons at an early-stage of age-associated neurodegenerative 
disorders, indicating that RNA oxidation actively contributes to the prodromal 
stage, onset, and development of these disorders. Further investigations aimed 
at understanding the processing mechanisms related to oxidative RNA damage and 
its consequences may provide significant insights into the pathogenesis of 
neurodegenerative disorders and pave the way for novel therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 23399675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3037. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Apr;70(4):488-95. doi: 10.1001/2013.jamaneurol.405.

The aging brain and cognition: contribution of vascular injury and aβ to mild 
cognitive dysfunction.

Marchant NL(1), Reed BR, Sanossian N, Madison CM, Kriger S, Dhada R, Mack WJ, 
DeCarli C, Weiner MW, Mungas DM, Chui HC, Jagust WJ.

Author information:
(1)Helen Wills Neuroscience Institute, University of California, Berkeley, 132 
Barker Hall, Mail Code 3190, Berkeley, CA 94720, USA. nlmarchant@gmail.com

IMPORTANCE: β-Amyloid (Aβ) deposition and vascular brain injury (VBI) frequently 
co-occur and are both associated with cognitive decline in aging. Determining 
whether a direct relationship exists between them has been challenging. We 
sought to understand VBI's influence on cognition and clinical impairment, 
separate from and in conjunction with pathologic changes associated with 
Alzheimer disease (AD).
OBJECTIVE: To examine the relationship between neuroimaging measures of VBI and 
brain Aβ deposition and their associations with cognition.
DESIGN AND SETTING: A cross-sectional study in a community- and clinic-based 
sample recruited for elevated vascular disease risk factors.
PARTICIPANTS: Clinically normal (mean age, 77.1 years [N = 30]), cognitively 
impaired (mean age, 78.0 years [N = 24]), and mildly demented (mean age, 79.8 
years [N = 7]) participants.
INTERVENTIONS: Magnetic resonance imaging, Aβ (Pittsburgh Compound B-positron 
emission tomographic [PiB-PET]) imaging, and cognitive testing.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Magnetic resonance images were rated for the presence and 
location of infarct (34 infarct-positive participants, 27 infarct-negative 
participants) and were used to quantify white matter lesion volume. The PiB-PET 
uptake ratios were used to create a PiB index by averaging uptake across regions 
vulnerable to early Aβ deposition; PiB positivity (29 PiB-positive participants, 
32 PiB-negative participants) was determined from a data-derived threshold. 
Standardized composite cognitive measures included executive function and verbal 
and nonverbal memory.
RESULTS: Vascular brain injury and Aβ were independent in both cognitively 
normal and impaired participants. Infarction, particularly in cortical and 
subcortical gray matter, was associated with lower cognitive performance in all 
domains (P < .05 for all comparisons). Pittsburgh Compound B positivity was 
neither a significant predictor of cognition nor interacted with VBI.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: In this elderly sample with normal cognition to mild 
dementia, enriched for vascular disease, VBI was more influential than Aβ in 
contemporaneous cognitive function and remained predictive after including the 
possible influence of Aβ. There was no evidence that VBI increases the 
likelihood of Aβ deposition. This finding highlights the importance of VBI in 
mild cognitive impairment and suggests that the impact of cerebrovascular 
disease should be considered with respect to defining the etiology of mild 
cognitive impairment.

DOI: 10.1001/2013.jamaneurol.405
PMCID: PMC3771392
PMID: 23400560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Weiner 
reports (for 2010–2012) having served on scientific advisory boards for Eli 
Lilly & Company, Araclon and Institut Catala de Neurociencies Aplicades, the 
Research Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veterans’ Illnesses, Biogen Idec, and 
Pfizer Inc; having served as a consultant for AstraZeneca, Araclon, 
Medivation/Pfizer Inc, Ipsen, TauRx Therapeutics Ltd, Bayer Healthcare, Biogen 
Idec, Exonhit Therapeutics SA, Servier, Synarc, Janssen, Harvard University, and 
KLJ Associates; having received travel funds from NeuroVigil, Inc, CHRU-Hopital 
Roger Salengro, Siemens, AstraZeneca, Geneva University Hospitals, Eli Lilly & 
Company, University of California, San Diego–Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI), Paris University, Institut Catala de Neurociencies Aplicades, 
University of New Mexico School of Medicine, Ipsen, Clinical Trials on 
Alzheimer’s Disease, Pfizer Inc, the AD/PD meeting (Conference on Alzheimer’s 
and Parkinson’s Diseases), Paul Sabatier University, Novartis, Tohoku 
University, Fundacio ACE, and Travel eDreams, Inc; having served on the 
editorial advisory boards of Alzheimer’s & Dementia and Magnetic Resonance 
Imaging; having received honoraria from NeuroVigil, Inc, Institute Catala de 
Neurociencies Aplicades, PMDA (Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices 
Agency)/Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour, and Welfare, Tohoku University, and 
Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation; having received commercial entities 
research support from Merck and Avid; having received government entities 
research support from the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans 
Affairs; and owning stock options in Synarc and Elan. Dr Weiner also reports 
that the following organizations contributed to the Foundation for the National 
Institutes of Health and thus to the National Institute on Aging–funded ADNI: 
Abbott, Alzheimer’s Association, Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, 
Anonymous Foundation, AstraZeneca, Bayer Healthcare, BioClinica, Inc (ADNI 2), 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, Cure Alzheimer’s Fund, Eisai, Elan, Gene Network Sciences, 
Genentech, GE Healthcare, GlaxoSmithKline, Innogenetics, Johnson & Johnson, Eli 
Lilly & Company, Medpace, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer Inc, Roche, Schering Plough, 
Synarc, and Wyeth.


3038. Synapse. 2013 Aug;67(8):541-3. doi: 10.1002/syn.21651. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Peripheral markers of Alzheimer's disease: surveillance of white blood cells.

Shad KF(1), Aghazadeh Y, Ahmad S, Kress B.

Author information:
(1)PAP RSB Institute of Health Sciences, Universiti Brunei Darussalam, Jalan 
Tungku Link, Gadong BE 1410, Brunei, Darussalam. ftmshad@gmail.com

Inflammation is part of the complex biological response of vascular tissues to 
harmful stimuli, such as pathogens, damaged cells, or irritants. This is a 
mechanism of innate immunity, which may cause an increase in the number of 
monocytes and neutrophils circulating in the blood. Literature indicated that 
chronic inflammation might be a factor in developing neurological problems, 
including Alzheimer's, Parkinson's and other similar illnesses. Our main 
objective is to identify peripheral markers of Alzheimer's disease and for that 
purpose; we are looking at the profile of white blood cells focusing on 
monocytes, neutrophils, lymphocytes and basophils. Twenty-seven patients of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), diagnosed by magnetic resonance imaging and 
neuropsychological tests were observed for their blood profile. Key observations 
during this study were that the levels of monocytes in the blood of the 
diagnosed AD patients were high irrespective of their age and sex. For those 
patients whose monocytes were in normal range their neutrophil levels were 
significantly high. Whereas blood levels of lymphocytes and basophils were found 
to be constantly low. Escalated levels of monocytes and neutrophils are 
hallmarks of chronic inflammation and may be precursor to Alzheimer's disease. A 
low lymphocyte count specifies that the body's resistance to fight infection is 
substantially reduced, whereas low basophil levels indicates their over 
utilization due to chronic allergic inflammatory condition. Future studies 
involved closer look at the cytokines produced by these white blood cells 
especially TNF IL-1, and IL-12, which are products of monocytes. Likewise, blood 
glucose and creatinine levels were high whereas calcium ions were low. Our 
studies indicated that white blood cells along with other inflammatory 
byproducts may act as peripheral markers for early diagnosis of Alzheimer's 
disease.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/syn.21651
PMID: 23404438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3039. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Feb;70(2):223-8. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.600.

APOE ε4 increases risk for dementia in pure synucleinopathies.

Tsuang D(1), Leverenz JB, Lopez OL, Hamilton RL, Bennett DA, Schneider JA, 
Buchman AS, Larson EB, Crane PK, Kaye JA, Kramer P, Woltjer R, Trojanowski JQ, 
Weintraub D, Chen-Plotkin AS, Irwin DJ, Rick J, Schellenberg GD, Watson GS, 
Kukull W, Nelson PT, Jicha GA, Neltner JH, Galasko D, Masliah E, Quinn JF, Chung 
KA, Yearout D, Mata IF, Wan JY, Edwards KL, Montine TJ, Zabetian CP.

Author information:
(1)Veterans Affairs Puget Sound Health Care System, Seattle,WA98108, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To test for an association between the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ϵ4 
allele and dementias with synucleinopathy.
DESIGN: Genetic case-control association study.
SETTING: Academic research.
PATIENTS: Autopsied subjects were classified into 5 categories: dementia with 
high-level Alzheimer disease (AD) neuropathologic changes (NCs) but without Lewy 
body disease (LBD) NCs (AD group; n=244), dementia with LBDNCs and high-level 
ADNCs (LBD-AD group; n=224), dementia with LBDNCs and no or low levels of ADNCs 
(pure DLB [pDLB] group; n=91), Parkinson disease dementia (PDD) with no or low 
levels of ADNCs (n=81), and control group (n=269). MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE The APOE 
allele frequencies. RESULTS The APOE ϵ4 allele frequency was significantly 
higher in the AD (38.1%), LBD-AD (40.6%), pDLB (31.9%), and PDD (19.1%) groups 
compared with the control group (7.2%; overall χ(2)(4)=185.25; P=5.56 × 
10(-39)), and it was higher in the pDLB group than the PDD group (P= .01). In an 
age-adjusted and sex-adjusted dominant model, ϵ4 was strongly associated with AD 
(odds ratio, 9.9; 95% CI, 6.4-15.3), LBD-AD (odds ratio, 12.6; 95% CI, 
8.1-19.8), pDLB (odds ratio, 6.1; 95% CI, 3.5-10.5), and PDD (odds ratio, 3.1; 
95% CI, 1.7-5.6). CONCLUSIONS The APOE ϵ4 allele is a strong risk factor across 
the LBD spectrum and occurs at an increased frequency in pDLB relative to PDD. 
This suggests that ϵ4 increases the likelihood of presenting with dementia in 
the context of a pure synucleinopathy. The elevated ϵ4 frequency in the pDLB and 
PDD groups, in which the overall brain neuritic plaque burden was low, indicates 
that apoE might contribute to neurodegeneration through mechanisms unrelated to 
amyloid processing.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.600
PMCID: PMC3580799
PMID: 23407718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3040. Mov Disord. 2013 Mar;28(3):302-10. doi: 10.1002/mds.25282. Epub 2013 Feb 13.

Cerebrospinal fluid Aβ levels correlate with structural brain changes in 
Parkinson's disease.

Beyer MK(1), Alves G, Hwang KS, Babakchanian S, Bronnick KS, Chou YY, Dalaker 
TO, Kurz MW, Larsen JP, Somme JH, Thompson PM, Tysnes OB, Apostolova LG.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Center for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Stavanger, Norway. mona.beyer@lyse.net

ParkWest is a large Norwegian multicenter study of newly diagnosed drug-naïve 
subjects with Parkinson's disease (PD). Cognitively normal PD subjects (PDCN) 
and PD subjects with mild cognitive impairment (PDMCI) from this cohort have 
significant hippocampal atrophy and ventricular enlargement, compared to normal 
controls. Here, we aimed to investigate whether the same structural changes are 
associated with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) levels of amyloid beta (Aβ)38 , Aβ40 , 
Aβ42 , total tau (t-tau), and phosphorylated tau (p-tau). We performed 
three-dimensional radial distance analyses of the hippocampi and lateral 
ventricles using the MRI data from ParkWest subjects who provided CSF at 
baseline. Our sample consisted of 73 PDCN and 18 PDMCI subjects. We found 
significant associations between levels of all three CSF Aβ analytes and t-tau 
and lateral ventricular enlargement in the pooled sample. In the PDCN sample, 
all three amyloid analytes showed significant associations with the radial 
distance of the occipital and frontal horns of the lateral ventricles. CSF Aβ38 
and Aβ42 showed negative associations, with enlargement in occipital and frontal 
horns of the lateral ventricles in the pooled sample, and a negative association 
with the occipital horns in PDMCI. CSF Aβ levels in early PD correlate with 
ventricular enlargement, previously associated with PD dementia. Therefore, CSF 
and MRI markers may help identify PD patients at high risk for developing 
cognitive decline and dementia in the course of their illness. Contrary to 
Alzheimer's disease, we found no associations between CSF t-tau and p-tau and 
hippocampal atrophy.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25282
PMCID: PMC3608817
PMID: 23408705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure statement Mona K. Beyer reports no 
conflicts of interest. Guido Alves has received research support from GSK and 
the Norwegian Parkinson’s disease Association, and honoraria for presentations 
from H. Lundbeck A/S and Orion Pharma. Kristy S. Hwang reports no conflicts of 
interest. Sona Babakchanian reports no conflicts of interest. Yi-Yu Chou reports 
no conflicts of interest. Martin W. Kurz has received honoraria for 
presentations from Pfizer. Jan Petter Larsen has served on scientific advisory 
boards for H. Lundbeck A/S and GSK. Paul M. Thompson reports no conflicts of 
interest. Kolbjorn Bronnick holds stocks in Dual Attention and has received 
honoraria for presentations from H. Lundbeck A/S and Solvay Pharma. Johanne 
Somme reports no conflicts of interest. Ole Bjorn Tysnes has received honoraria 
for lectures and support to participate in scientific meetings from several 
companies engaged in Parkinson’s disease. Liana Apostolova reports no conflicts 
of interest. Turi Olene Dalaker reports no conflicts of interest.


3041. Brain. 2013 Feb;136(Pt 2):392-9. doi: 10.1093/brain/aws318.

Glucocerebrosidase mutations influence the natural history of Parkinson's 
disease in a community-based incident cohort.

Winder-Rhodes SE(1), Evans JR, Ban M, Mason SL, Williams-Gray CH, Foltynie T, 
Duran R, Mencacci NE, Sawcer SJ, Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
Forvie Site, Robinson Way, Cambridge CB2 0PY, UK.

Comment in
    J Neurol. 2013 May;260(5):1441-4.

Carriers of mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA) are at increased risk 
of developing Parkinson's disease. The frequency of GBA mutations in unselected 
Parkinson's disease populations has not been established. Furthermore, no 
previous studies have investigated the influence of GBA mutations on the natural 
history of Parkinson's disease using prospective follow-up. We studied DNA from 
262 cases who had been recruited at diagnosis into one of two independent 
community-based incidence studies of Parkinson's disease. In 121 cases, 
longitudinal data regarding progression of motor disability and cognitive 
function were derived from follow-up assessments conducted every 18 months for a 
median of 71 months. Sequencing of the GBA was performed after two-stage 
polymerase chain reaction amplification. The carrier frequency of genetic 
variants in GBA was determined. Baseline demographic and clinical variables were 
compared between cases who were either GBA mutation carriers, polymorphism 
carriers or wild-type homozygotes. Cox regression analysis was used to model 
progression to major motor (Hoehn and Yahr stage 3), and cognitive (dementia) 
end-points in cases followed longitudinally. We show that in a representative, 
unselected UK Parkinson's disease population, GBA mutations are present at a 
frequency of 3.5%. This is higher than the prevalence of other genetic mutations 
currently associated with Parkinson's disease and indicates that GBA mutations 
make an important contribution to Parkinson's disease encountered in the 
community setting. Baseline clinical characteristics did not differ 
significantly between cases with and without GBA sequence variants. However, the 
hazard ratio for progression both to dementia (5.7, P = 0.003) and Hoehn and 
Yahr stage 3 (4.2, P = 0.003) were significantly greater in GBA mutation 
carriers. We also show that carriers of polymorphisms in GBA which are not 
generally considered to increase Parkinson's disease risk are at significantly 
increased risk of progression to Hoehn and Yahr stage 3 (3.2, P = 0.004). Our 
results indicate that genetic variation in GBA has an important impact on the 
natural history of Parkinson's disease. To our knowledge, this is the first time 
a genetic locus has been shown to influence motor progression in Parkinson's 
disease. If confirmed in further studies, this may indicate that GBA mutation 
status could be used as a prognostic marker in Parkinson's disease. Elucidation 
of the molecular mechanisms that underlie this effect will further our 
understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease and may in turn suggest novel 
therapeutic strategies.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/aws318
PMID: 23413260 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3042. Eur J Public Health. 2014 Feb;24(1):40-4. doi: 10.1093/eurpub/ckt014. Epub 2013 
Feb 14.

Prevalence of depression among older adults with dementia living in low- and 
middle-income countries: a cross-sectional study.

Andreasen P(1), Lönnroos E, von Euler-Chelpin MC.

Author information:
(1)1 Department of International Health, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.

BACKGROUND: The prevalence of depression has been evaluated in populations of 
low- and middle-income (LMI) countries but the risk of depression has not been 
specified among persons with dementia. This cross-sectional analysis aimed to 
assess the prevalence and risk of depression among older people with dementia 
living in LMI countries.
METHODS: The study analysed data from a population-based survey conducted by 
10/66 Dementia Research Group in 2004. Altogether, 17 031 participants from 
eight different countries aged 65 years and above were assessed. Logistic 
regression was used to calculate prevalence and odds ratio (OR) of depression on 
persons with dementia. Adjustments by age and education were included in the 
analysis. ORs of depression on different types of dementia were determined.
RESULTS: Depression was identified in 5.8% (4.4% of men, 6.6% of women) of all 
the 17 031 participants and in 12.4% (18.9% of men, 10.1% of women) of the 1612 
persons with dementia. Persons with dementia had an increased risk of depression 
compared with persons without dementia, the age- and education-adjusted OR was 
2.38 [95% confidence interval (CI0 1.99-2.84]); 3.86 (95% CI 2.83-5.26) for men 
and 1.88 (95% CI 1.51-2.35) for women. Compared with Alzheimer's disease, Lewy 
body [OR 2.75 (95% CI 1.40-3.72)] and vascular dementia [OR 2.35, (95% CI 
1.49-3.72)] were associated with a higher risk of depression.
CONCLUSIONS: Persons with dementia were twice as likely to have depression as 
persons without dementia. Among persons with dementia, the prevalence of 
depression was higher for men than women, and the risk of depression varied by 
the type of dementia.

DOI: 10.1093/eurpub/ckt014
PMID: 23417621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3043. Am Fam Physician. 2013 Feb 15;87(4):267-73.

Parkinson disease: an update.

Gazewood JD(1), Richards DR, Clebak K.

Author information:
(1)University of Virginia Health System, Charlottesville, VA, USA.

Comment in
    Am Fam Physician. 2013 Jun 15;87(12):822.
    Am Fam Physician. 2013 Jun 15;87(12):822.

Summary for patients in
    Am Fam Physician. 2013 Feb 15;87(4):Online.

Parkinson disease is a progressive neurologic disorder afflicting approximately 
1 percent of Americans older than 60 years. The cardinal features of Parkinson 
disease are bradykinesia, rigidity, tremor, and postural instability. There are 
a number of neurologic conditions that mimic the disease, making it difficult to 
diagnose in its early stages. Physicians who rarely diagnose Parkinson disease 
should refer patients suspected of having it to physicians with more experience 
in making the diagnosis, and should periodically reevaluate the accuracy of the 
diagnosis. Treatment is effective in reducing motor impairment and disability, 
and should be started when a patient begins to experience functional impairment. 
The combination of carbidopa and levodopa is the most effective treatment, but 
dopamine agonists and monoamine oxidase-B inhibitors are also effective, and are 
less likely to cause dyskinesias. For patients taking carbidopa/levodopa who 
have motor complications, adjunctive therapy with a dopamine agonist, a 
monoamine oxidase-B inhibitor, or a catechol O-methyltransferase inhibitor will 
improve motor symptoms and functional status, but with an increase in 
dyskinesias. Deep brain stimulation is effective in patients who have poorly 
controlled symptoms despite optimal medical therapy. Occupational, physical, and 
speech therapy improve patient function. Fatigue, sleep disturbances, dementia, 
and depression are common in patients with Parkinson disease. Although these 
conditions are associated with significantly lower quality of life, they may 
improve with treatment.

PMID: 23418798 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3044. Mol Genet Metab. 2013 Apr;108(4):212-24. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.01.008. Epub 
2013 Jan 26.

New findings concerning vertebrate porin II--on the relevance of glycine motifs 
of type-1 VDAC.

Thinnes FP(1).

Author information:
(1)Baumschulenweg 5, D-37083 Göttingen, Germany. futhin@t-online.de

New findings concerning vertebrate porin part I was published in 1997, then 
summarizing early data and reflections regarding the molecular structure of 
vertebrate voltage-dependent anion-selective channels, VDAC/eukaryotic porin, 
and the extra-mitochondrial expression pattern of human type-1 VDAC. Meanwhile, 
endeavors of different laboratories confirmed and widened this beginning by 
encircling the function of the channels. Regarding the function of mitochondrial 
outer membrane-standing VDACs the channels are established parts of the 
intrinsic apoptotic pathway and thus therapeutic targets in studies on several 
diseases: cancer, Alzheimer's disease, Down Syndrome, Parkinson's disease, 
Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis, cystic fibrosis and malaria. Regarding cell 
membrane-integrated type-1 VDAC it has been documented by different approaches 
that this porin channel is engaged in cell volume regulation, trans-membrane 
electron transport and apoptosis. Furthermore, new data insinuate a bridging of 
extrinsic and intrinsic apoptotic pathways, putatively gaining relevance in 
Alzheimer research. Mammalian type-1 VDAC, a β-barrel, is basically built up by 
nineteen β-sheets connected by peptide stretches of varying lengths. The 
molecule also comprises an N-terminal stretch of some twenty amino acids which, 
according to biochemical data, traverses the channel lumen towards the cytosolic 
surface of outer mitochondrial membranes or the plasma lemma, respectively and 
works as voltage sensor in channel gating. In artificial lipid bilayers VDACs 
figure as anion or cation-channels, as VDACs are permeable to both cations and 
anions, with voltage shifts changing the relative permeability. Type-1 VDAC 
carries several motifs where glycine residues are in critical positions. Motifs 
of this type, on the on hand, are established nucleotide binding sites. On the 
other hand, the GxxxG motifs are also discussed as relevant peptide 
dimerization/aggregation/membrane perturbation motifs. Finally, GxxxG motifs 
bind cholesterol. Type-1 VDAC shows one such GxxxG motif at the proximal end of 
its N-terminal voltage sensor while amyloid Aβ peptides include three of them in 
series. Noteworthy, two additional may be modified versions, GxxxGxG and 
GxxGxxxG, are found on β-sheet 19 or 9, respectively. Recent data have allowed 
speculating that amyloid Aβ induces apoptosis via opening type-1 VDAC in cell 
membranes of hypo-metabolic neurons, a process most likely running over life 
time--as leaves fall from trees in the tropics--and ending in Alzheimer's 
disease whenever critical brain regions are affected. The expression of GxxxG 
motifs on either reactant under consideration is in line with this model of 
Alzheimer's disease pathogenesis, which clearly differs from the amyloid Aβ 
cascade theory, and which can, furthermore, be understood as a basic model for 
apoptosis induction. However, to assume randomly distributed interactions of 
body wide found amyloid Aβ peptides with the N-terminal voltage sensors of 
ubiquitously expressed cell membrane-standing human type-1 VDAC opens up a new 
view on Alzheimer's disease, which might even include a clue on systemic aspects 
of the disease. While elaborating this concept, my focus was at first only on 
the GxxxG motif at the proximal end of the N-terminal voltage sensor of type-1 
VDAC. Here, I include a corresponding sequence stretch on the channel's β-sheet 
19, too.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2013.01.008
PMID: 23419876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3045. Mov Disord. 2013 Jul;28(8):1034-49. doi: 10.1002/mds.25377. Epub 2013 Feb 20.

Nonpharmacological enhancement of cognitive function in Parkinson's disease: a 
systematic review.

Hindle JV(1), Petrelli A, Clare L, Kalbe E.

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, United Kingdom. 
j.v.hindle@bangor.ac.uk

Cognitive decline and dementia are frequent in patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD). The evidence for nonpharmacological therapies in Alzheimer's disease and 
other dementias has been studied systematically, but the evidence is unclear for 
their efficacy in cognition and dementia in PD. An international collaboration 
produced a comprehensive, systematic review of the effectiveness and of 
nonpharmacological and noninvasive therapies in cognitively intact, cognitively 
impaired, and PD dementia groups. The interventions included cognitive 
rehabilitation, physical rehabilitation, exercise, and brain stimulation 
techniques but excluded invasive treatments, such as surgery and deep brain 
stimulation. The potential biases and evidence levels for controlled trials 
(CTs) were analyzed based on Cochrane and National Institute for Health and 
Clinical Excellence criteria. After exclusions, 18 studies were reviewed, 
including 5 studies of cognitive training, 4 of exercise and physical therapies, 
4 of combined cognitive and physical interventions, and 5 of brain stimulation 
techniques. The methodology, study populations, interventions, outcomes, control 
groups, analyses, results, limitations, biases, and evidence levels of all 
reviewed studies were described. There were 9 CTs, including 6 randomized CTs 
(RCTs). Although 5 trials showed positive results, only 1 study of cognitive 
training achieved evidence grading of 1+ with a low risk of bias. There were no 
studies on PD dementia. Current research on nonpharmacological therapies for 
cognitive dysfunction and dementia in PD is very limited in quantity and 
quality. There is an urgent need for rigorous RCTs of nonpharmacological 
treatments for cognitive impairment and dementia in PD.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25377
PMID: 23426759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3046. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2013 Apr;120(4):649-53. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-013-0994-0. Epub 2013 Feb 22.

The practical management of cognitive impairment and psychosis in the older 
Parkinson's disease patient.

Hindle JV(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Medical Sciences, Bangor University, Bangor, UK. 
j.v.hindle@bangor.ac.uk

Parkinson's disease (PD) has been described as an age-related disease. Ageing 
significantly increases the risk of psychosis and dementia. Older patients often 
have a complex mixture of delirium, psychosis, dementia, gait and balance 
problems and other comorbidities which can cause significant management 
problems. There are concerns about the safety and tolerability of the treatments 
for psychosis and dementia. Delirium is common in older Parkinson's patients and 
must be assessed and managed carefully. The aetiology of psychosis in 
Parkinson's is complex and often associated with the development of cognitive 
impairment. Initial adjustments of Parkinson's drugs should be considered if 
symptoms are intrusive. Where drug therapy is required, evidence suggests that 
quetiapine may be a safe initial option. There is no contraindication to the use 
of clozapine in older patients, with the required blood monitoring. Dementia is 
almost inevitable with very advanced disease and increasing age, and is 
associated with a marked cholinergic deficit in the brain. Cholinesterase 
inhibitors may be more effective in PD than in Alzheimer's disease and appear 
relatively safe with appropriate monitoring of the pulse. There is much less 
evidence for the use of memantine. There is no current evidence for the use of 
specific non-pharmacological therapies in the management of psychosis or 
dementia in PD. Due to the associated gait and balance problems, older 
Parkinson's patients benefit from comprehensive multi-disciplinary assessment.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-013-0994-0
PMID: 23430276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3047. JIMD Rep. 2012;3:53-7. doi: 10.1007/8904_2011_48. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

A twelve-year follow-up study on a case of early-onset parkinsonism preceding 
clinical manifestation of Gaucher disease.

Machaczka M(1), Arce MP, Rucinska M, Yoshitake T, Kehr J, Jurczak W, Skotnicki 
AB, Månsson JE, Tylki-Szymanska A, Svenningsson P.

Author information:
(1)Hematology Center Karolinska, M54, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, 
141 86, Stockholm, Sweden, maciej.machaczka@ki.se.

Mutations in the glucocerebrosidase gene (GBA1) cause Gaucher disease (GD) and 
are the most common genetic risk factor for the development of Parkinson's 
disease (PD). Here, we present a 12-year follow-up study of a male with GD and 
PD (diagnosed 24years ago), which PD preceded the clinical manifestation of GD 
by 12years. The patient is a compound heterozygote for mutations c.115+1G>A and 
c.1226A>G (IVS2 + 1/N370S) in the GBA1 gene. Imiglucerase had a beneficial 
effect on GD, but not on PD. Treatment with L-dopa and other PD drugs showed 
temporary efficacy but 2years later significant wearing-off phenomenon and 
dyskinesias appeared. Unilateral pallidotomy was performed with transient 
benefit. Cognitive decline appeared later and developed in to akinetic mutism. A 
lumbar puncture was performed to characterize the biochemical profile of 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Analyses of monoamine metabolites levels in the CSF, 
determined by reverse-phase high-performance liquid chromatography, revealed 
remarkably low levels of all studied monoamine metabolites (HVA, DOPAC, 5-HIAA, 
MHPG). These data indicate that PD associated with GBA1 mutations may not only 
affect dopaminergic neurons, but also noradrenergic and serotonergic neurons. Of 
note, normal levels of P-tau, total tau and β-amyloid (1-42) were detected on 
ELISA assay. Thus, the cognitive decline, akinetic mutism and moderate cortical 
atrophy found on the CT scan were not paralleled by any changes of dementia 
markers in CSF. This single case study extends the follow-up period and adds 
novel CSF information; however additional data on other patients with both PD 
and GD may help put our observations in its ultimate proper context.

DOI: 10.1007/8904_2011_48
PMCID: PMC3509857
PMID: 23430873


3048. Mov Disord. 2013 May;28(5):671-4. doi: 10.1002/mds.25387. Epub 2013 Feb 23.

Validation of a screening battery to predict driving fitness in people with 
Parkinson's disease.

Devos H(1), Vandenberghe W, Nieuwboer A, Tant M, De Weerdt W, Dawson JD, Uc EY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Rehabilitation Sciences, KU Leuven, Heverlee, Belgium. 
hannes.devos@faber.kuleuven.be

BACKGROUND: We previously developed a short clinical battery, consisting of 
contrast sensitivity, Clinical Dementia Rating, the Unified Parkinson's Disease 
Rating Scale-motor section (UPDRS III), and disease duration, which correctly 
classified 90% of drivers with Parkinson's Disease (PD). The aim of this study 
was to validate that screening battery in a different sample of PD drivers.
METHODS: Sixty drivers with PD were enrolled to validate our original screening 
battery to predict driving fitness decisions (pass-fail) by a state agency where 
drivers underwent detailed visual, cognitive, and on-road testing.
RESULTS: Twenty-four participants (40%) failed the driving evaluation. The 
screening battery correctly classified 46 (77%) participants (sensitivity and 
negative predictive value = 96%; specificity and positive predictive 
value = 64%). Adding other clinical predictors (e.g., age of onset, Hoehn-Yahr 
stage instead of UPDRS III) failed to improve the specificity of the model when 
the sensitivity was kept constant at 96%. However, a driving simulator 
evaluation improved the specificity of the model to 94%.
CONCLUSIONS: The original clinical battery proved to be a valid screening tool 
that accurately identifies fit drivers with PD and select those who need more 
detailed testing at specialized centers.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25387
PMID: 23436270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3049. Mov Disord. 2013 Jul;28(8):1104-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.25388. Epub 2013 Feb 23.

Selective executive dysfunction but intact risky decision-making in early 
Huntington's disease.

Holl AK(1), Wilkinson L, Tabrizi SJ, Painold A, Jahanshahi M.

Author information:
(1)Sobell Department of Motor Neuroscience and Movement Disorders, University 
College London, Institute of Neurology, London, United Kingdom.

Executive dysfunction, including problems with decision-making, inhibition of 
prepotent responses, and verbal fluency, are main features of Huntington's 
disease (HD). The decline of executive function in HD is related to the 
anatomical progression of HD pathology in the basal ganglia, where the earliest 
changes of neuronal cell death are seen in the dorsolateral caudate. To examine 
the specific pattern of executive dysfunction in early HD, 18 patients with 
early HD were assessed on: (1) the Iowa Gambling Task to measure risky decision 
making, (2) the Stroop test to measure inhibition of prepotent responses, and 
(3) the verbal fluency test to measure internally guided word search and 
production, necessitating suppression of retrieval/production of inappropriate 
words and monitoring of the output. Patients with early HD were significantly 
impaired on the Stroop and verbal fluency tests relative to controls. However, 
Iowa Gambling Task performance was comparable across the 2 groups. This pattern 
of selective executive dysfunction in early HD probably reflects the fact that 
inhibitory processing involved in both the Stroop and verbal fluency tests 
recruits the dorsolateral caudate and its cortical connections, which are 
dysfunctional in early HD, whereas risky decision-making during the Iowa 
Gambling Task recruits the ventromedial caudate and its connections, which 
remain spared early on in the disease. The current results demonstrate that the 
deterioration of executive functioning in HD is variable and that some types of 
executive processing might already be impaired in early HD, whereas others 
remain intact.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25388
PMID: 23436289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3050. Brain. 2013 Mar;136(Pt 3):739-50. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt005.

Visual exploration in Parkinson's disease and Parkinson's disease dementia.

Archibald NK(1), Hutton SB, Clarke MP, Mosimann UP, Burn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Consultant Neurologist, The James Cook University Hospital, Middlesbrough, 
TS4 3BW, UK. neil.archibald@nhs.net

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Oct;136(Pt 10):e250.

Parkinson's disease, typically thought of as a movement disorder, is 
increasingly recognized as causing cognitive impairment and dementia. Eye 
movement abnormalities are also described, including impairment of rapid eye 
movements (saccades) and the fixations interspersed between them. Such movements 
are under the influence of cortical and subcortical networks commonly targeted 
by the neurodegeneration seen in Parkinson's disease and, as such, may provide a 
marker for cognitive decline. This study examined the error rates and visual 
exploration strategies of subjects with Parkinson's disease, with and without 
cognitive impairment, whilst performing a battery of visuo-cognitive tasks. 
Error rates were significantly higher in those Parkinson's disease groups with 
either mild cognitive impairment (P = 0.001) or dementia (P < 0.001), than in 
cognitively normal subjects with Parkinson's disease. When compared with 
cognitively normal subjects with Parkinson's disease, exploration strategy, as 
measured by a number of eye tracking variables, was least efficient in the 
dementia group but was also affected in those subjects with Parkinson's disease 
with mild cognitive impairment. When compared with control subjects and 
cognitively normal subjects with Parkinson's disease, saccade amplitudes were 
significantly reduced in the groups with mild cognitive impairment or dementia. 
Fixation duration was longer in all Parkinson's disease groups compared with 
healthy control subjects but was longest for cognitively impaired Parkinson's 
disease groups. The strongest predictor of average fixation duration was disease 
severity. Analysing only data from the most complex task, with the highest error 
rates, both cognitive impairment and disease severity contributed to a 
predictive model for fixation duration [F(2,76) = 12.52, P ≤ 0.001], but 
medication dose did not (r = 0.18, n = 78, P = 0.098, not significant). This 
study highlights the potential use of exploration strategy measures as a marker 
of cognitive decline in Parkinson's disease and reveals the efficiency by which 
fixations and saccades are deployed in the build-up to a cognitive response, 
rather than merely focusing on the outcome itself. The prolongation of fixation 
duration, present to a small but significant degree even in cognitively normal 
subjects with Parkinson's disease, suggests a disease-specific impact on the 
networks directing visual exploration, although the study also highlights the 
multi-factorial nature of changes in exploration and the significant impact of 
cognitive decline on efficiency of visual search.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt005
PMID: 23436502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3051. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e57476. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057476. Epub 2013 Feb 21.

Internet-based screening for dementia risk.

Brandt J(1), Sullivan C, Burrell LE 2nd, Rogerson M, Anderson A.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, The Johns Hopkins 
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. 
jbrandt@jhmi.edu

The Dementia Risk Assessment (DRA) is an online tool consisting of questions 
about known risk factors for dementia, a novel verbal memory test, and an 
informant report of cognitive decline. Its primary goal is to educate the public 
about dementia risk factors and encourage clinical evaluation where appropriate. 
In Study 1, more than 3,000 anonymous persons over age 50 completed the DRA 
about themselves; 1,000 people also completed proxy reports about another 
person. Advanced age, lower education, male sex, complaints of severe memory 
impairment, and histories of cerebrovascular disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
brain tumor all contributed significantly to poor memory performance. A high 
correlation was obtained between proxy-reported decline and actual memory test 
performance. In Study 2, 52 persons seeking first-time evaluation at dementia 
clinics completed the DRA prior to their visits. Their responses (and those of 
their proxy informants) were compared to the results of independent evaluation 
by geriatric neuropsychiatrists. The 30 patients found to meet criteria for 
probable Alzheimer's disease, vascular dementia, or frontotemporal dementia 
differed on the DRA from the 22 patients without dementia (most other 
neuropsychiatric conditions). Scoring below criterion on the DRA's memory test 
had moderately high predictive validity for clinically diagnosed dementia. 
Although additional studies of larger clinical samples are needed, the DRA holds 
promise for wide-scale screening for dementia risk.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0057476
PMCID: PMC3578821
PMID: 23437393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3052. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2012;2:tre-02-70-346-2. doi: 
10.7916/D8N58K4H. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

The NEDICES Study: Recent Advances in the Understanding of the Epidemiology of 
Essential Tremor.

Romero JP(1), Benito-León J, Bermejo-Pareja F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University Hospital "12 de Octubre", Madrid, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Essential tremor (ET) is the most common tremor disorder. ET has 
classically been viewed as a benign monosymptomatic condition. Yet over the past 
10 years, a growing body of evidence indicates that this is a progressive 
condition that is clinically heterogeneous, and may be associated with a variety 
of different features. Large epidemiological studies such as the Neurological 
Disorders of Central Spain (NEDICES), a longitudinal, population-based survey, 
have contributed significantly to the changing view of the disease. Our aim is 
to review some of the main results of NEDICES within the larger framework of the 
epidemiology of ET.
METHODS: Data for this review were gathered from all our articles published up 
to October 2011 regarding NEDICES study and "Essential Tremor".
RESULTS: We have published 18 articles up to October 2011. The prevalence, 
incidence, and mortality of ET were analyzed in this cohort. In addition, ET was 
found to be associated with increased frailty and low morale, as well as with a 
series of non-motor manifestations, including cognitive deficits, mild cognitive 
impairment, dementia, depressive symptoms, and hearing impairment. Finally, the 
link between ET and Parkinson's disease (PD) was formally quantified in the 
NEDICES study, which demonstrated that the risk of developing incident PD was 
4.3 times higher in prevalent ET cases than in age-matched controls without ET.
CONCLUSIONS: This review highlights the contributions of NEDICES towards the 
advancement of current knowledge of the epidemiology and clinical features of 
ET, and emphasizes the importance of population-based studies towards the 
understanding of complex, ageing-related diseases.

DOI: 10.7916/D8N58K4H
PMCID: PMC3570054
PMID: 23439396

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors report no 
conflict of interest.


3053. Nucl Med Mol Imaging. 2013 Mar;47(1):44-51. doi: 10.1007/s13139-012-0182-4. Epub 
2012 Nov 3.

Differential Diagnosis of Parkinsonism Using Dual-Phase F-18 FP-CIT PET Imaging.

Jin S(1), Oh M(1), Oh SJ(1), Oh JS(1), Lee SJ(1), Chung SJ(2), Lee CS(2), Kim 
JS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Asan Medical Center, College of Medicine, 
University of Ulsan, 88, Olympic-ro 43-gil, Songpa-gu, Seoul, 138-736 South 
Korea.
(2)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, College of Medicine, University 
of Ulsan, Seoul, South Korea.

PURPOSE: Dopamine transporter (DAT) imaging can demonstrate presynaptic 
dopaminergic neuronal loss in Parkinson's disease (PD). However, differentiating 
atypical parkinsonism (APD) from PD is often difficult. We investigated the 
usefulness of dual-phase F-18 FP-CIT positron emission tomography (PET) imaging 
in the differential diagnosis of parkinsonism.
METHODS: Ninety-eight subjects [five normal, seven drug-induced parkinsonism 
(DIP), five essential tremor (ET), 24 PD, 20 multiple system atrophy-parkinson 
type (MSA-P), 13 multiple system atrophy-cerebellar type (MSA-C), 13 progressive 
supranuclear palsy (PSP), and 11 dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB)] underwent F-18 
FP-CIT PET. PET images were acquired at 5 min (early phase) and 3 h (late phase) 
after F-18 FP-CIT administration (185 MBq). Regional uptake pattern of cerebral 
and cerebellar hemispheres was assessed on early phase images and striatal DAT 
binding pattern was assessed on late phase images, using visual, quantitative, 
and statistical parametric mapping (SPM) analyses.
RESULTS: Striatal DAT binding was normal in normal, ET, DIP, and MSA-C groups, 
but abnormal in PD, MSA-P, PSP, and DLB groups. No difference was found in 
regional uptake on early phase images among normal DAT binding groups, except in 
the MSA-C group. Abnormal DAT binding groups showed different regional uptake 
pattern on early phase images compared with PD in SPM analysis (FDR < 0.05). 
When discriminating APD from PD, visual interpretation of the early phase image 
showed high diagnostic sensitivity and specificity (75.4 % and 100 %, 
respectively). Regarding the ability to distinguish specific APD, sensitivities 
were 81 % for MSA-P, 77 % for MSA-C, 23 % for PSP, and 54.5 % for DLB.
CONCLUSIONS: Dual-phase F-18 FP-CIT PET imaging is useful in demonstrating 
striatal DAT loss in neurodegenerative parkinsonism, and also in differentiating 
APD, particularly MSA, from PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s13139-012-0182-4
PMCID: PMC4035208
PMID: 24895507


3054. Mov Disord. 2013 Apr;28(4):425-38. doi: 10.1002/mds.25352. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Magnetic resonance imaging: a biomarker for cognitive impairment in Parkinson's 
disease?

Duncan GW(1), Firbank MJ, O'Brien JT, Burn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
United Kingdom. gordon.duncan@newcastle.ac.uk

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2013 Aug;28(9):1316.

Dementia is a frequent and disabling complication of Parkinson's disease (PD). 
Clinicians and researchers lack a biomarker capable of tracking the structural 
and functional changes that underlie the evolution of cognitive dysfunction in 
PD. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) has been adopted as a biomarker in natural 
history and interventional studies of Alzheimer's disease (AD) and amnestic mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI), but its utility as a biomarker for PD and 
Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) is unclear. In this review, the authors 
summarize the studies that have used MRI to investigate cognitive decline in PD, 
outline limitations of those studies, and suggest directions for future 
research. PD dementia is associated with extensive cortical atrophy, which may 
be quantified with structural MRI. More promisingly, patterns of atrophy may be 
present in those who have PD with MCI (PD-MCI). Subcortical white matter tract 
degeneration is detectable early in the disease with diffusion tensor imaging 
and may precede changes observed on conventional structural MRI. Although less 
well studied, other MR techniques, such as functional MRI, MR perfusion imaging 
with arterial spin labeling, and MR spectroscopy, have demonstrated differences 
in activation and metabolism between PD and PDD. In this review, the ability to 
compare studies was limited by the heterogeneity of study populations, cognitive 
testing methods, and imaging protocols. Future work should adopt agreed scan 
protocols, should be adequately powered, and should use carefully phenotyped 
patients to fully maximize the contribution of MRI as a biomarker for PDD.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25352
PMID: 23450518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3055. Mov Disord. 2013 Aug;28(9):1285-8. doi: 10.1002/mds.25360. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Short latency afferent inhibition: a biomarker for mild cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease?

Yarnall AJ(1), Rochester L, Baker MR, David R, Khoo TK, Duncan GW, Galna B, Burn 
DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon Tyne, 
UK. alison.yarnall@ncl.ac.uk

Comment in
    Mov Disord. 2013 Aug;28(9):1171-2.

BACKGROUND: Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease (PD) is common and 
predicts those at risk of dementia. Cholinergic dysfunction may contribute to 
its pathophysiology and can be assessed using short latency afferent inhibition.
METHODS: Twenty-two patients with PD (11 cognitively normal; 11 with mild 
cognitive impairment) and 22 controls participated. Short latency afferent 
inhibition was measured by conditioning motor evoked potentials, which were 
elicited by transcranial magnetic stimulation of the motor cortex with 
electrical stimuli delivered to the contralateral median nerve at varying 
interstimulus intervals.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between cognitively normal PD and 
controls for short latency afferent inhibition (62.8±30.3% vs. 55.7±21.7%; 
P=0.447). The PD-mild cognitive impairment group had significantly less 
inhibition (88.4±25.8%) than both cognitively normal PD (P=0.021) and controls 
(P=0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: Cholinergic dysfunction occurs early in those with PD-mild 
cognitive impairment. Short latency afferent inhibition may be a useful 
biomarker of increased risk of dementia in PD patients. © 2013 Movement Disorder 
Society.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25360
PMID: 23450646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3056. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Apr;19(4):407-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.01.020. Epub 2013 Feb 23.

Monogenic Parkinson's disease and parkinsonism: clinical phenotypes and 
frequencies of known mutations.

Puschmann A(1).

Author information:
(1)Dept. for Neurology, Lund University and Skåne University Hospital, 
Getingevägen 4, 22185 Lund, Sweden. andreas.puschmann@med.lu.se

Mutations in seven genes are robustly associated with autosomal dominant (SNCA, 
LRRK2, EIF4G1, VPS35) or recessive (parkin/PARK2, PINK1, DJ1/PARK7) Parkinson's 
disease (PD) or parkinsonism. Changes in a long list of additional genes have 
been suggested as causes for parkinsonism or PD, including genes for hereditary 
ataxias (ATXN2, ATXN3, FMR1), frontotemporal dementia (C9ORF72, GRN, MAPT, 
TARDBP), DYT5 (GCH1, TH, SPR), and others (ATP13A2, CSF1R, DNAJC6, FBXO, GIGYF2, 
HTRA2, PLA2G6, POLG, SPG11, UCHL1). This review summarizes the clinical features 
of diseases caused by mutations in these genes, and their frequencies. Point 
mutations and multiplications in SNCA cause cognitive or psychiatric symptoms, 
parkinsonism, dysautonomia and myoclonus with widespread alpha-synuclein 
pathology in the central and peripheral nervous system. LRRK2 mutations may lead 
to a clinical phenotype closely resembling idiopathic PD with a puzzling variety 
in neuropathology. Mutations in parkin/PARK2, PINK1 or DJ1/PARK7 may cause 
early-onset parkinsonism with a low risk for cognitive decline and a 
pathological process usually restricted to the brainstem. Carriers of mutations 
in the other genes may develop parkinsonism with or without additional symptoms, 
but rarely a disease resembling PD. The pathogenicity of several mutations 
remains unconfirmed. Although some mutations occur with high frequency in 
specific populations, worldwide all are very rare. The genetic cause of the 
majority of patients with sporadic or hereditary PD remains unknown in most 
populations. Clinical genetic testing is useful for selected patients. Testing 
strategies need to be adapted individually based on clinical phenotype and 
estimated frequency of the mutation in the patient's population.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.01.020
PMID: 23462481 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3057. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2013 Mar 5;133(5):524-7. doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.12.0686.

[Executive function deficits following stroke].

[Article in Norwegian]

Engstad RT(1), Engstad TT, Davanger S, Wyller TB.

Author information:
(1)Oslo universitetssykehus, Norway.

Comment in
    Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2013 Mar 5;133(5):494.

BACKGROUND: Executive function deficit is a cognitive dysfunction resulting in a 
reduced ability to initiate, control and monitor targeted behaviour. Our 
clinical experience indicates that this often remains undiagnosed following 
stroke.
METHOD: The article is based on literature searches using the search terms 
«Stroke» and «Executive function» via the search engine McMaster Plus, in the 
databases Cochrane Library and PubMed, coupled with the authors' own experience.
RESULTS: Executive function deficit is a common form of stroke-related cognitive 
dysfunction which often accompanies emotional instability and depression. The 
condition is an important risk factor for loss of self-sufficiency and for 
reduced survival. Diagnosis is based on the patient's history and observation, 
supplemented by cognitive testing. Executive function deficits also occur in 
patients with no clinical signs of stroke, but who have image diagnostic signs 
of cerebral ischaemia, and with other cerebral diseases such as Parkinson's 
disease and dementia. Executive function is mainly located in the prefrontal 
cortex and the subcortical circuits, but executive function deficits are also 
seen in cases of lesions in other areas of the brain. The treatment of executive 
function deficits focuses on compensatory strategies and on recovery of lost 
function.
INTERPRETATION: Executive function deficits are common with stroke-related 
cognitive impairment, and may affect the prognosis. There is a need for 
systematic testing and strategies for treatment and prevention.

DOI: 10.4045/tidsskr.12.0686
PMID: 23463064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3058. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Aug;84(8):883-7. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-304440. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Demographic and motor features associated with the occurrence of 
neuropsychiatric and sleep complications of Parkinson's disease.

Munhoz RP(1), Teive HA, Eleftherohorinou H, Coin LJ, Lees AJ, Silveira-Moriyama 
L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hospital de Clínicas, Federal University of Paraná, 
Curitiba, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether four key neuropsychiatric and sleep related 
features associated with Parkinson's disease (PD) are associated with the motor 
handicap and demographic data.
BACKGROUND: The growing number of recognised non-motor features of PD makes 
routine screening of all these symptoms impractical. Here, we investigated the 
hypothesis that standard demographic data and the routine assessment of motor 
signs is associated with the presence of dementia, psychosis, clinically 
probable rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (cpRBD) and restless 
legs syndrome (RLS).
METHODS: 775 patients with PD underwent standardised assessment of motor 
features and the presence of dementia, psychosis, cpRBD and RLS. A stepwise 
feature elimination procedure with fitted logistic regression models was applied 
to identify which/if any combination of demographic and motor factors is 
associated with each of the four studied non-motor features. A within-study 
out-of-sample estimate of the power of the predicted values of the models was 
calculated using standard evaluation procedures.
RESULTS: Age and Hoehn&Yahr (H&Y) stage were strongly associated with the 
presence of dementia (p value<0.001 for both factors in the final selected 
model) while a combination of age, disease duration, H&Y stage, dopamine 
agonists and catechol-O-methyltransferase (COMT) inhibitors was associated with 
the presence of psychosis. Disease duration and H&Y stage were the significant 
indicators of cpRBD, and the lack of significant motor asymmetry was the only 
significant feature associated with RLS-type symptoms but the evidence of 
association was weak.
CONCLUSIONS: Demographic and motor features routinely collected in patients with 
PD can estimate the occurrence of neuropsychiatric and sleep-related features of 
PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-304440
PMID: 23463867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3059. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Aug;84(8):875-81. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-304126. Epub 2013 Mar 5.

Cortical thinning is associated with disease stages and dementia in Parkinson's 
disease.

Zarei M(1), Ibarretxe-Bilbao N, Compta Y, Hough M, Junque C, Bargallo N, Tolosa 
E, Martí MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the pattern of cortical thinning in Parkinson's 
disease (PD) across different disease stages and to elucidate to what extent 
cortical thinning is related to cognitive impairment.
DESIGN: Ninety-six subjects including 39 controls and 57 PD patients 
participated in this study. PD subjects were divided into three groups (early, 
n=24; moderate, n=18; with dementia, n=15). High field structural brain MRI 
images were acquired in a 3T scanner and analyses of cortical thickness and 
surface were carried out. Vertex-wise group comparisons were performed and 
cortical thickness was correlated with motor and cognitive measures.
RESULTS: We found a positive correlation between Mini-Mental State Examination 
scores and cortical thickness in the anterior temporal, dorsolateral prefrontal, 
posterior cingulate, temporal fusiform and occipitotemporal cortex. Unified 
Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale-III (motor subsection) scores showed a robust 
negative correlation with caudate volumes. We found that disease stage in PD was 
associated with thinning of the medial frontal (premotor and supplementary motor 
cortex), posterior cingulate, precuneus, lateral occipital, temporal and 
dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Discriminant analysis and a receiver operating 
characteristics approach showed that mean cortical thickness and hippocampus 
volume have 80% accuracy in identifying PD patients with dementia. PD stage and 
PD dementia can be characterised by a specific pattern of cortical thinning.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that measuring cortical thickness can be useful in 
assessing disease stage and cognitive impairment in patients with PD. In 
addition, cortical thickness may be useful in identifying dementia in PD.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-304126
PMCID: PMC3717586
PMID: 23463873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3060. Pract Neurol. 2013 Apr;13(2):92-103. doi: 10.1136/practneurol-2012-000337.

Neuroimaging in dementia: a practical guide.

Mortimer AM(1), Likeman M, Lewis TT.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, UK. 
alex_mortimer@hotmail.com

Over 800 000 people in the UK are demented. Alzheimer's disease, dementia with 
Lewy bodies, vascular dementia and frontotemporal lobar degeneration account for 
the majority. Although detailed clinical assessment forms the basis of 
evaluating a patient with cognitive impairment, structural and functional 
imaging techniques are increasingly being used. Neuroimaging can identify 
changes to supplement the clinical diagnosis and help to distinguish dementia 
subtypes. This may be important for treatment, prognosis and care planning. 
Furthermore, early changes on structural and functional imaging may have a role 
in preclinical detection, perhaps allowing people to start any treatments early. 
In this review, we explain the tools available to the neuroradiologist and 
examine the implications of imaging findings in assessing patients with 
cognitive impairment or dementia.

DOI: 10.1136/practneurol-2012-000337
PMID: 23468560 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3061. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2013;53(2):91-7. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.91.

[Severe olfactory dysfunction is a predictor of dementia with Parkinson's 
disease].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda A(1).

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Department of Neuroscience and Sensory Organs, Tohoku 
University Graduate School of Medicine.

Recently, we identified that hyposmia, one of the most typical non-motor 
features in Parkinson's disease (PD), was a predictive feature of PDD 
(Parkinson's disease dementia). The multivariate logistic analysis identified 
severe hyposmia and visuoperceptual impairment as independent risk factors for 
subsequent dementia within 3 years. The patients with severe hyposmia had an 
18.7-fold increase in their risk of dementia for each 1 SD (2.8) decrease in the 
score of odor stick identification test for Japanese (OSIT-J). We also found an 
association between severe hyposmia and a characteristic distribution of 
cerebral metabolic decline, which was identical to the findings observed in PDD. 
Furthermore, volumetric magnetic resonance imaging analyses demonstrated close 
relationships between olfactory dysfunction and the atrophy of focal brain 
structures, including the amygdala and other limbic structures. Dementia is one 
of the most debilitating symptoms of PD. Despite its clinical importance, the 
development of dementia is still difficult to predict at early stages. As 
cognitive impairments are known to be associated with poor prognoses in PD, 
olfactory tests may be a useful tool for the management of PD cases especially 
in advanced stages.

DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.53.91
PMID: 23470887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3062. Clin Med (Lond). 2013 Feb;13(1):93-6. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.13-1-93.

How to treat Parkinson's disease in 2013.

Worth PF(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Norfolk and Norwich University Hospital NHS Trust. 
paul.worth@nnuh.nhs.uk

Parkinson's disease is a common, progressive, debilitating disease with 
substantial physical, psychological and social implications. Pharmacological 
management is complex and should be individualised according to the needs of the 
patient. In early disease, treatment is generally highly effective, but 
medication becomes increasingly inadequate in controlling motor fluctuations and 
dyskinesias as the disease progresses. Non-motor symptoms, especially depression 
and dementia, require a holistic, multidisciplinary approach to maximise quality 
of life for patients and their carers. For the future, the ideal solution 
remains neuroprotection and restoration. Progress has been hampered by the lack 
of animal models that reflect the widespread brain pathology presumed to cause 
both motor and non-motor symptoms of PD in humans. Currently, agents are 
undergoing clinical trials in early, mildly affected patients, such as the 
plant-derived substance PYM50028 (Cogane), which promotes expression of 
endogenous neural growth factors and has shown promise in vitro and in animal 
models. Gene-therapy trials in progress rely on the viral vectors used to 
deliver the enzymatic machinery required for dopamine synthesis to the striatum. 
As PD progresses, adequate control of motor symptoms depends increasingly on 
continuous drug delivery, and greater physiological stimulation of dopamine 
receptors may help to prevent the development of LIDs and motor fluctuations. 
Efforts thus are afoot to develop better delivery systems for levodopa, and a 
new sustained-release formulation is in development.

DOI: 10.7861/clinmedicine.13-1-93
PMCID: PMC5873719
PMID: 23472504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3063. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Apr;9(4):222-30. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.33. Epub 2013 
Mar 12.

The clinical spectrum of sport-related traumatic brain injury.

Jordan BD(1).

Author information:
(1)Burke Rehabilitation Hospital, 785 Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains, New York, 
10605 NY, USA. bjordan@burke.org

Acute and chronic sports-related traumatic brain injuries (TBIs) are a 
substantial public health concern. Various types of acute TBI can occur in 
sport, but detection and management of cerebral concussion is of greatest 
importance as mismanagement of this syndrome can lead to persistent or chronic 
postconcussion syndrome (CPCS) or diffuse cerebral swelling. Chronic TBI 
encompasses a spectrum of disorders that are associated with long-term 
consequences of brain injury, including chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE), 
dementia pugilistica, post-traumatic parkinsonism, post-traumatic dementia and 
CPCS. CTE is the prototype of chronic TBI, but can only be definitively 
diagnosed at autopsy as no reliable biomarkers of this disorder are available. 
Whether CTE shares neuropathological features with CPCS is unknown. Evidence 
suggests that participation in contact-collision sports may increase the risk of 
neurodegenerative disorders such as Alzheimer disease, but the data are 
conflicting. In this Review, the spectrum of acute and chronic sport-related TBI 
is discussed, highlighting how examination of athletes involved in high-impact 
sports has advanced our understanding of pathology of brain injury and enabled 
improvements in detection and diagnosis of sport-related TBI.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.33
PMID: 23478462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3064. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2013;35(5-6):239-48. doi: 10.1159/000348408. Epub 
2013 Mar 7.

Differences in drug therapy between dementia disorders in the Swedish dementia 
registry: a nationwide study of over 7,000 patients.

Johnell K(1), Religa D, Eriksdotter M.

Author information:
(1)Aging Research Center, Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm University, SE–113 
30 Stockholm, Sweden. Kristina.Johnell@ki.se

BACKGROUND/AIMS: We aimed to study whether there are differences between 
dementia disorders and the use of anti-dementia drugs and antipsychotics 
(neuroleptics) in a large population of dementia patients.
METHODS: Information about dementia disorders was obtained from the national 
Swedish Dementia Registry (SveDem) 2007-2010 (n = 7,570). Multivariate logistic 
regression analysis was performed to investigate the association between 
dementia disorders and the use of anti-dementia drugs and antipsychotics, after 
adjustment for age, sex, residential setting, living alone, MMSE score and 
number of other drugs (a proxy for overall co-morbidity).
RESULTS: More than 80% of the Alzheimer's disease (AD) and 86% of dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) patients used anti-dementia drugs. Women were more likely than 
men to be treated with cholinesterase inhibitors. A higher MMSE score was 
positively associated with the use of cholinesterase inhibitors, but negatively 
associated with NMDA receptor antagonists and antipsychotics. Use of 
antipsychotics was 6% overall; however, it was 16% in DLB patients with an 
adjusted odds ratio of 4.2 compared to AD patients.
CONCLUSION: Use of anti-dementia drugs in AD was in agreement with Swedish 
guidelines. However, use of antipsychotics in DLB patients was high, which might 
be worrying given the susceptibility of DLB patients to antipsychotics.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000348408
PMID: 23485654 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3065. Can Fam Physician. 2013 Mar;59(3):249-54.

Structured approach to patients with memory difficulties in family practice.

Lee L(1), Weston WW, Heckman G, Gagnon M, Lee FJ, Sloka S.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Family Medicine, Kitchener, ON, Canada. joelinda5@rogers.com

OBJECTIVE: To provide family physicians with a structured approach to patients 
presenting with memory difficulties.
SOURCES OF INFORMATION: The approach is based on an accredited memory clinic 
training program developed by the Centre for Family Medicine Memory Clinic in 
partnership with the Ontario College of Family Physicians.
MAIN MESSAGE: Use of a structured clinical reasoning approach can assist 
physicians in achieving an accurate diagnosis in patients presenting with memory 
difficulties. Delirium, depression, and reversible causes need to be excluded, 
followed by differentiation among normal cognitive aging, mild cognitive 
impairment, and dementia. Obtaining collateral history and accurate functional 
assessment are critical. Common forms of dementia can be clinically 
differentiated by the order in which symptoms appear and by how cognitive 
deficits evolve over time. Typically, early signs of Alzheimer dementia involve 
impairment in episodic memory, whereas dementia involving predominantly vascular 
causes might present with early loss of executive function and relatively 
preserved episodic memory. Frontotemporal dementia and Lewy body spectrum 
disorders might have early loss of executive function and visuospatial function, 
as well as characteristic clinical features.
CONCLUSION: A clinical reasoning approach can help physicians achieve early, 
accurate diagnoses that can guide appropriate management and improve care for 
patients with memory difficulties.

PMCID: PMC3596200
PMID: 23486793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3066. FEBS Lett. 2013 May 2;587(9):1316-25. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.02.046. Epub 
2013 Mar 13.

ATP13A2 deficiency induces a decrease in cathepsin D activity, fingerprint-like 
inclusion body formation, and selective degeneration of dopaminergic neurons.

Matsui H(1), Sato F, Sato S, Koike M, Taruno Y, Saiki S, Funayama M, Ito H, 
Taniguchi Y, Uemura N, Toyoda A, Sakaki Y, Takeda S, Uchiyama Y, Hattori N, 
Takahashi R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 
606-8507, Japan.

Kufor-Rakeb syndrome (KRS) was originally described as an autosomal recessive 
form of early-onset parkinsonism with pyramidal degeneration and dementia. 
ATP13A2 was identified as the causative gene in KRS. ATP13A2 encodes the ATP13A2 
protein, which is a lysosomal type5 P-type ATPase, and ATP13A2 mutations are 
linked to autosomal recessive familial parkinsonism. Here, we report that normal 
ATP13A2 localizes in the lysosome, whereas disease-associated variants remain in 
the endoplasmic reticulum. Cathepsin D activity was decreased in 
ATP13A2-knockdown cells that displayed lysosome-like bodies characterized by 
fingerprint-like structures. Furthermore, an atp13a2 mutation in medaka fish 
resulted in dopaminergic neuronal death, decreased cathepsin D activity, and 
fingerprint-like structures in the brain. Based on these results, lysosome 
abnormality is very likely to be the primary cause of KRS/PARK9.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.02.046
PMID: 23499937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3067. J Eur Acad Dermatol Venereol. 2014 May;28(5):558-64. doi: 10.1111/jdv.12132. 
Epub 2013 Mar 18.

Increased risk of pemphigoid following scabies: a population-based 
matched-cohort study.

Chung SD(1), Lin HC, Wang KH.

Author information:
(1)Division of Urology, Department of Surgery, Far Eastern Memorial Hospital, 
New Taipei City, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: No prior study has investigated the possibility that scabies 
patients may be at an increased risk for developing pemphigoid.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the risk of pemphigoid following scabies during a 3-year 
follow-up period using a Taiwanese population-based claims database and taking 
clinical and demographic characteristics into consideration.
METHODS: This investigation consisted of a study group of 6793 subjects with a 
diagnosis of scabies and 33 965 randomly selected subjects used as a comparison 
group. Each patient was tracked for 3 years following their index dates to 
identify those who received a subsequent diagnosis of pemphigoid. Stratified Cox 
proportional hazards regressions were used to compute the hazard ratio (HR) of 
pemphigoid during the 3-year follow-up period.
RESULTS: Of the 40 758 subjects, 52 (0.13%) had received a diagnosis of 
pemphigoid during the 3-year follow-up period; 33 (0.49% of the study group) 
were from the study group and 19 (0.06% of the comparison group) were from the 
comparison group. Compared to subjects without scabies, the HR for pemphigoid 
for subjects with scabies was 5.93 within the 3-year follow-up period following 
the index date after adjusting for monthly income, hypertension, diabetes, 
obesity, psoriasis, stroke, dementia, Parkinson's disease, coronary heart 
disease, schizophrenia or bipolar disorder, and after censoring those that died 
during the follow-up period.
CONCLUSIONS: This study detected an increased risk for pemphigoid among patients 
suffering from scabies. Physicians treating elderly patients with a history of 
scabies should be alert to the development of pemphigoid.

© 2013 The Authors Journal of the European Academy of Dermatology and 
Venereology © 2013 European Academy of Dermatology and Venereology.

DOI: 10.1111/jdv.12132
PMID: 23506522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3068. Biomed Res Int. 2013;2013:161687. doi: 10.1155/2013/161687. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

Early Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease pathology in urban children: Friend 
versus Foe responses--it is time to face the evidence.

Calderón-Garcidueñas L(1), Franco-Lira M, Mora-Tiscareño A, Medina-Cortina H, 
Torres-Jardón R, Kavanaugh M.

Author information:
(1)Center for Structural and Functional Neurosciences, The University of 
Montana, 32 Campus Drive, Skaggs Building 287, Missoula, MT 59812, USA. 
lilian.calderon-garciduenas@umontana.edu

Chronic exposure to particulate matter air pollution is known to cause 
inflammation leading to respiratory- and cardiovascular-related sickness and 
death. Mexico City Metropolitan Area children exhibit an early brain imbalance 
in genes involved in oxidative stress, inflammation, and innate and adaptive 
immune responses. Early dysregulated neuroinflammation, brain microvascular 
damage, production of potent vasoconstrictors, and perturbations in the 
integrity of the neurovascular unit likely contribute to progressive 
neurodegenerative processes. The accumulation of misfolded proteins coincides 
with the anatomical distribution observed in the early stages of both 
Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases. We contend misfolding of 
hyperphosphorylated tau (HPπ), alpha-synuclein, and beta-amyloid could represent 
a compensatory early protective response to the sustained systemic and brain 
inflammation. However, we favor the view that the chronic systemic and brain 
dysregulated inflammation and the diffuse vascular damage contribute to the 
establishment of neurodegenerative processes with childhood clinical 
manifestations. Friend turns Foe early; therefore, implementation of 
neuroprotective measures to ameliorate or stop the inflammatory and 
neurodegenerative processes is warranted in exposed children. Epidemiological, 
cognitive, structural, and functional neuroimaging and mechanistic studies into 
the association between air pollution exposures and the development of 
neuroinflammation and neurodegeneration in children are of pressing importance 
for public health.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/161687
PMCID: PMC3581281
PMID: 23509683 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3069. J Magn Reson Imaging. 2013 Apr;37(4):770-7. doi: 10.1002/jmri.23800.

Proton MRS in mild cognitive impairment.

Kantarci K(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905, USA. 
kantarci.kejal@mayo.edu

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is a clinical syndrome operationalized for early 
diagnosis and treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD). Many individuals with MCI 
are at the prodromal stage of AD or other dementia. Various quantitative 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) techniques that measure the anatomic, 
biochemical, microstructural, functional, and blood-flow changes are being 
evaluated as possible surrogate measures for early diagnosis and disease 
progression in MCI. The pathology underlying MCI is heterogeneous, dominated by 
AD, cerebrovascular disease, Lewy body disease, or a mixture of these 
pathologies in autopsy cohorts. Proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy ((1)H 
MRS) metabolite markers may help identify and track etiologies that typically 
underlie MCI in the elderly. The role of proton MRS will be critical for 
pathophysiological processes for which a reliable biomarker does not exist such 
as neuronal dysfunction, glial and microglial activation in MCI.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/jmri.23800
PMCID: PMC3609038
PMID: 23526756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3070. JAMA Neurol. 2013 May;70(5):580-6. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.2110.

Prognosis of mild cognitive impairment in early Parkinson disease: the Norwegian 
ParkWest study.

Pedersen KF(1), Larsen JP, Tysnes OB, Alves G.

Author information:
(1)The Norwegian Centre for Movement Disorders, Stavanger University Hospital, 
Stavanger, Norway. kenfrp@online.no

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2013 May;70(5):553-5.

IMPORTANCE: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) is common in Parkinson disease (PD), 
but the prognostic value of MCI in early PD is unknown.
OBJECTIVE: To examine the course of MCI and its progression to dementia in an 
incident PD cohort.
DESIGN: Prospective longitudinal cohort study.
SETTING: The Norwegian ParkWest study, an ongoing population-based study of the 
incidence, neurobiology, and prognosis of PD in western and southern Norway.
PARTICIPANTS: A population-based cohort of 182 patients with incident PD 
monitored for 3 years.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Serial neuropsychological tests of attention, 
executive function, verbal memory, and visuospatial skills were administered at 
baseline, 1 year, and 3 years. Patients were classified as having MCI and 
received a diagnosis of dementia according to published consensus criteria.
RESULTS: Significantly more patients with MCI than without MCI at baseline (10 
of 37 [27.0%] vs 1 of 145 [0.7%]; relative risk, 39.2 [95% CI, 5.2-296.5]; P < 
.001) progressed to dementia during follow-up. Of those with MCI at baseline, 8 
of 37 (21.6%) had MCI that reverted to normal cognition during follow-up. Mild 
cognitive impairment at the 1-year visit was associated with a similar 
progression rate to dementia (10 of 36 patients [27.8%]) and reversion rate to 
normal cognition (7 of 36 [19.4%]). However, among the 22 patients with 
persistent MCI at baseline and the 1-year visit, 10 (45.5%) developed dementia 
and only 2 (9.1%) had MCI that reverted to normal cognition by the end of study.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Mild cognitive impairment at PD diagnosis predicts a 
highly increased risk for early dementia. Repeated neuropsychological testing 
increases the prognostic accuracy of MCI with respect to early dementia 
development in PD.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.2110
PMID: 23529397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3071. JAMA Neurol. 2013 May;70(5):553-5. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.260.

Can mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson disease predict the development of 
dementia?

Copeland BJ, Schiess MC.

Comment on
    JAMA Neurol. 2013 May;70(5):580-6.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.260
PMID: 23529474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3072. Tremor Other Hyperkinet Mov (N Y). 2013;3:tre-03-134-2929-1. doi: 
10.7916/D8N879HS. Epub 2013 Mar 26.

REM Sleep Behavior Disorder and Prodromal Neurodegeneration - Where Are We 
Headed?

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Montplaisir JY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada ; Centre d'Études Avance´es en Me´decine du Sommeil, 
Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur, Montre´al, Canada.

Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is characterized by loss 
of normal atonia during REM sleep, such that patients appear to act out their 
dreams. The most important implication of research into this area is that 
patients with idiopathic RBD are at very high risk of developing 
synuclein-mediated neurodegenerative disease (Parkinson's disease [PD], dementia 
with Lewy bodies [DLB], and multiple system atrophy), with risk estimates that 
approximate 40-65% at 10 years. Thus, RBD disorder is a very strong feature of 
prodromal synucleinopathy. This provides several opportunities for future 
research. First, patients with REM sleep behavior disorder can be studied to 
test other predictors of disease, which could potentially be applied to the 
general population. These studies have demonstrated that olfactory loss, 
decreased color vision, slowing on quantitative motor testing, and abnormal 
substantia nigra neuroimaging findings can predict clinical synucleinopathy. 
Second, prospectively studying patients with RBD allows a completely 
unprecedented opportunity to directly evaluate patients as they transition into 
clinical neurodegenerative disease. Studies assessing progression of markers of 
neurodegeneration in prodromal PD are beginning to appear. Third, RBD are very 
promising subjects for neuroprotective therapy trials because they have a high 
risk of disease conversion with a sufficiently long latency, which provides an 
opportunity for early intervention. As RBD research expands, collaboration 
between centers will become increasingly essential.

DOI: 10.7916/D8N879HS
PMCID: PMC3607914
PMID: 23532774

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interests: None.


3073. J Nutr Health Aging. 2013 Apr;17(4):295-9. doi: 10.1007/s12603-012-0401-9.

Malnutrition in community-dwelling adults with dementia (NutriAlz Trial).

Roqué M(1), Salvà A, Vellas B.

Author information:
(1)Institut de l'Envelliment, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Sant Pau 
Institute of Biomedical Research (IIB-Sant Pau), Barcelona, Spain. 
marta.roque@uab.cat

OBJECTIVES: The objective of this study is to assess the nutritional status, 
measured by the MNA, in community-dwelling elderly individuals with dementia and 
to identify clinical risk factors for nutritional risk or malnutrition.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional analysis of a cluster randomized clinical trial 
(Nutrialz).
SETTING: Community-dwelling individuals attending dementia clinics.
PARTICIPANTS: 940 individuals.
MEASUREMENTS: The clinical scales assessed were Mini Nutritional Assessment 
(MNA), Eating Behaviour Scale (EBS), Charlson comorbidity index, Clinical 
Dementia Rating (CDR), Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), Basic Activities of 
Daily Living (BADL) score, Instrumental Activities of Daily Living (IADL) score, 
Neuropsychiatric Inventory Questionnaire (NPI-Q), Cornell depression scale and 
Zarit Caregiver Burden Interview.
RESULTS: 5.2% of participants were classified as being malnourished, 42.6% as 
being at risk of malnutrition and 52.2% as well nourished. Malnutrition by type 
of dementia was more frequent in Lewy bodies dementia (18.2%) than in the other 
types. Worse nutritional status is significantly related to more advanced age 
and worse cognitive, functional and behavioural profile, as well as increased 
burden for caregivers. Presence of behavioural symptoms is significantly related 
to worse nutritional level for all NPI-Q symptoms but depression, exaltation, 
lack of inhibition and irritability. The items more strongly related to 
malnutrition are appetite/feeding and hallucinations. Dependence in any basic or 
instrumental ADL is significantly related to higher risk of malnutrition. 
Dependence on feeding is a strongly related risk factor, while food preparation 
is only a moderate one. A logistic regression model to predict at 
risk/malnutrition kept as significant risk factors EBS (Odds Ratio (OR) 0.84, 
95%CI 0.78 to 0.91), Cornell (OR 1.12, 95%CI 1.09 to 1.16), the number of 
dependent BADL (OR 1.29, 95%CI 1.17 to 1.42), age (OR 1.04, 95%CI 1.02-1.06), 
MMSE (OR 0.95, 95%CI 0.92 to 0.98) and Charlson (OR 1.18, 95%CI 1.05 to 1.34). A 
similar model built for prediction of malnutrition retained as significant 
covariables only EBS, Cornell and the number of dependent BADL.
CONCLUSION: These results will allow a better understanding of the clinical 
stage previous to malnutrition. An adequate diagnosis and treatment of 
identified modifiable factors like functional impairment, eating behaviours and 
depression could delay or avoid malnutrition.

DOI: 10.1007/s12603-012-0401-9
PMID: 23538648 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3074. BMJ Open. 2013 Apr 2;3(4):e002613. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002613. Print 2013.

Specificity and sensitivity of transcranial sonography of the substantia nigra 
in the diagnosis of Parkinson's disease: prospective cohort study in 196 
patients.

Bouwmans AE(1), Vlaar AM, Mess WH, Kessels A, Weber WE.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Maastricht University Medical Centre, Maastricht, 
The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Numerous ultrasound studies have suggested that a typical enlarged 
area of echogenicity in the substantia nigra (SN+) can help diagnose idiopathic 
Parkinson's disease (IPD). Almost all these studies were retrospective and 
involved patients with well-established diagnoses and long-disease duration. In 
this study the diagnostic accuracy of transcranial sonography (TCS) of the 
substantia nigra in the patient with an undiagnosed parkinsonian syndrome of 
recent onset has been evaluated.
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study for diagnostic accuracy.
SETTING: Neurology outpatient clinics of two teaching hospitals in the 
Netherlands.
PATIENTS: 196 consecutive patients, who were referred to two neurology 
outpatient clinics for analysis of clinically unclear parkinsonism. Within 2 
weeks of inclusion all patients also underwent a TCS and a (123)I-ioflupane 
Single Photon Emission CT (FP-CIT SPECT) scan of the brain (n=176).
OUTCOME MEASURES: After 2 years, patients were re-examined by two movement 
disorder specialist neurologists for a final clinical diagnosis, that served as 
a surrogate gold standard for our study.
RESULTS: Temporal acoustic windows were insufficient in 45 of 241 patients 
(18.67%). The final clinical diagnosis was IPD in 102 (52.0%) patients. 
Twenty-four (12.3%) patients were diagnosed with atypical parkinsonisms (APS) of 
which 8 (4.0%) multisystem atrophy (MSA), 6 (3.1%) progressive supranuclear 
palsy (PSP), 6 (3.1%) Lewy body dementia and 4 (2%) corticobasal degeneration. 
Twenty-one (10.7%) patients had a diagnosis of vascular parkinsonism, 20 (10.2%) 
essential tremor, 7 (3.6%) drug-induced parkinsonism and 22 (11.2%) patients had 
no parkinsonism but an alternative diagnosis. The sensitivity of a SN+ for the 
diagnosis IPD was 0.40 (CI 0.30 to 0.50) and the specificity 0.61 (CI 0.52 to 
0.70). Hereby the positive predictive value (PPV) was 0.53 and the negative 
predictive value (NPV) 0.48. The sensitivity and specificity of FP-CIT SPECT 
scans for diagnosing IPD was 0.88 (CI 0.1 to 0.95) and 0.68 (CI 0.58 to 0.76) 
with a PPV of 0.75 and an NPV of 0.84.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnostic accuracy of TCS in early stage Parkinson's disease 
is not sufficient for routine clinical use. CLINICALTRIALS.GOV IDENTIFIER: 
NCT0036819.

DOI: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002613
PMCID: PMC3641465
PMID: 23550093


3075. J Neuropsychol. 2013 Sep;7(2):225-40. doi: 10.1111/jnp.12015. Epub 2013 Apr 1.

Neuroimaging of brain changes associated with cognitive impairment in 
Parkinson's disease.

Christopher L(1), Strafella AP.

Author information:
(1)Division of Brain, Imaging and Behaviour--Systems Neuroscience, Toronto 
Western Research Institute, UHN, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Cognitive impairment occurs frequently in Parkinson's disease (PD) and the 
concept of Mild Cognitive Impairment in PD (PD-MCI) has recently emerged. 
Patients with mild impairment are at risk of developing dementia, and thus it is 
a topic of growing interest. Many previous studies have investigated the neural 
correlates of cognitive impairment, in particular executive dysfunction, in PD 
patients without dementia using neuroimaging techniques including structural 
MRI, functional MRI and PET imaging. These studies, which have provided a 
foundation for understanding which brain regions and neurotransmitter systems 
may be involved in executive dysfunction in PD, will be reviewed. Recent 
neuroimaging studies that have used specific criteria to classify patients as 
PD-MCI, in the hopes of gaining further insight into the underlying neural 
mechanisms will also be discussed. In particular, this review will cover key 
findings involving structural MRI investigating grey and white matter changes, 
functional MRI to examine changes in neural activation and PET imaging to 
investigate metabolic and neurochemical changes that have led to an improved 
understanding of pathology associated with executive dysfunction in PD without 
dementia and PD-MCI.

© 2013 The British Psychological Society.

DOI: 10.1111/jnp.12015
PMCID: PMC4452222
PMID: 23551844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3076. Mov Disord. 2013 May;28(5):597-604. doi: 10.1002/mds.25445. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

Prodromal autonomic symptoms and signs in Parkinson's disease and dementia with 
Lewy bodies.

Postuma RB(1), Gagnon JF, Pelletier A, Montplaisir J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, McGill University, Montreal General Hospital, 
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Pathologic staging systems suggest that autonomic dysfunction may be an early 
manifestation of Parkinson's disease and dementia with Lewy bodies. However, 
direct evidence is limited, and no prospective studies have measured when 
autonomic dysfunction starts before disease. Patients with idiopathic rapid eye 
movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder are at very high risk of developing 
neurodegenerative synucleinopathy, providing an opportunity to directly observe 
the development of autonomic dysfunction from prodromal stages of 
neurodegeneration. Patients with idiopathic REM sleep behavior disorder were 
followed annually in a prospective cohort that was established in 2004. Urinary, 
orthostatic, erectile, and constipation symptoms and systolic blood pressure 
drop from lying to standing were assessed annually. Patients who eventually 
developed defined synucleinopathy were compared with age-matched controls. The 
evolution of autonomic measures was assessed with regression analysis to 
determine when markers first deviated from control values. Sensitivity and 
specificity of autonomic markers for identification of prodromal disease were 
calculated. Of 91 patients, 32 developed disease. In prodromal stages, there was 
substantial autonomic dysfunction observable at least 5 years before diagnosis. 
On regression analysis, autonomic dysfunction appeared to progress slowly over 
prodromal periods. The estimated onset of autonomic dysfunction ranged from 11 
years to 20 years, and systolic drop (20.4 years) and constipation (15.3 years) 
had the earliest estimates. Systolic drop, erectile dysfunction, and 
constipation could identify disease up to 5 years before diagnosis with 
sensitivity ranging from 50% to 90%. By directly observing development of 
neurodegenerative synucleinopathy, we confirmed that autonomic dysfunction can 
occur early in neurodegenerative synucleinopathy, even as long as 20 years 
before defined disease. © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25445
PMID: 23554107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3077. Nat Rev Neurol. 2013 Apr;9(4):192-200. doi: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.36.

Acute and chronic traumatic encephalopathies: pathogenesis and biomarkers.

DeKosky ST(1), Blennow K, Ikonomovic MD, Gandy S.

Author information:
(1)Office of the Dean and Department of Neurology, University of Virginia School 
of Medicine, P. O. Box 800793, Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. 
dekosky@virginia.edu

Over the past decade, public awareness of the long-term pathological 
consequences of traumatic brain injury (TBI) has increased. Such awareness has 
been stimulated mainly by reports of progressive neurological dysfunction in 
athletes exposed to repetitive concussions in high-impact sports such as boxing 
and American football, and by the rising number of TBIs in war veterans who are 
now more likely to survive explosive blasts owing to improved treatment. 
Moreover, the entity of chronic traumatic encephalopathy (CTE)--which is marked 
by prominent neuropsychiatric features including dementia, parkinsonism, 
depression, agitation, psychosis, and aggression--has become increasingly 
recognized as a potential late outcome of repetitive TBI. Annually, about 1% of 
the population in developed countries experiences a clinically relevant TBI. The 
goal of this Review is to provide an overview of the latest understanding of CTE 
pathophysiology, and to delineate the key issues that are challenging clinical 
and research communities, such as accurate quantification of the risk of CTE, 
and development of reliable biomarkers for single-incident TBI and CTE.

DOI: 10.1038/nrneurol.2013.36
PMCID: PMC4006940
PMID: 23558985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3078. Lancet Neurol. 2013 May;12(5):443-53. doi: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70056-5. Epub 
2013 Apr 3.

Neurodegenerative disease status and post-mortem pathology in idiopathic 
rapid-eye-movement sleep behaviour disorder: an observational cohort study.

Iranzo A(1), Tolosa E, Gelpi E, Molinuevo JL, Valldeoriola F, Serradell M, 
Sanchez-Valle R, Vilaseca I, Lomeña F, Vilas D, Lladó A, Gaig C, Santamaria J.

Author information:
(1)Neurology Service, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona, IDIBAPS, Barcelona, Spain; 
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red Enfermedades Neurodegenerativas 
CIBERNED, Barcelona 08036, Spain. airanzo@clinic.ub.es

Comment in
    Lancet Neurol. 2013 May;12(5):417-9.

BACKGROUND: We postulated that idiopathic rapid-eye-movement (REM) sleep 
behaviour disorder (IRBD) represents the prodromal phase of a Lewy body disorder 
and that, with sufficient follow-up, most cases would eventually be diagnosed 
with a clinical defined Lewy body disorder, such as Parkinson's disease (PD) or 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
METHODS: Patients from an IRBD cohort recruited between 1991 and 2003, and 
previously assessed in 2005, were followed up during an additional period of 7 
years. In this original cohort, we sought to identify the nature and frequency 
of emerging defined neurodegenerative syndromes diagnosed by standard clinical 
criteria. We estimated rates of survival free from defined neurodegenerative 
disease by means of the Kaplan-Meier method. We further characterised 
individuals who remained diagnosed as having only IRBD, through dopamine 
transporter (DAT) imaging, transcranial sonography (TCS), and olfactory testing. 
We did a neuropathological assessment in three patients who died during 
follow-up and who had the antemortem diagnosis of PD or DLB.
FINDINGS: Of the 44 participants from the original cohort, 36 (82%) had 
developed a defined neurodegenerative syndrome by the 2012 assessment (16 
patients were diagnosed with PD, 14 with DLB, one with multiple system atrophy, 
and five with mild cognitive impairment). The rates of neurological-disease-free 
survival from time of IRBD diagnosis were 65·2% (95% CI 50·9 to 79·5) at 5 
years, 26·6% (12·7 to 40·5) at 10 years, and 7·5% (-1·9 to 16·9) at 14 years. Of 
the four remaining neurological-disease-free individuals who underwent 
neuroimaging and olfactory tests, all four had decreased striatal DAT uptake, 
one had substantia nigra hyperechogenicity on TCS, and two had impaired 
olfaction. In three patients, the antemortem diagnoses of PD and DLB were 
confirmed by neuropathological examination showing widespread Lewy bodies in the 
brain, and α-synuclein aggregates in the peripheral autonomic nervous system in 
one case. In these three patients, neuronal loss and Lewy pathology 
(α-synuclein-containing Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites) were found in the 
brainstem nuclei that regulate REM sleep atonia.
INTERPRETATION: Most IRBD individuals from our cohort developed a Lewy body 
disorder with time. Patients who remained disease-free at follow-up showed 
markers of increased short-term risk for developing PD and DLB in IRBD, such as 
decreased striatal DAT binding. Our findings indicate that in most patients 
diagnosed with IRBD this parasomnia represents the prodromal phase of a Lewy 
body disorder. IRBD is a candidate for the study of early events and progression 
of this prodromal phase, and to test disease-modifying strategies to slow or 
stop the neurodegenerative process.
FUNDING: None.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/S1474-4422(13)70056-5
PMID: 23562390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3079. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Jul;22(7):718-26. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.12.023. 
Epub 2013 Mar 25.

Sleep complaints and incident disability in a community-based cohort study of 
older persons.

Park M(1), Buchman AS(2), Lim AS(3), Leurgans SE(2), Bennett DA(2).

Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Service and Research Center, Department of Behavioral 
Sciences, Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, IL. Electronic address: 
margaret_park@rush.edu.
(2)Rush Alzheimer's Disease Center, Department of Neurological Sciences, Rush 
University Medical Center, Chicago, IL.
(3)Division of Neurology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Sleep complaints are associated with adverse health consequences. We 
hypothesized that non-disabled older persons with more sleep complaints have an 
increased risk of developing disability.
METHODS: Subjects included 908 older clergy participating in the Religious Order 
Study without clinical dementia, history of stroke, or Parkinson disease. At 
baseline, participants rated their difficulty falling asleep, frequency of 
nocturnal awakenings, sleep efficacy, and napping frequency, from which a 
summary dyssomnia measure was derived. Self-report assessment of disability 
included instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), basic activities of 
daily living (ADLs), and Rosow-Breslau mobility disability at baseline and at 
annual evaluations.
RESULTS: Mean follow-up was 9.6 (SD: 4.2) years. At baseline, more than 60% had 
one or more sleep complaints. In a series of Cox proportional hazards models 
controlling for age, sex, and education, a one-point higher dyssomnia score at 
baseline was associated with about 20% increased risk of IADL disability (hazard 
ratio: 1.20; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.04-1.39; χ(2)1 = 7.62; p <0.05), 
about 27% increased risk of ADL disability (hazard ratio: 1.27; 95% CI: 
1.10-1.47; χ(2)1 = 12.15; p <0.01), and about 27% increased risk of mobility 
disability (hazard ratio: 1.27; 95% CI: 1.09-1.48; χ(2)1 = 11.04; p <0.01). 
These associations did not vary by age, sex, or education and remained 
significant after controlling for potential confounders including body mass 
index, chronic medical conditions, and several common medications. Controlling 
for depressive symptoms attenuated the association between sleep complaints and 
incident IADL and ADL disabilities but the association between sleep complaints 
and incident mobility disability remained significant.
CONCLUSION: Non-disabled older adults with more sleep complaints have an 
increased risk of developing disability.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.12.023
PMCID: PMC3735667
PMID: 23567404 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3080. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;21(6):501-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.11.015. 
Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Testing visual perception in dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer disease.

Wood JS(1), Firbank MJ, Mosimann UP, Watson R, Barber R, Blamire AM, O'Brien JT.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Cellular Medicine, Newcastle Magnetic Resonance Centre, Campus 
for Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, Newcastle, United Kingdom. 
Electronic address: josh.wood@ncl.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVE: Visuoperceptual deficits are common in dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB) and Alzheimer disease (AD). Testing visuoperception in dementia is 
complicated by decline in other cognitive domains and extrapyramidal features. 
To overcome these issues, we developed a computerized test, the Newcastle 
visuoperception battery (NEVIP), which is independent of motor function and has 
minimal cognitive load.We aimed to test its utility to identify visuoperceptual 
deficits in people with dementia.
PARTICIPANTS AND MEASUREMENTS: We recruited 28 AD and 26 DLB participants with 
35 comparison participants of similar age and education. The NEVIP was used to 
test angle, color, and form discrimination along with motion perception to 
obtain a composite visuoperception score.
RESULTS: Those with DLB performed significantly worse than AD participants on 
the composite visuoperception score (Mann-Whitney U = 142, p = 0.01). 
Visuoperceptual deficits (defined as 2 SD below the performance of comparisons) 
were present in 71% of the DLB group and 40% of the AD group. Performance was 
not significantly correlated with motor impairment, but was significantly 
related to global cognitive impairment in DLB (rs = -0.689, p <0.001), but not 
in AD.
CONCLUSION: Visuoperceptual deficits can be detected in both DLB and AD 
participants using the NEVIP, with the DLB group performing significantly worse 
than AD. Visuoperception scores obtained by the NEVIP are independent of 
participant motor deficits and participants are able to comprehend and perform 
the tasks.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.11.015
PMID: 23567415 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3081. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2013 Jun;21(6):509-19. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.022. 
Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Neuropsychiatric features of frontal lobe dysfunction in autopsy-confirmed 
patients with lewy bodies and "pure" Alzheimer disease.

Peavy GM(1), Salmon DP, Edland SD, Tam S, Hansen LA, Masliah E, Galasko D, 
Hamilton JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, CA. 
Electronic address: gpeavy@ucsd.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To compare patients with autopsy-confirmed Alzheimer disease (AD) and 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) on the frequency of behaviors related to frontal 
system dysfunction and the association of these behaviors with dementia 
severity.
METHODS: We performed a cross-sectional survey of a longitudinal cohort at a 
university research center for AD on a volunteer sample of 19 DLB and 38 AD 
participants with autopsy-confirmed diagnoses, similar in age (DLB: 77.3, AD: 
77.5), education (DLB: 15.2, AD: 14.7), and Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) 
score (DLB: 20.6, AD: 20.5), with impairment ranging from mild deficits to 
moderate dementia. The Frontal Systems Behavior Scale (FrSBe)-Family Rating Form 
assessing patient apathy, disinhibition, and executive dysfunction by a 
knowledgeable informant was used.
RESULTS: A two-way analysis of variance with the FrSBe total as the dependent 
variable revealed a significant MMSE by diagnosis interaction (F(1,53) = 9.34, 
p = 0.004). Mean FrSBe total for AD patients showed significant impairment 
across the range of dementia severity, whereas it was relatively preserved for 
DLB patients in the early stage of disease. The interaction term showed the same 
pattern for the executive dysfunction (F(1,53) = 7.62, p = 0.008), disinhibition 
(F(1,53) = 4.90, p = 0.031), and apathy (F(1,53) = 9.77, p = 0.003) subscales.
CONCLUSION: Although frontal behavioral symptoms in AD patients were present 
regardless of stage of dementia, DLB patients showed significant frontal 
dysfunction only in later stages. Results suggest that frontal subcortical 
circuits associated with behaviors assessed by the FrSBe are affected early in 
AD but not until later stages in DLB. Assessing specific behaviors related to 
frontal systems, coupled with stage of cognitive decline, may aid in clinical 
differentiation of AD and DLB.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. All rights 
reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.10.022
PMCID: PMC3664517
PMID: 23567425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3082. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;22(4):381-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.08.014. 
Epub 2013 Mar 13.

The use and costs of formal care in newly diagnosed dementia: a three-year 
prospective follow-up study.

Vossius C(1), Rongve A(2), Testad I(3), Wimo A(4), Aarsland D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stavanger University Hospital, Norway; Centre for 
Age-related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Norway; Stavanger Teaching 
Nursing Home, Stavanger, Norway. Electronic address: c.vossius@hotmail.com.
(2)Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Haugesund Hospital, Norway.
(3)Centre for Age-related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Norway.
(4)Department of Neurobiology Caring Science and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
(5)Centre for Age-related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Norway; 
Faculty of Medicine, Akershus University Hospital, University of Oslo, Norway; 
Department of Neurobiology Caring Science and Society, Karolinska Institutet, 
Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the use of formal care during the first three years 
after diagnosis of mild dementia and identify cost-predicting factors.
DESIGN: Prospective longitudinal study over three years.
SETTING: An incidence-based bottom-up cost-of-illness study where information 
about formal health care services was drawn from the municipalities' registers 
during the first three years after the diagnosis of mild dementia.
PARTICIPANTS: 109 patients with mild dementia at baseline, diagnosed according 
to consensus criteria based on standardized assessments.
MEASUREMENT: The use of formal care as registered by the municipalities' 
registration systems. Costs were estimated by applying unit costs, including 
municipal expenses and out-of-pocket contributions. Clinical data were collected 
at baseline to identify cost-predicting factors.
RESULTS: Costs for formal care were increasing from € 535 per month of survival 
(MOS) at baseline to € 3,611 per MOS during the third year, with a mean of € 
2,420 during the whole observation period. The major cost driver (74%) was 
institutional care. The costs for people with dementia with Lewy bodies (€ 3,247 
per MOS) were significantly higher than for people with Alzheimer disease (€ 
1,855 per MOS). The most important cost-predicting factors we identified were 
the living situation, a diagnosis of non-Alzheimer disease, comorbidity, and 
daily living functioning. The use of cholinesterase inhibitors was related to 
lower costs.
CONCLUSION: Formal care costs increased significantly over time with 
institutional care being the heaviest cost driver. Studies with longer 
observation periods will be necessary to evaluate the complete socioeconomic 
impact of the course of dementia.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.08.014
PMID: 23567428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3083. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;36(2):261-74. doi: 10.3233/JAD-122434.

Postmortem 3-D brain hemisphere cortical tau and amyloid-β pathology mapping and 
quantification as a validation method of neuropathology imaging.

Smid LM(1), Kepe V, Vinters HV, Bresjanac M, Toyokuni T, Satyamurthy N, Wong KP, 
Huang SC, Silverman DH, Miller K, Small GW, Barrio JR.

Author information:
(1)David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095-6948, USA.

This work is aimed at correlating pre-mortem [18F]FDDNP positron emission 
tomography (PET) scan results in a patient with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), 
with cortical neuropathology distribution determined postmortem in three 
physical dimensions in whole brain coronal sections. Analysis of total amyloid-β 
(Aβ) distribution in frontal cortex and posterior cingulate gyrus confirmed its 
statistically significant correlation with cortical [18F]FDDNP PET binding 
values (distribution volume ratios, DVR) (p < 0.001, R = 0.97, R2 = 0.94). 
Neurofibrillary tangle (NFT) distribution correlated significantly with cortical 
[18F]FDDNP PET DVR in the temporal lobe (p < 0.001, R = 0.87, R2 = 0.76). Linear 
combination of Aβ and NFT densities was highly predictive of [18F]FDDNP PET DVR 
through all analyzed regions of interest (p < 0.0001, R = 0.92, R2 = 0.85), and 
both densities contributed significantly to the model. Lewy bodies were present 
at a much lower level than either Aβ or NFTs and did not significantly 
contribute to the in vivo signal. [18F]FDG PET scan results in this patient were 
consistent with the distinctive DLB pattern of hypometabolism. This work offers 
a mapping brain model applicable to all imaging probes for verification of 
imaging results with Aβ and/or tau neuropathology brain distribution using 
immunohistochemistry, fluorescence microscopy, and autoradiography.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-122434
PMCID: PMC3688653
PMID: 23568102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3084. Am J Epidemiol. 2013 May 1;177(9):970-8. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws334. Epub 2013 Apr 
9.

Residential distance to high-voltage power lines and risk of neurodegenerative 
diseases: a Danish population-based case-control study.

Frei P, Poulsen AH, Mezei G, Pedersen C, Cronberg Salem L, Johansen C, Röösli M, 
Schüz J.

The aim of this study was to investigate the possible association between 
residential distance to high-voltage power lines and neurodegenerative diseases, 
especially Alzheimer's disease. A Swiss study previously found increased risk of 
Alzheimer's disease for people living within 50 m of a power line. A 
register-based case-control study including all patients diagnosed with 
neurodegenerative diseases during the years 1994-2010 was conducted among the 
entire adult population of Denmark. Using conditional logistic regression 
models, hazard ratios for ever living close to a power line in the time period 
5-20 years before diagnosis were computed. The risks for developing dementia, 
Parkinson's disease, multiple sclerosis, and motor neuron disease were not 
increased in persons living within close vicinity of a power line. The risk of 
Alzheimer's disease was not increased for ever living within 50 m of a power 
line (hazard ratio = 1.04, 95% confidence interval: 0.69, 1.56). No 
dose-response according to number of years of living within 50 m of a power line 
was observed, but there were weak indications of an increased risk for persons 
diagnosed by the age of 75 years. Overall, there was little support for an 
association between neurodegenerative disease and living close to power lines.

DOI: 10.1093/aje/kws334
PMID: 23572049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3085. J Nucl Med. 2013 Jun;54(6):887-93. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.112599. Epub 2013 Apr 
9.

Assessing mild cognitive impairment with amyloid and dopamine terminal molecular 
imaging.

Albin RL(1), Burke JF, Koeppe RA, Giordani B, Gilman S, Frey KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan 
48109-2200, USA. ralbin@umich.edu

We evaluated PET-based classification of neurodegenerative pathology in mild 
cognitive impairment (MCI).
METHODS: Our study was a cross-sectional and prospective evaluation of a cohort 
of 27 MCI subjects drawn from a university-based cognitive disorders clinic. We 
compared expert clinical consensus classification of MCI at entry and possible 
dementia at follow-up with molecular imaging-based classification using 
(11)C-dihydotetrabenazine PET measurement of striatal dopamine terminal 
integrity and (11)C-Pittsburgh compound B ((11)C-PiB) PET measurement of 
cerebral amyloid burden.
RESULTS: Eleven subjects were initially classified clinically as amnestic MCI, 7 
as multidomain MCI, and 9 as nonamnestic MCI. At a mean follow-up of 3 y, 18 
subjects converted to dementia. PET imaging evidence of significant cerebral 
amyloid deposition or nigrostriatal denervation was a strong predictor of 
conversion to dementia. There was only moderate concordance between expert 
clinical classifications and PET-based classifications of dementia subtypes.
CONCLUSION: Combined PET molecular imaging of cerebral amyloid burden and 
striatal dopamine terminal integrity may be useful for identifying subjects at 
high risk for progression to dementia and in defining neurochemically 
differentiated subsets of MCI subjects.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.112.112599
PMCID: PMC3790329
PMID: 23572495 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3086. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Jun;22(6):580-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.11.001. 
Epub 2013 Apr 9.

Determining the association of the 5HTTLPR polymorphism with delusions and 
hallucinations in Lewy body dementias.

Creese B(1), Ballard C(1), Aarsland D(2), Londos E(3), Sharp S(4), Jones E(5).

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Centre for Age-Related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway; Department of Geriatric Medicine, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
(3)Clinical Memory Research Unit, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund 
University, Lund, Sweden.
(4)Mental Health Sciences Unit, University College London, United Kingdom.
(5)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, United 
Kingdom. Electronic address: emma.3.jones@kcl.ac.uk.

OBJECTIVES: To determine whether the 5HTTLPR serotonin transporter polymorphism 
is associated with delusions and hallucinations in people with dementia with 
Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson disease dementia (PDD).
DESIGN: Prospective cohort study.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 187 individuals, recruited from centres in Norway, 
Sweden, and the United Kingdom were included in this study; 97 with clinically 
or neuropathologically diagnosed DLB/PDD and 90 cognitively normal individuals 
as a comparison group.
MEASUREMENTS: All participants with dementia underwent serial evaluation of 
neuropsychiatric symptoms to assess the presence of persistent delusions and 
hallucinations using the Columbia University Scale for Psychopathology in 
Alzheimer disease, the Neuropsychiatric Inventory, or the Present Behavioural 
Examination. Severity of cognitive impairment was measured using the Mini Mental 
State Examination (MMSE). Individuals were genotyped for the 5HTTLPR 
polymorphism.
RESULTS: Logistic regression demonstrated that homozygosity for the L/L genotype 
and lower MMSE were associated with an increased risk for delusions (odds ratio: 
11.5 and 1.16, respectively). Neither was significantly associated with 
hallucinations.
CONCLUSIONS: This study is the first to demonstrate the 5HTTLPR polymorphism is 
associated with delusions in Lewy body dementias, with important implications 
regarding the mechanisms underlying this symptom across the AD/DLB/PDD spectrum. 
Further studies are warranted to investigate this relationship further and 
examine treatment opportunities.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2012.11.001
PMID: 23582751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3087. Int J Psychophysiol. 2013 Aug;89(2):213-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.04.003. 
Epub 2013 Apr 11.

Cognitive dysfunction and REM sleep behavior disorder: key findings in the 
literature and preliminary longitudinal findings.

Manni R(1), Sinforiani E, Pacchetti C, Zucchella C, Cremascoli R, Terzaghi M.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Medicine Unit, C. Mondino National Institute of Neurology Foundation, 
IRCCS, Pavia, Italy. Electronic address: raffaele.manni@mondino.it.

A considerable proportion of subjects initially diagnosed with idiopathic REM 
sleep behavior disorder (iRBD) are reported to convert to a neurodegenerative 
disorder, mainly synucleinopathies. It is unclear whether cognitive deficits in 
iRBD represent an associated feature or a marker predictive of subsequent 
development of a synucleinopathy. Cross-sectional studies indicate that a 
proportion of iRBD patients show cognitive deficits similar to those typically 
found in patients with synucleinopathies. The available longitudinal data 
suggest that cognitive dysfunction in iRBD tends to progress over time, with 
this progression probably being underpinned by a neurodegenerative process. 
Furthermore, within the framework of Parkinson's disease, RBD has been shown to 
be a risk factor for progressive cognitive decline even advancing to dementia. 
This paper addresses the multifaceted issue of cognitive dysfunction in RBD. 
Taking into account some key literature findings and preliminary longitudinal 
observations of our own, it shows that cognitive deterioration, mainly involving 
visuospatial abilities (learning as a stable deficit and copying as an evolving 
deficit), non-verbal logic, attention and executive functions can be observed in 
iRBD follow-up, suggesting an underlying evolving degenerative process. Large 
cohort studies with more prolonged follow-ups and greater methodological 
uniformity are needed to provide more reliable and robust findings.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2013.04.003
PMID: 23583627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3088. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2013 Jun;26(2):95-104. doi: 
10.1177/0891988713481267. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Apathy in patients with Parkinson disease as a function of side of onset.

Harris E(1), McNamara P, Durso R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Sciences and Epidemiology, Naval Health Research 
Center, San Diego, CA 92106, USA. Erica.Harris@med.navy.mil

BACKGROUND: In previous studies among patients with Parkinson disease (PD) who 
were administered the Apathy Evaluation Scale (AES), between 12% and 51% 
evidenced clinically significant apathy. Although apathy is a risk factor for 
dementia, its causes and clinical correlates have not been adequately studied. 
In particular, side of onset of disease, though a likely predictor of apathy and 
dementia, has not been thoroughly investigated.
METHODS: A total of 30 mid-stage patients with PD and 35 community-dwelling 
elderly control patients (CPs) were administered the AES (self version) along 
with a battery of cognitive and neuropsychiatric assessments. Persons close to 
patients with PD and CPs completed the AES--other (informant) version about the 
patient or CP. Multiple linear regression analysis examined predictors of apathy 
severity after controlling for mood, levodopa dosage equivalents (LDEs), gender, 
age, and disease severity (Hoehn--Yahr [H-Y] stage).
RESULTS: Patients with right-onset disease more frequently exhibited apathy and 
evidenced significantly higher total AES scores than left-onset patients with PD 
or CPs (P < .03). Of all the patients, 42% with right-onset PD versus 11.1% of 
the patients with left-onset PD exhibited clinically significant levels of 
apathy. There were no differences for self versus informant scores for 
right-onset patients with PD. The AES scores were not correlated with 
depression, stress, anxiety, LDEs, gender, age, and H-Y stage. There were no 
gender differences for any AES variables.
CONCLUSION: Clinically significant levels of apathy are much more likely to 
occur in patients with right-onset disease. These patients may be at greater 
risk of PD-related dementia.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988713481267
PMID: 23584852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3089. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Jun;70(6):727-35. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1925.

A multicenter study of glucocerebrosidase mutations in dementia with Lewy 
bodies.

Nalls MA(1), Duran R, Lopez G, Kurzawa-Akanbi M, McKeith IG, Chinnery PF, Morris 
CM, Theuns J, Crosiers D, Cras P, Engelborghs S, De Deyn PP, Van Broeckhoven C, 
Mann DM, Snowden J, Pickering-Brown S, Halliwell N, Davidson Y, Gibbons L, 
Harris J, Sheerin UM, Bras J, Hardy J, Clark L, Marder K, Honig LS, Berg D, 
Maetzler W, Brockmann K, Gasser T, Novellino F, Quattrone A, Annesi G, De Marco 
EV, Rogaeva E, Masellis M, Black SE, Bilbao JM, Foroud T, Ghetti B, Nichols WC, 
Pankratz N, Halliday G, Lesage S, Klebe S, Durr A, Duyckaerts C, Brice A, 
Giasson BI, Trojanowski JQ, Hurtig HI, Tayebi N, Landazabal C, Knight MA, Keller 
M, Singleton AB, Wolfsberg TG, Sidransky E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurogenetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes 
of Health, National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, 
USA.

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2013 Jun;70(6):686-8.

IMPORTANCE: While mutations in glucocerebrosidase (GBA1) are associated with an 
increased risk for Parkinson disease (PD), it is important to establish whether 
such mutations are also a common risk factor for other Lewy body disorders.
OBJECTIVE: To establish whether GBA1 mutations are a risk factor for dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB). DESIGN We compared genotype data on patients and 
controls from 11 centers. Data concerning demographics, age at onset, disease 
duration, and clinical and pathological features were collected when available. 
We conducted pooled analyses using logistic regression to investigate GBA1 
mutation carrier status as predicting DLB or PD with dementia status, using 
common control subjects as a reference group. Random-effects meta-analyses were 
conducted to account for additional heterogeneity.
SETTING: Eleven centers from sites around the world performing genotyping.
PARTICIPANTS: Seven hundred twenty-one cases met diagnostic criteria for DLB and 
151 had PD with dementia. We compared these cases with 1962 controls from the 
same centers matched for age, sex, and ethnicity.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Frequency of GBA1 mutations in cases and controls. 
RESULTS We found a significant association between GBA1 mutation carrier status 
and DLB, with an odds ratio of 8.28 (95% CI, 4.78-14.88). The odds ratio for PD 
with dementia was 6.48 (95% CI, 2.53-15.37). The mean age at diagnosis of DLB 
was earlier in GBA1 mutation carriers than in noncarriers (63.5 vs 68.9 years; P 
< .001), with higher disease severity scores.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Mutations in GBA1 are a significant risk factor for 
DLB. GBA1 mutations likely play an even larger role in the genetic etiology of 
DLB than in PD, providing insight into the role of glucocerebrosidase in Lewy 
body disease.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.1925
PMCID: PMC3841974
PMID: 23588557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Crosiers 
reports receiving travel support from Abbott and Boehringer Ingelheim. Dr 
Brockmann reports receiving speaker honoraria from Deutsche Gesellschaft für 
klinische Neurophysiologie, GlaxoSmithKline, and Orion Corporation. Dr Berg 
reports receiving consultation fees from UCB Schwarz Pharma, Merz, and Novartis; 
payment for lectures from Teva, GSC, Lundbeck, and UCB Schwarz Pharma; and grant 
support from Janssen Pharmaceutica, Teva, Michael J. Fox Foundation, the Federal 
Ministry of Education and Research, Abbott, Boehringer, German Parkinson’s 
Disease Association, and the Center for Integrative Neurosciences. Dr Gasser 
reports receiving consultation fees from Cefalon Pharma and Merck-Serono; 
lecture fees from Valeant Pharma, Merck-Serono, UCB-Pharma, and Boehringer; and 
grant support from Novartis Pharma, European Union, Helmholtz Association, and 
the Federal Ministry of Education and Research. Dr Maetzler reports receiving 
lecture fees from GlaxoSmithKline and grant support from the Robert Bosch 
Foundation. Dr Masellis reports receiving speaker honoraria from Novartis and 
EMD Serono, Inc; serving as an associate editor for Current Pharmacogenomics and 
Personalized Medicine; receiving publishing royalties from Henry Stewart Talks; 
serving as a consultant for Bioscape Medical Imaging CRO; and receiving research 
support from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Parkinson Society 
Canada, an Early Researcher Award from the Ministry of Economic Development and 
Innovation of Ontario, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd, and the Department of 
Medicine, Sunnybrook Health Sciences Centre. Dr Black reports receiving contract 
research funds to the Cognitive Neurology Research and Stroke Research Units 
from Roche, GlaxoSmithKline, Novartis, Myriad, Pfizer, sanofi-aventis, 
Boehringer Ingelheim, Lundbeck, Novo Nordisk, and AstraZeneca and honoraria from 
Janssen-Ortho, Novartis, Lundbeck, Pfizer, Eisai, Myriad, GlaxoSmithKline, 
Roche, Schering-Plough, Elan, Wyeth, and Bristol-Myers Squibb. Dr Ghetti reports 
receiving support from Elan and Bayer Schering Pharma AG. Dr Nichols reports 
receiving support from the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and 
Stroke, National Institutes of Health (NIH).


3090. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Dec;84(12):1299-300. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2012-304694. Epub 2013 Apr 16.

Does cognitive profile distinguish Lewy body disease from Alzheimer's disease in 
the early stages?

Blanc F.

Comment on
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Dec;84(12):1326-30.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2012-304694
PMID: 23591555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3091. Neurology. 2013 May 14;80(20):1841-9. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f62. Epub 
2013 Apr 17.

White matter microstructure deteriorates across cognitive stages in Parkinson 
disease.

Melzer TR(1), Watts R, MacAskill MR, Pitcher TL, Livingston L, Keenan RJ, 
Dalrymple-Alford JC, Anderson TJ.

Author information:
(1)New Zealand Brain Research Institute, University of Otago, Christchurch, New 
Zealand. tracy.melzer@nzbri.org

OBJECTIVES: To characterize different stages of Parkinson disease (PD)-related 
cognitive decline using diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) and investigate potential 
relationships between cognition and microstructural integrity of primary white 
matter tracts.
METHODS: Movement Disorder Society criteria were used to classify 109 patients 
with PD as having normal cognition (PD-N, n = 63), mild cognitive impairment 
(PD-MCI, n = 28), or dementia (PD-D, n = 18), and were compared with 32 matched 
controls. DTI indices were assessed across groups using tract-based spatial 
statistics, and multiple regression was used to assess association with 
cognitive and clinical measures.
RESULTS: Relative to controls, PD-N showed some increased mean diffusivity (MD) 
in corpus callosum, but no significantly decreased fractional anisotropy (FA). 
Decreased FA and increased MD were identified in PD-MCI and PD-D relative to 
controls. Only small areas of difference were observed in PD-MCI and PD-D 
compared with PD-N, while DTI metrics did not differ significantly between 
PD-MCI and PD-D. Executive function, attention, memory, and a composite measure 
of global cognition were associated with MD, primarily in anterior white matter 
tracts; only attention was associated with FA. These differences were 
independent of white matter hyperintensity load, which was also associated with 
cognition in PD.
CONCLUSIONS: PD is associated with spatially restricted loss of microstructural 
white matter integrity in patients with relatively normal cognition, and these 
alterations increase with cognitive dysfunction. Functional impairment in 
executive function, attention, and learning and memory appears associated with 
microstructural changes, suggesting that tract-based spatial statistics provides 
an early marker for clinically relevant cognitive impairment in PD.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182929f62
PMID: 23596076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3092. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Mar 1;70(3):320-5. doi: 10.1001/2013.jamaneurol.286.

Posterior cingulate glucose metabolism, hippocampal glucose metabolism, and 
hippocampal volume in cognitively normal, late-middle-aged persons at 3 levels 
of genetic risk for Alzheimer disease.

Protas HD(1), Chen K, Langbaum JB, Fleisher AS, Alexander GE, Lee W, Bandy D, de 
Leon MJ, Mosconi L, Buckley S, Truran-Sacrey D, Schuff N, Weiner MW, Caselli RJ, 
Reiman EM.

Author information:
(1)Banner Alzheimer's Institute, 901 E Willetta St, Phoenix, AZ 85006, USA. 
hillary.protas@bannerhealth.com

Comment in
    JAMA Neurol. 2013 Mar 1;70(3):299-300.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize and compare measurements of the posterior cingulate 
glucose metabolism, the hippocampal glucose metabolism, and hippocampal volume 
so as to distinguish cognitively normal, late-middle-aged persons with 2, 1, or 
0 copies of the apolipoprotein E (APOE) ε4 allele, reflecting 3 levels of risk 
for late-onset Alzheimer disease.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional comparison of measurements of cerebral glucose 
metabolism using 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography and 
measurements of brain volume using magnetic resonance imaging in cognitively 
normal ε4 homozygotes, ε4 heterozygotes, and noncarriers.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PARTICIPANTS: A total of 31 ε4 homozygotes, 42 ε4 heterozygotes, and 76 
noncarriers, 49 to 67 years old, matched for sex, age, and educational level.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The measurements of posterior cingulate and hippocampal 
glucose metabolism were characterized using automated region-of-interest 
algorithms and normalized for whole-brain measurements. The hippocampal volume 
measurements were characterized using a semiautomated algorithm and normalized 
for total intracranial volume.
RESULTS: Although there were no significant differences among the 3 groups of 
participants in their clinical ratings, neuropsychological test scores, 
hippocampal volumes (P = .60), or hippocampal glucose metabolism measurements (P 
= .12), there were significant group differences in their posterior cingulate 
glucose metabolism measurements (P = .001). The APOE ε4 gene dose was 
significantly associated with posterior cingulate glucose metabolism (r = 0.29, 
P = .0003), and this association was significantly greater than those with 
hippocampal volume or hippocampal glucose metabolism (P < .05, determined by use 
of pairwise Fisher z tests).
CONCLUSIONS: Although our findings may depend in part on the analysis algorithms 
used, they suggest that a reduction in posterior cingulate glucose metabolism 
precedes a reduction in hippocampal volume or metabolism in cognitively normal 
persons at increased genetic risk for Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.1001/2013.jamaneurol.286
PMCID: PMC3745014
PMID: 23599929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Mosconi has 
a patent on a technology that was licensed to Abiant Inc by New York University 
and, as such, has a financial interest in this license agreement and holds stock 
and stock options in the company. Dr Mosconi has also received compensation for 
consulting services from Abiant Inc. Dr Weiner reported that he was on the 
scientific advisory boards of Lilly, Araclon, Institut Catala de Neurociencies 
Aplicades, Gulf War Veterans Advisory Committee, and Biogen Idec in 2010 and 
Pfizer in 2011; that he consulted for AstraZeneca, Araclon, Medivation/Pfizer, 
Ipsen, TauRx Therapeutics, Bayer HealthCare, Biogen Idec, ExonHit Therapeutics, 
Servier, and Synarc in 2010 and Pfizer and Janssen in 2011; that he received 
funding for travel from NeuroVigil, CHRU Hôpital Roger Salengro, Siemens, 
AstraZeneca, Geneva University Hospitals, Lilly, University of California, San 
Diego–Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI), Paris University, 
Institut Catala de Neurociencies Aplicades, University of New Mexico School of 
Medicine, Ipsen, and Clinical Trials on Alzhimer’s Disease in 2010 and Pfizer, 
The Alzheimer’s & Parkinson’s Conference, Paul Sabatier University, Novartis, 
and Tohoku University in 2011; that he was on the editorial advisory board of 
Alzheimer’s Disease & Dementia and Magnetic Resonance Imaging; that he received 
honoraria from NeuroVigil and Institut Catala de Neurociencies Aplicades in 2010 
and Pharmaceuticals and Medical Devices Agency/Japanese Ministry of Health, 
Labour, and Welfare and Tohoku University in 2011; that he received commercial 
entities research support from Merck and Avid; that he received government 
entities research support from the US Department of Defense and the Department 
of Veterans Affairs; and that he has stock options in Synarc and Elan. The 
organizations contributing to the foundation for the National Institutes of 
Health, and thus to the National Institute on Aging–funded ADNI, are Abbott, the 
Alzheimer’s Association, the Alzheimer’s Drug Discovery Foundation, the 
Anonymous Foundation, AstraZeneca, Bayer HealthCare, BioClinica (ADNI 2), 
Bristol-Myers Squibb, the Cure Alzheimer’s Fund, Eisai, Elan, Gene Network 
Sciences, Genentech, GE Healthcare, GlaxoSmithKline, Innogenetics, Johnson & 
Johnson, Lilly, Medpace, Merck, Novartis, Pfizer, Roche, Schering Plough, 
Synarc, and Wyeth.


3093. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;36(4):679-88. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130458.

α-Synuclein in cerebrospinal fluid of Alzheimer's disease and mild cognitive 
impairment.

Korff A(1), Liu C, Ginghina C, Shi M, Zhang J; Alzheimer’s Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle, WA 98104, USA.

In addition to amyloid-β (Aβ) and tau, α-synuclein, best known for its role in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), has been suggested to be involved in cognition and 
pathogenesis of Alzheimer's disease (AD). We investigate the potential of 
α-synuclein in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) as a biomarker of cognitive decline in 
AD, and its prodromal phase, mild cognitive impairment (MCI). Using an 
established, sensitive Luminex assay, we measured α-synuclein levels in the CSF 
of a cohort of close to 400 healthy control, MCI, and AD subjects obtained from 
the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging Initiative (ADNI) and factored in APOE 
genotype in data analysis. CSF α-synuclein levels were significantly higher in 
the MCI (p = 0.005) and AD (p < 0.001) groups, compared to controls. However, 
receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve analysis suggests that CSF 
α-synuclein level on its own only offered modest sensitivity (65%) and 
specificity (74%) as a diagnostic marker of AD, with an area under the curve 
(AUC) value of 0.719 for AD versus controls. The effect of APOE genotype, if 
any, was quite subtle. However, there was a significant correlation between 
α-synuclein and cognition (p = 0.001), with increased α-synuclein levels 
associated with decreased Mini-Mental State Exam scores. Our results support a 
role for α-synuclein even in MCI, the early phase of AD, in addition to being a 
potential contributor in MCI and AD diagnosis or monitoring of disease 
progression.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-130458
PMCID: PMC3740054
PMID: 23603399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.


3094. Int Rev Psychiatry. 2013 Apr;25(2):197-209. doi: 10.3109/09540261.2013.766154.

Neuropsychiatry of corticobasal degeneration and progressive supranuclear palsy.

Bruns MB(1), Josephs KA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) and progressive supranuclear palsy syndrome (PSPS) 
are two of the atypical Parkinsonism syndromes, in that patients exhibit 
rigidity, occasional tremor and postural instability, but do not symptomatically 
respond to dopamine replacement. CBS and PSPS can often present with complex 
cognitive difficulties and neuropsychiatric disturbances. Symptoms of 
depression, apathy, or agitation can be subtle and are often overlooked as 
reactions to learning a new diagnosis of Parkinsonism. These symptoms may be the 
earliest presenting evidence of CBS or PSPS, and these syndromes can be 
misdiagnosed with a primary psychiatric disorder rather than a neurodegenerative 
condition. Patients may be inappropriately treated with antipsychotic 
medications that exacerbate the extra-pyramidal motor features of the syndromes. 
When symptoms are considered to comprise a neurodegenerative syndrome, it may be 
an inaccurate diagnosis as many features of CBS and PSPS not only overlap with 
each other, but also with other dementia syndromes. This review discusses 
similarities and differences between the syndromes of CBS and PSPS in terms of 
neuropsychiatric features. Improved characterization of the clinical syndromes 
is necessary to better predict underlying pathology. Improved education about 
these diseases would help patients, caregivers and clinicians to anticipate 
symptom progression and avoid premature nursing home placement.

DOI: 10.3109/09540261.2013.766154
PMID: 23611349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3095. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 19;8(4):e61676. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061676. Print 
2013.

Awareness of memory deficits in early stage Huntington's disease.

Cleret de Langavant L(1), Fénelon G, Benisty S, Boissé MF, Jacquemot C, 
Bachoud-Lévi AC.

Author information:
(1)INSERM U955 E01, Neuropsychologie Interventionnelle, Créteil, France.

Patients with Huntington's disease (HD) are often described as unaware of their 
motor symptoms, their behavioral disorders or their cognitive deficits, 
including memory. Nevertheless, because patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) 
remain aware of their memory deficits despite striatal dysfunction, we 
hypothesize that early stage HD patients in whom degeneration predominates in 
the striatum can accurately judge their own memory disorders whereas more 
advanced patients cannot. In order to test our hypothesis, we compared 
subjective questionnaires of memory deficits (in HD patients and in their 
proxies) and objective measures of memory dysfunction in patients. Forty-six 
patients with manifest HD attending the out-patient department of the French 
National Reference Center for HD and thirty-three proxies were enrolled. We 
found that HD patients at an early stage of the disease (Stage 1) were more 
accurate than their proxies at evaluating their own memory deficits, 
independently from their depression level. The proxies were more influenced by 
patients' functional decline rather than by patients' memory deficits. Patients 
with moderate disease (Stage 2) misestimated their memory deficits compared to 
their proxies, whose judgment was nonetheless influenced by the severity of both 
functional decline and depression. Contrasting subjective memory ratings from 
the patients and their objective memory performance, we demonstrate that 
although HD patients are often reported to be unaware of their neurological, 
cognitive and behavioral symptoms, it is not the case for memory deficits at an 
early stage. Loss of awareness of memory deficits in HD is associated with the 
severity of the disease in terms of CAG repeats, functional decline, motor 
dysfunction and cognitive impairment, including memory deficits and executive 
dysfunction.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061676
PMCID: PMC3631142
PMID: 23620779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3096. Handb Clin Neurol. 2013;113:1913-7. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00061-7.

Huntington's disease in children.

Letort D(1), Gonzalez-Alegre P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Movement Disorders, Department of Neurology, Carver College of 
Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.

Huntington's disease (HD) is a dominantly inherited, fatal neurodegenerative 
disease. This incurable illness is characterized by a triad of a movement 
disorder, cognitive decline and psychiatric manifestations. Although most 
patients with HD have disease onset in the adult years, a small but significant 
proportion present with pediatric HD. It has been long known that patients with 
early-onset HD commonly exhibit prominent parkinsonism, known as the Westphal 
variant of HD. However, even among patients with pediatric HD there are 
differential clinical features depending on the age of onset, with younger 
patients frequently presenting diagnostic challenges. In his chapter, the 
characteristics of patients with childhood- and adolescence-onset HD are 
discussed, focusing on the differential clinical features that can aid the 
clinical reach a correct diagnosis, the indications and rational use of genetic 
testing and the currently available options for symptomatic treatment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/B978-0-444-59565-2.00061-7
PMID: 23622414 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3097. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Jul;19(7):680-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.03.008. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Cerebral white matter hyperintensity in Parkinson's disease: a major risk factor 
for mild cognitive impairment.

Kandiah N(1), Mak E, Ng A, Huang S, Au WL, Sitoh YY, Tan LC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, National Neuroscience Institute, Singapore. 
Nagaendran_Kandiah@nni.com.sg

BACKGROUND: Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and dementia contribute to a poor 
quality of life among patients with PD. The influence of cerebral ischemia as a 
risk factor for MCI in PD has not been adequately investigated. To address this 
issue, we examined the influence of the volume and distribution of white matter 
hyperintensity (WMH) as a risk factor for MCI in early PD.
METHODS: Prospective study of patients with early idiopathic PD. All patients 
had baseline MRI-FLAIR, clinical assessment and detailed neuropsychological 
evaluation. Data on demographics, vascular risk factors, cognitive performance 
and WMH volumes were analyzed.
RESULTS: 91 patients; mean age 64.9 years, mean education of 10.5 years. 24 
patients fulfilled the Movement Disorder Society criteria for MCI and were 
classified as PD-MCI while the rest were classified as PD with no cognitive 
impairment (PD-NCI). Patients with PD-MCI and PD-NCI did not differ in Hoehn & 
Yahr staging. PD-MCI patients had a higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus, 
hypertension and hyperlipidemia. PD-MCI patients had significantly greater 
volume of periventricular (6.04 ml vs. 2.66 ml, p = 0.001) and deep subcortical 
WMH (2.16 vs.1.44, p = 0.002). Regional WMH was significantly greater among 
PD-MCI in the frontal, parietal and occipital regions. Logistic regression 
analyses demonstrated WMH to be associated with PD-MCI independent of age, 
education, and vascular risk factors. Increasing WMH volume was associated with 
lower performance on executive function, memory and language.
CONCLUSIONS: WMH is an important risk factor for PD-MCI independent of vascular 
risk factors. PD patients with WMH should be regularly screened for MCI.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.03.008
PMID: 23623194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3098. Clin Calcium. 2013 May;23(5):731-8.

[Fall risk and fracture. Falls in patients with dementia].

[Article in Japanese]

Komatsu T(1).

Author information:
(1)School of Health Science, Department of Physical Therapy, Tokyo University of 
Technology, Japan.

The fall risk has 3.6 fold in Dementia with Lewy Bodies (DLB) and 16 fold post 
faller syndrome among diseases to cause dementia, and it was reported that have 
a significant parkinsonism and a fall more. DLB has multiple symptoms such as 
that physical symptom, rather than worsening a symptom by characteristics of 
high sensibility medical intervention for medication, and has severe problem 
falls. It was indicated that make a decrease a fall risk for restored cognitive 
function with executive function in the elderly peoples. Thus, improve the 
quality of care and the establishment of non - pharmacological therapies, for it 
is important to further therapeutic exercise as prevention is required 
cooperation and sharing information across professions.

PMID: 23628687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3099. Nihon Rinsho. 2013 Mar;71(3):423-9.

[Smoking and neurological disorders].

[Article in Japanese]

Fujii H(1), Hosomi N, Matsumoto M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience and Therapeutics, Hiroshima University 
Graduate School of Biomedical and Health Sciences.

Some meta-analysis on smoking and risk of stroke showed that current smoking 
raised risks of total stroke, subarachnoid hemorrhage, and ischemic stroke but 
did not raise risk of intraparenchymal hemorrhage. On the other hand, previous 
meta-analysis showed that smoking was inversely associated with risk of 
Parkinson's disease. Early research found that nicotine improved short-term 
cognitive function and inhibited amyloid formation. More recently, it has showed 
with meta-analysis that smoking raised risk of Alzheimer's disease. Cigarette 
smoking has a disadvantage for neurological disorders.

PMID: 23631229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3100. J Neurol Phys Ther. 2013 Jun;37(2):58-64. doi: 10.1097/NPT.0b013e31829219bc.

Aerobic exercise to improve executive function in Parkinson disease: a case 
series.

Tabak R(1), Aquije G, Fisher BE.

Author information:
(1)Division of Biokinesiology and Physical Therapy, University of Southern 
California, Los Angeles, California 90089, USA. Rtabak@dhs.lacounty.gov

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Parkinson disease (PD) affects cognition, specifically 
executive function. In people with PD, impaired executive function has been 
identified as an indicator of fall risk and decreased quality of life. 
Therefore, it is important to consider impaired executive function in the 
physical therapy management of PD. It has been established that exercise 
improves cognition in older adults and emerging evidence suggests a similar 
effect in people with neurological conditions. We assessed changes in executive 
function in an aerobic exercise intervention in 2 people with cognitive 
impairments due to PD.
CASE DESCRIPTION: Two individuals with PD participated in this case series. 
Participant 1 was a 61-year-old woman with PD dementia, who had PD for 14 years. 
Participant 2 was a 72-year-old man with mild cognitive impairments, who had PD 
for 7 years.
INTERVENTION: The participants completed an 8-week program of aerobic exercise 
training on a stationary bicycle. Primary outcome measures examined executive 
function, and secondary measures examined disease severity, quality of life, and 
walking function.
OUTCOMES: Both participants demonstrated improvements in all measures of 
executive function and quality of life. Participant 1 also made improvements in 
walking function.
DISCUSSION: Our outcomes provide preliminary evidence of improved executive 
function following aerobic exercise in people with PD with cognitive 
impairments. Larger studies are needed to confirm these findings and investigate 
whether a causal relationship exists between exercise and improved executive 
function in persons with PD, and how these impact motor performance and quality 
of life measures.Video Abstract available (see Video, Supplemental Digital 
Content 1, http://links.lww.com/JNPT/A43) for more insights from the authors.

DOI: 10.1097/NPT.0b013e31829219bc
PMID: 23632453 [Indexed for MEDLINE]