3101. J Clin Diagn Res. 2013 Mar;7(3):484-8. doi: 10.7860/JCDR/2013/4203.2803. Epub 
2013 Mar 1.

The use of the mini-mental state examination and the clock-drawing test for 
dementia in a tertiary hospital.

Sallam K(1), Amr M.

Author information:
(1)Assistant Professor, Department of Neurology, Faculty of Medicine, Benha 
University , Egypt .

INTRODUCTION: An early and a quick identification of dementia is desirable to 
improve the overall care to the affected persons in the developing countries. 
The aim of this study was to evaluate the discriminative abilities of the Mini 
Mental State Examination (MMSE) and the Clock Drawing Test (CDT) in 
differentiating the demented patients from the controls and also the 
differentiation between the different types of dementia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: This study was designed to evaluate the patients with 
varied types and severities of dementia, who were diagnosed by using the 
Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) scale. All the patients completed the MMSE and 
the simplified CDT.
RESULTS: This study included 197 patients with an age range of 43-79 years. 
Fifty-one patients (25.9%) were diagnosed with Alzheimer Dementia (AD), 37 
patients (18.8%) with Vascular Dementia (VD), 23 patients (11.7%) with 
Parkinson's Disease Dementia (PDD) and 86 patients (43.6%) with other variants 
of dementia. The total MMSE score of the enrolled patients was significantly 
lower as compared to that of the control subjects, with a non-significant 
difference between the varied diagnoses. The total CDT scores were significantly 
lower in the patients as compared to those in the controls, with significantly 
lower scores in the PDD group as compared to those in the AD group. The patients 
who had AD showed non-significantly higher CDT scores as compared to the 
patients who had vascular and other types of dementia.
CONCLUSION: A combined application of both MMSE and CDT can identify the persons 
with a cognitive affection and this may be a useful tool for the diagnosis of 
the non Alzheimer's type of dementia.

DOI: 10.7860/JCDR/2013/4203.2803
PMCID: PMC3616561
PMID: 23634401


3102. J Nucl Med. 2013 Jul;54(7):1072-6. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.114025. Epub 2013 May 
1.

Striatal dopamine transporter binding does not correlate with clinical severity 
in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Ziebell M(1), Andersen BB, Pinborg LH, Knudsen GM, Stokholm J, Thomsen G, 
Karlsborg M, Høgh P, Mørk ML, Hasselbalch SG.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Research Unit and Cimbi, Rigshospitalet and University of 
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. ziebell@nru.dk

Patients who have dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) show both clinical and 
histopathologic overlap with Alzheimer disease patients and Parkinson disease 
patients. In this study, we correlated the core features of DLB (dementia, 
parkinsonism, hallucinations, and fluctuations) with striatal dopamine 
transporter (DAT) availability as assessed with SPECT and 
(123)I-N-(3-iodoprop-2E-enyl)-2-β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-methylphenyl) nortropane 
((123)I-PE2I) in patients with newly diagnosed DLB.
METHODS: Two hundred eighty-eight patients were consecutively included in the 
study as they were referred for diagnostic SPECT scanning of DAT with 
(123)I-PE2I. Of those patients, 51 had, on the basis of clinical guideline 
criteria, a probable-DLB diagnosis at follow-up 16 ± 11.6 mo later. Before or on 
the day of the SPECT scan, DLB patients had a routine neurologic examination 
including Hoehn and Yahr grading and were cognitively evaluated with the Mini 
Mental State Examination.
RESULTS: There was no correlation between Mini Mental State Examination, Hoehn 
and Yahr score, fluctuations or hallucinations, and striatal DAT availability as 
measured with (123)I-PE2I and SPECT.
CONCLUSION: In patients with newly diagnosed DLB, symptoms are not associated 
with a reduction in striatal DAT despite its firm involvement in DLB pathology.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.112.114025
PMID: 23637201 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3103. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2013 Apr 3;3(1):102-12. doi: 10.1159/000348350. 
Print 2013 Jan.

Cognitive profiles of patients with mild cognitive impairment or dementia in 
Alzheimer's or Parkinson's disease.

Hildebrandt H(1), Fink F, Kastrup A, Haupts M, Eling P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Klinikum Bremen-Ost, Bremen, University of 
Oldenburg, Oldenburg ; Institute of Psychology, University of Oldenburg, 
Oldenburg.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) are associated 
with severe cognitive decline, but it is still unclear to what extent they 
become functionally more similar over time.
METHODS: We compared amnestic mild cognitively impaired (aMCI; n = 29) patients 
to mild cognitively impaired (MCI) PD patients (n = 25), and patients with AD (n 
= 34) to patients with PD dementia (PDD; n = 15) with respect to cognitive 
functioning and mood.
RESULTS: aMCI patients were impaired in episodic memory, while MCI PD patients 
showed deficits in visuoconstruction and attention. AD and PDD patients showed 
comparable deficits on tests for language, attention and visuoconstruction. 
However, unlike PDD patients but similar to aMCI patients, AD patients showed a 
characteristic memory impairment, especially commission errors on recognition 
tasks, whereas PDD patients scored higher on the depressive mood questionnaire.
CONCLUSIONS: In advanced stages of both diseases, the pattern of functional 
deficits associated with parietal and temporal lobe functions (attention, 
visuoconstruction and language) is similar. However, specific differences, 
already present in the early stage (recognition errors in AD, associated with 
mediobasal temporal lobe functioning, and depressed mood in PDD, associated with 
non-motor basal ganglia loops), are also observed in the late stage.

DOI: 10.1159/000348350
PMCID: PMC3638936
PMID: 23637703


3104. Neurobiol Dis. 2013 Oct;58:13-8. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.013. Epub 2013 Apr 
29.

Elevated serum autoantibody against high mobility group box 1 as a potent 
surrogate biomarker for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.

Hwang CS(1), Liu GT, Chang MD, Liao IL, Chang HT.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology, National Tsing Hua University, 
Hsinchu, Taiwan, Republic of China. csh514@ms28.hinet.net

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is a complicate and progressive onset 
devastating neurodegenerative disease. Its pathogenic mechanisms remain unclear 
and there is no specific test for diagnosis. For years, researchers have been 
vigorously searching for biomarkers associated with ALS to assist clinical 
diagnosis and monitor disease progression. Some specific inflammatory processes 
in the central nervous system have been reported to participate in the 
pathogenesis of ALS. As high mobility group box 1 (HMGB1) is elevated in spinal 
cord tissues of patients with ALS, we hypothesized, therefore, that serum 
autoantibody against HMGB1 (HMGB1 autoAb) might represent an effective biomarker 
for ALS. Patients with ALS, Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and 
healthy age-matched control subjects were recruited for this study. ALS group 
consisted of 61 subjects, the other groups each consisted of forty subjects. We 
generated a polyclonal antibody against HMGB1 and developed an ELISA-based 
methodology for screening serum samples of these subjects. All samples were 
coded for masked comparison. For statistic analyses, two-tailed Student's 
t-test, ANOVA, Bonferroni multiple comparison test, Spearman correlation, and 
receiver operating characteristic curve were applied. We discovered that the 
level of HMGB1 autoAb significantly increased in patients with ALS as compared 
with that of patients with Alzheimer's disease, Parkinson's disease, and healthy 
control subjects. The differences between all groups were robust even at the 
early stages of ALS progression. More importantly, higher HMGB1 autoAb level was 
found in more severe disease status with significant correlation. Our study 
demonstrates that serum HMGB1 autoAb may serve as a biomarker for the diagnosis 
of ALS and can be used to monitor disease progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2013.04.013
PMID: 23639787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3105. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Aug;19(8):717-24. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.03.009. Epub 2013 May 3.

Combined dementia-risk biomarkers in Parkinson's disease: a prospective 
longitudinal study.

Compta Y(1), Pereira JB, Ríos J, Ibarretxe-Bilbao N, Junqué C, Bargalló N, 
Cámara A, Buongiorno M, Fernández M, Pont-Sunyer C, Martí MJ.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson Disease and Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Service, IDIBAPS, 
CIBERNED, Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain.

Erratum in
    Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Nov;19(11):1071-2.

Neuropsychological (mostly posterior-cortical) deficits, quantitative magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) atrophy patterns, and low cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) 
levels of amyloid-β have been separately related to worsening cognition in 
Parkinson's disease (PD). However, these biomarkers have not been longitudinally 
assessed in combination as PD-dementia predictors. In this prospective 
longitudinal study, 27 non-demented PD patients underwent CSF, 
neuropsychological and 3-T brain-MRI studies at baseline and were re-assessed 18 
months later in terms of progression to dementia (primary outcome) and 
longitudinal neuropsychological and cortical thickness changes (secondary 
outcomes). At follow-up 11 patients (41%) had progressed to dementia. Lower CSF 
amyloid-β, worse verbal learning, semantic fluency and visuoperceptual scores, 
and thinner superior-frontal/anterior cingulate and precentral regions were 
significant baseline dementia predictors in binary logistic regressions as 
quantitative and/or dichotomised traits. All participants without baseline 
biomarker abnormalities remained non-demented whereas all with abnormalities in 
each biomarker type progressed to dementia, with intermediate risk for those 
showing abnormalities in a single to two biomarker types (p = 0.006). Both the 
dementia-outcome and low baseline CSF amyloid-β were prospectively associated 
with limbic and posterior-cortical neuropsychological decline and frontal, 
limbic and posterior-cortical thinning from baseline to follow-up. These 
findings suggest that the combination of CSF amyloid-β, neuropsychological and 
cortical thickness biomarkers might provide a basis for dementia-risk 
stratification and progression monitoring in PD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.03.009
PMID: 23643469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3106. Rev Esp Geriatr Gerontol. 2013 Sep-Oct;48(5):228-31. doi: 
10.1016/j.regg.2013.01.001. Epub 2013 May 3.

[Advance care planning and severe chronic diseases].

[Article in Spanish]

Diestre Ortín G(1), González Sequero V, Collell Domènech N, Pérez López F, 
Hernando Robles P.

Author information:
(1)Centro Sociosanitario Albada, Corporación Sanitaria Parc Taulí, Sabadell, 
Institut Universitari Parc Taulí - Universitat Autónoma de Barcelona (UAB), 
Campus d'Excelència Internacional, Bellaterrra, Barcelona, España. Electronic 
address: gdiestre@gmal.com.

INTRODUCTION: Advanced care planning (ACP) helps in make decisions on the health 
problems of people who have lost the capacity for informed consent. It has 
proven particularly useful in addressing the end of life. The aim of this study 
was to determine the prevalence of ACP in patients with severe chronic diseases.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Review of medical records of patients with dementia, 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, Parkinson's disease, chronic obstructive 
pulmonary disease or interstitial lung disease, heart failure, chronic kidney 
disease on dialysis and cancer, all in advanced stages. We collected data on 
living wills or registered prior decisions by the physician according to 
clinical planned.
RESULTS: A total of 135 patients were studied. There was a record of ACP in 22 
patients (16.3%). In most of them it was planned not to start any vital 
treatment in the event of high risk of imminent death and lacking the ability to 
make decisions. Only two patients were had a legal living will.
CONCLUSION: The registration of ACP is relatively low, and this can affect 
decision-making in accordance with the personal values of patients when they do 
not have the capacity to exercise informed consent.

Copyright © 2012 SEGG. Published by Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.regg.2013.01.001
PMID: 23643615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3107. Sleep Med. 2013 Aug;14(8):739-43. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.03.004. Epub 2013 
May 3.

Neuroimaging of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder: transcranial 
ultrasound, single-photon emission computed tomography, and positron emission 
tomography scan data.

Miyamoto M(1), Miyamoto T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Center of Sleep Medicine, Dokkyo Medical University, 
Tochigi, Japan. miyatomo@dokkyomed.ac.jp

Idiopathic rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (iRBD), which typically 
develops in middle-aged individuals or later and progresses chronically, is a 
common clinical manifestation of Lewy body-related syndrome. It is important 
that combinations of neuroimaging markers in iRBD are considered for the purpose 
of diagnosing neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson disease (PD), 
dementia with Lewy body disease (DLB), or multiple system atrophy (MSA) at an 
early stage. Important advances have been made in the diagnosis of PD or DLB 
using imaging methods such as positron emission tomography (PET) and 
single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) scans or transcranial B-mode 
ultrasonography (TCS). These methods are important in clinical research, in 
which the identification of biomarkers for iRBD offers diagnostic opportunities 
and points the way to new therapeutic strategies. This review focuses on 
neuroimaging studies of rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder (RBD) 
patients using techniques such as TCS, SPECT, and PET scans.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.03.004
PMID: 23648146 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3108. Neurotherapeutics. 2013 Jul;10(3):447-58. doi: 10.1007/s13311-013-0193-6.

Intrabodies as neuroprotective therapeutics.

Messer A(1), Joshi SN.

Author information:
(1)New York State Dept of Health, Wadsworth Center, Albany, NY 12208, USA. 
messer@wadsworth.org

The process of misfolding of proteins that can trigger a pathogenic cascade 
leading to neurodegenerative diseases largely originates intracellularly. It is 
possible to harness the specificity and affinity of antibodies to counteract 
either protein misfolding itself, or the aberrant interactions and excess 
stressors immediately downstream of the primary insult. This review covers the 
emerging field of engineering intracellular antibody fragments, intrabodies and 
nanobodies, in neurodegeneration. Huntington's disease has provided the clearest 
proof of concept for this approach. The model systems and readouts for this 
disorder power the studies, and the potential to intervene therapeutically at 
early stages in known carriers with projected ages of onset increases the 
chances of meaningful clinical trials. Both single-chain Fv and single-domain 
nanobodies have been identified against specific targets; data have allowed 
feedback for rational design of bifunctional constructs, as well as target 
validation. Intrabodies that can modulate the primary accumulating protein in 
Parkinson's disease, alpha-synuclein, are also reviewed, covering a range of 
domains and conformers. Recombinant antibody technology has become a major 
player in the therapeutic pipeline for cancer, infectious diseases, and 
autoimmunity. There is also tremendous potential for applying this powerful 
biotechnology to neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.1007/s13311-013-0193-6
PMCID: PMC3701772
PMID: 23649691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3109. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Oct;34(10):2441.e7-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.04.012. Epub 2013 May 4.

Absence of A673T amyloid-β precursor protein variant in Alzheimer's disease and 
other neurological diseases.

Ting SK(1), Chong MS, Kandiah N, Hameed S, Tan L, Au WL, Prakash KM, Pavanni R, 
Lee TS, Foo JN, Bei JX, Yu XQ, Liu JJ, Zhao Y, Lee WL, Tan EK.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore; National 
Neuroscience Institute, Singapore, Singapore.

The rare variant A673T in the amyloid-β precursor protein (APP) gene has been 
shown to reduce the risk of cognitive impairment. We genotyped the variant in 
8721 Asian individuals comprising 552 with Alzheimer's disease and vascular 
dementia, 790 with Parkinson's disease, and 7379 controls. The A673T variant was 
absent in all of the subjects. Our finding suggests that the A673T protective 
variant is not relevant in our Asian population. Studies in other ethnic 
populations would clarify whether this variant is specific to specific 
races/ethnicities.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.04.012
PMID: 23652020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3110. Metab Brain Dis. 2013 Sep;28(3):341-53. doi: 10.1007/s11011-013-9412-4. Epub 
2013 May 8.

Neurodegenerative disease and obesity: what is the role of weight loss and 
bariatric interventions?

Ashrafian H(1), Harling L, Darzi A, Athanasiou T.

Author information:
(1)The Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, Imperial 
College London at St Mary's Hospital Campus, 10th Floor, Queen Elizabeth the 
Queen Mother (QEQM) Building, Praed Street, London, W2 1NY, UK. 
h.ashrafian@imperial.ac.uk

Neurodegenerative diseases are amongst the leading causes of worldwide 
disability, morbidity and decreased quality of life. They are increasingly 
associated with the concomitant worldwide epidemic of obesity. Although the 
prevalence of both AD and PD continue to rise, the available treatment 
strategies to combat these conditions remain ineffective against an increase in 
global neurodegenerative risk factors. There is now epidemiological and 
mechanistic evidence associating obesity and its related disorders of impaired 
glucose homeostasis, type 2 diabetes mellitus and metabolic syndrome with both 
AD and PD. Here we describe the clinical and molecular relationship between 
obesity and neurodegenerative disease. Secondly we outline the protective role 
of weight loss, metabolic and caloric modifying interventions in the context of 
AD and PD. We conclude that the application of caloric restriction through 
dietary changes, bariatric (metabolic) surgery and gut hormone therapy may offer 
novel therapeutic strategies against neurodegenerative disorders. Investigating 
the protective mechanisms of weight loss, metabolic and caloric modifying 
interventions can increase our understanding of these major public health 
diseases and their management.

DOI: 10.1007/s11011-013-9412-4
PMID: 23653255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3111. Am J Ther. 2013 May-Jun;20(3):279-91. doi: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e31828bfb7f.

A review of the etiology, associated comorbidities, and treatment of orthostatic 
hypotension.

Perlmuter LC(1), Sarda G, Casavant V, Mosnaim AD.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and 
Science, North Chicago, IL, USA.

The magnitude of increase in systolic blood pressure in response to the shift 
from supine to upright posture is considered to reflect the adequacy of 
orthostatic regulation. Orthostatic integrity is largely maintained by the 
interaction between the skeletal muscle pump, neurovascular compensation, 
neurohumoral effects, and cerebral blood flow regulation. Various physiological 
states and disease conditions may disrupt these mechanisms as seen in vasovagal 
syncope, dysautonomic orthostatic intolerance, and postural orthostatic 
tachycardia syndrome. Orthostatic hypotension (OH) and decreased cerebral blood 
flow are strongly related. Even subclinical OH has been associated to different 
degrees with impaired cognitive function, decreased effort, reduced motivation, 
increased hopelessness, and signs of attention-deficit hyperactivity disorder 
and dementia, diabetes mellitus, and Parkinson disease. Furthermore, subclinical 
levels of inadequate blood pressure regulation in response to orthostasis have 
been linked to increased depression and anxiety and intergenerational behavioral 
sequelae between mother and child. Identifying causes of subclinical and 
clinical OH is critical in improving quality of life for both children and older 
adults. A better understanding of the underlying causes responsible for the 
etiology of OH could lead to a rational design of novel effective therapeutic 
regimens for the treatment of this condition and associated comorbidities.

DOI: 10.1097/MJT.0b013e31828bfb7f
PMID: 23656967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3112. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2013;35(5):530-9. doi: 10.1080/13803395.2013.798397. 
Epub 2013 May 13.

The contribution of trail making to the prediction of performance-based 
instrumental activities of daily living in Parkinson's disease without dementia.

Higginson CI(1), Lanni K, Sigvardt KA, Disbrow EA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Loyola University Maryland, Baltimore, MD 
21210-2699, USA. cihigginson@loyola.edu

Performance on Part B of the Trail Making Test (TMT) contributes to the 
prediction of ability to complete instrumental activities of daily living 
(IADLs) in Parkinson's disease (PD). Although this suggests that cognitive 
flexibility is important in the everyday functioning of individuals with PD, 
this may not be the case as the TMT is multifactorial, involving motor speed, 
visual scanning, sequencing, and cognitive flexibility. The purpose of the 
current study was to determine which elements of the task contribute to the 
prediction of IADLs in a sample of 30 nondemented individuals with PD. 
Correlational analyses indicated strong relationships between a 
performance-based measure of IADLs and measures involving scanning, sequencing, 
and cognitive flexibility from the Delis-Kaplan Executive Function System 
(D-KEFS) TMT. Results from standard regressions indicated that measures of 
sequencing and level of depression but not scanning, cognitive flexibility, or 
demographic variables made a significant, independent contribution to the 
prediction of IADLs. These results suggest that the sequencing element of the 
TMT is paramount in the prediction of IADLs in PD.

DOI: 10.1080/13803395.2013.798397
PMCID: PMC3674142
PMID: 23663116 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3113. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;36(4):699-709. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130281.

Neuropathologic correlates of cognition in a population-based sample.

Cholerton B(1), Larson EB, Baker LD, Craft S, Crane PK, Millard SP, Sonnen JA, 
Montine TJ.

Author information:
(1)Geriatric Research, Education, & Clinical Center, Veterans Affairs Puget 
Sound Health Care System, 9600 Veterans Drive SW, Tacoma, WA 98493, USA. 
bchol@u.washington.edu

Many cognitively normal older adults have underlying neuropathologic changes of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), vascular brain injury (VBI), or Lewy body disease 
(LBD), which confer an increased risk of dementia. The current study focused on 
the association between multiple neuropathologic indices and performance on 
specific cognitive domains in a community sample of older adults. Of 438 
participants in the Adult Changes in Thought population-based study of brain 
aging who were autopsied, 363 subjects had cognitive testing at their final 
study visit and were included. Associations were measured between performance on 
the Cognitive Abilities Screening Instrument prior to death and neuropathologic 
endpoints, including AD neuropathologic changes, LBD, cerebral amyloid 
angiopathy, and measures of VBI. Braak stage for neurofibrillary tangles, lower 
brain weight, and VBI as measured by cerebral cortical microvascular lesions 
(μVBI) explained a significant proportion of the variance associated with global 
cognitive test performance (R2 = 0.31, p < 0.0001) both in the entire sample and 
when analysis was restricted to non-demented subjects (R2 = 0.23, p < 0.0001). 
Specific cognitive domains were differentially related to neuropathologic lesion 
type: memory and executive function with AD pathologic changes and cortical 
μVBI, executive function with subcortical μVBI, and visuospatial construction 
with LBD. Thus, neuropathologic lesions of LBD and μVBI are associated with 
poorer cognitive performance over and above AD neuropathologic changes in 
subjects without dementia in this cohort. These findings underscore that 
cognitive impairment is a complex convergent trait that has important 
implications for clinical investigation and medical management of older adults.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-130281
PMCID: PMC3737376
PMID: 23666176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3114. Acta Neurol Scand. 2013 Dec;128(6):409-13. doi: 10.1111/ane.12138. Epub 2013 May 
14.

CERAD test performance and cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Karrasch M(1), Laatu S, Martikainen K, Marttila R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Abo Akademi University, Turku, 
Finland.

OBJECTIVES: Many patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) develop mild cognitive 
impairment (PD-MCI) and dementia (PDD). The Consortium to Establish a Registry 
for Alzheimer's Disease (CERAD) neurocognitive test battery was originally 
developed to identify early Alzheimer's disease, but it has become a widely used 
screening instrument also for other types of dementia. The aim of the study was 
to examine differences in CERAD test performances between cognitively intact and 
impaired PD patients.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighty-eight PD patients participating in a 
rehabilitation course were studied. The Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) was used 
to assess cognitive impairment. Sixty-six patients were cognitively intact and 
22 had cognitive impairment (≥1 in two or more domains or a sum of boxes score 
of ≥3). The Finnish CERAD test battery was used to measure cognitive functions 
in seven different domains (language functions, verbal learning, visuospatial 
functions, delayed recall, memory consolidation, recognition memory, and 
executive functions).
RESULTS: There were significant differences between the cognitively intact and 
impaired patients in six CERAD subtests (wordlist learning sum, wordlist delayed 
recall, constructional praxis recall, clock drawing, verbal fluency and 
constructional praxis copy) when controlling for covariates (disease duration, 
motor symptoms, age, and education). No differences were observed in memory 
consolidation scores.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that mild cognitive impairment in PD is 
related to deficits in memory, executive functions, and visuospatial functions. 
The memory deficit is non-amnestic and does not entail accelerated forgetting. 
CERAD shows promise in identifying PD patients with cognitive impairment and 
increased risk of dementia.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/ane.12138
PMID: 23668316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3115. Mov Disord. 2013 Jun;28(6):697-701. doi: 10.1002/mds.25499. Epub 2013 May 14.

The many faces of alpha-synuclein mutations.

Kasten M(1), Klein C.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neurogenetics, University of Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

Since the first description of alpha-synuclein (SNCA) mutations in 1997, this 
gene has probably become the most intensely investigated one associated with 
monogenic Parkinson disease (PD). Prompted by the finding of a novel SNCA 
mutation, H50Q, we systematically explored the 145 published SNCA mutation 
carriers for a possible mutation (type)-specific clinical expression, which 
appears to be rather unique to SNCA mutations compared with other PD genes. The 
A53T mutation is associated with an approximately 10-year earlier age at onset 
than the other 3 known missense mutations, including the new H50Q mutation. 
Similarly, SNCA triplication carriers have an approximately 10-year earlier 
onset and a more rapid disease course than duplication carriers, who, overall 
closely resemble patients with idiopathic PD. Furthermore, higher order SNCA 
multiplications are associated with additional neurologic features, such as 
myoclonus. For the nonmotor features, their mere frequency appears less striking 
than their severity, with an early age of onset of depression or dementia, 
suicidal ideation, and multimodal hallucinations. We conclude that, (1) although 
SNCA mutations are a rare cause of PD, it remains worth testing for new 
mutations in this gene; (2) a differential view of SNCA mutations and variants 
may allow important pathophysiologic inferences even beyond monogenic PD and is 
warranted in the context of clinical counseling.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25499
PMID: 23674458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3116. Eur J Neurol. 2013 Nov;20(11):1459-e126. doi: 10.1111/ene.12196. Epub 2013 May 
17.

Decreased striatal dopamine transporter uptake in the non-fluent/agrammatic 
variant of primary progressive aphasia.

Gil-Navarro S(1), Lomeña F, Cot A, Lladó A, Montagut N, Castellví M, Bosch B, 
Rami L, Antonell A, Balasa M, Pavia J, Iranzo A, Molinuevo JL, Sánchez-Valle R.

Author information:
(1)Alzheimer's Disease and Other Cognitive Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, 
Hospital Clínic, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Patients with the non-fluent/agrammatic variant of 
primary progressive aphasia (nfvPPA) may develop atypical parkinsonian 
syndromes. However, there is no current biomarker to assess which patients are 
at high risk of developing parkinsonism. 
123I-2β-carbomethoxy-3β-(4-iodophenyl)-N-(3-fluoropropyl)-nortropane 
(123I-FP-CIT)-SPECT detects striatal dopamine dysfunction in vivo. The objective 
of the present study was to study whether non-fluent/agrammatic patients without 
parkinsonism at baseline present decreased striatal 123I-FP-CIT uptake.
METHODS: Visual and semi-quantitative assessments of the striatal 123I-FP-CIT 
uptake ratio were carried out in 15 patients with nfvPPA, eight patients with 
the logopenic variant of PPA (lvPPA) and 18 controls. To rule out progranulin 
mutations or underlying Alzheimer's disease (AD), serum progranulin levels and 
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers of AD (Aβ42 , total-tau, 
phosphorylated-tau181 ) were determined. A second 123I-FP-CIT-SPECT analysis in 
the biomarker-enriched groups was also carried out.
RESULTS: Patients with nfvPPA presented reduced striatal 123I-FP-CIT binding, 
especially in the left hemisphere (P = 0.002), compared with controls. All lvPPA 
patients had normal striatal 123I-FP-CIT uptake. 123I-FP-CIT striatal binding in 
nfvPPA patients with normal progranulin and CSF biomarker levels (nfvPPA/bio-) 
was also significantly reduced (P < 0.05) compared with lvPPA patients with 
positive AD biomarkers. Sixty-four per cent (9/14) of nfvPPA patients and 80% of 
nfvPPA/bio- patients (8/10) showed a diminished individual left striatal 
123I-FP-CIT uptake ratio. On follow-up, seven nfvPPA/bio- patients developed 
parkinsonism (median 1.9 years; range 1.2-2.9), six of them with baseline 
reduced 123I-FP-CIT uptake.
CONCLUSIONS: Reduced striatal tracer uptake in nfvPPA patients prior to clinical 
parkinsonism can be detected by 123I-FP-CIT-SPECT, especially in those with 
nfvPPA/bio-, suggesting subclinical nigrostriatal degeneration. Decreased 
striatal 123I-FP-CIT binding might identify PPA patients at increased risk of 
developing atypical parkinsonian syndromes, probably related to tau-pathology.

© 2013 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2013 EFNS.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.12196
PMID: 23679075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3117. Drugs Aging. 2013 Aug;30(8):603-11. doi: 10.1007/s40266-013-0092-x.

Neuropsychiatric symptoms in patients with dementias associated with cortical 
Lewy bodies: pathophysiology, clinical features, and pharmacological management.

Ballard C(1), Aarsland D, Francis P, Corbett A.

Author information:
(1)Wolfson Centre for Age-Related Diseases, King's College London, Wolfson 
Building, Guy's Campus, London, SE1 1UL, UK. clive.ballard@kcl.ac.uk

Erratum in
    Drugs Aging. 2014 Aug;31(8):651.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD) are 
synucleinopathies that lead to neurodegeneration and dementia. Although they 
result in symptoms common to Alzheimer's disease, they are associated with early 
emergence of parkinsonism and high frequency of neuropsychiatric symptoms, most 
commonly hallucinations and delusions. This review summarizes the current 
understanding of the underlying biology of neuropsychiatric symptoms in DLB and 
PDD and the evidence base for treatment to address them. Disruption to 
cholinergic and serotonergic neurotransmission and synapse activity are 
highlighted as primary pathological factors in neuropsychiatric symptoms, 
particularly loss of key neurotransmitter functions, alterations to neuronal 
receptors in the serotonergic pathway, and regionally specific structural 
changes that are linked to specific symptoms. Review of options for 
pharmacological treatment of neuropsychiatric symptoms suggests that the best 
evidence for the value of treatment is for cholinesterase inhibitors, with an 
indication that people with visual hallucinations are particularly likely to 
benefit. Evidence for the benefits of antipsychotics other than clozapine is 
limited, and there are serious safety concerns about the use of antipsychotics 
in these patients. Evidence to support other pharmacological interventions is 
very preliminary. Nonpharmacological approaches based on person-centered care 
and cholinesterase inhibitors should be considered as the first-line treatment 
for neuropsychiatric symptoms except in extreme cases.

DOI: 10.1007/s40266-013-0092-x
PMID: 23681401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3118. Brain. 2013 Jun;136(Pt 6):1708-17. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt095. Epub 2013 May 17.

β-Propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration: a new X-linked dominant 
disorder with brain iron accumulation.

Hayflick SJ(1), Kruer MC, Gregory A, Haack TB, Kurian MA, Houlden HH, Anderson 
J, Boddaert N, Sanford L, Harik SI, Dandu VH, Nardocci N, Zorzi G, Dunaway T, 
Tarnopolsky M, Skinner S, Holden KR, Frucht S, Hanspal E, Schrander-Stumpel C, 
Mignot C, Héron D, Saunders DE, Kaminska M, Lin JP, Lascelles K, Cuno SM, Meyer 
E, Garavaglia B, Bhatia K, de Silva R, Crisp S, Lunt P, Carey M, Hardy J, 
Meitinger T, Prokisch H, Hogarth P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular and Medical Genetics, Oregon Health and Science 
University, Portland, OR 97239, USA. hayflick@ohsu.edu

Comment in
    Brain. 2013 Jun;136(Pt 6):1687-91.

Neurodegenerative disorders with high iron in the basal ganglia encompass an 
expanding collection of single gene disorders collectively known as 
neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation. These disorders can largely be 
distinguished from one another by their associated clinical and neuroimaging 
features. The aim of this study was to define the phenotype that is associated 
with mutations in WDR45, a new causative gene for neurodegeneration with brain 
iron accumulation located on the X chromosome. The study subjects consisted of 
WDR45 mutation-positive individuals identified after screening a large 
international cohort of patients with idiopathic neurodegeneration with brain 
iron accumulation. Their records were reviewed, including longitudinal clinical, 
laboratory and imaging data. Twenty-three mutation-positive subjects were 
identified (20 females). The natural history of their disease was remarkably 
uniform: global developmental delay in childhood and further regression in early 
adulthood with progressive dystonia, parkinsonism and dementia. Common early 
comorbidities included seizures, spasticity and disordered sleep. The symptoms 
of parkinsonism improved with l-DOPA; however, nearly all patients experienced 
early motor fluctuations that quickly progressed to disabling dyskinesias, 
warranting discontinuation of l-DOPA. Brain magnetic resonance imaging showed 
iron in the substantia nigra and globus pallidus, with a 'halo' of T1 
hyperintense signal in the substantia nigra. All patients harboured de novo 
mutations in WDR45, encoding a beta-propeller protein postulated to play a role 
in autophagy. Beta-propeller protein-associated neurodegeneration, the only 
X-linked disorder of neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation, is 
associated with de novo mutations in WDR45 and is recognizable by a unique 
combination of clinical, natural history and neuroimaging features.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt095
PMCID: PMC3673459
PMID: 23687123 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3119. Int Wound J. 2015 Jun;12(3):254-9. doi: 10.1111/iwj.12086. Epub 2013 May 21.

Systemic factors and mortality in elderly patients with pressure ulcers.

Jaul E(1), Calderon-Margalit R(2).

Author information:
(1)Skilled Geriatric Nursing Department, Herzog Hospital and Hebrew University 
Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem, Israel.
(2)Braun School of Public Health and Community Medicine, Hebrew University - 
Hadassah, Jerusalem, Israel.

The aim of this article was to identify specific systemic factors associated 
with existence of pressure ulcers (PUs) and the effect on survival from the time 
of admission. Patients admitted to the Skilled Nursing Department of the Herzog 
Hospital, Jerusalem, between 1 July 2008 and 31 December 2011. Of the 174 
admitted patients (mean age: 77·4 ± 13·2 years), 107 (61·5%) had pre-existing 
PUs and 67 (38·5%) did not have PUs. Major systemic factors were assessed for 
each patient at the time of admission: sociodemographic characteristics, 
comorbidities, use of urinary catheter, tube feeding and tracheostomy; 
nutritional state; Global Deterioration Scale, Glasgow Coma Scale and Norton 
Scale. Complications such as the number of provided antibiotic courses, and 
length and outcomes of hospitalisation were identified at the end of the study. 
In the univariate analysis, patients in the PU group had significantly prevalent 
characteristics including advanced age, low cognitive and consciousness 
function, low Norton scale, Parkinson's disease and anaemia due to chronic 
diseases, low nutritional parameters and higher number of antibiotics provided. 
Conditions that were associated with PUs in multiple regression analyses 
included advanced dementia (OR = 3·0, 95% CI: 1·4-6·3; P = 0·002), urinary 
catheter usage (OR = 2·25, 95% CI: 1·06-4·7; P = 0·03), low body mass index, BMI 
(OR = 0·92, 95% CI: 0·86-0·99; P = 0·02) and anaemia level (OR = 0·7, 95% CI: 
0·58-0·9; P = 0·004). The median survival time of patients with PUs was 
significantly lower than the non PUs group (94 versus 414 days, respectively) (P 
= 0·005, log rank test). Length of stay was also significantly lower in the PU 
group (166 versus 270 days, P = 0·02). The existence of PUs may indicate a final 
common pathway of various systemic factors (geriatric conditions, diseases and 
frailty dysfunction).

© 2013 The Authors. International Wound Journal © 2013 Medicalhelplines.com Inc 
and John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

DOI: 10.1111/iwj.12086
PMCID: PMC7950837
PMID: 23692122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3120. Am J Emerg Med. 2013 Jul;31(7):1133-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.04.007. Epub 
2013 May 20.

Mild head injury in pediatrics: algorithms for management in the ED and in young 
athletes.

Simma B(1), Lütschg J, Callahan JM.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Academic Teaching Hospital, Landeskrankenhaus 
Feldkirch, 6800 Feldkirch, Austria. burkhard.simma@lkhf.at

Mild head injury is of interest because of a history of under diagnosis and 
underestimated clinical importance. Half of the patients with mild head injuries 
or concussions have sport-related injuries. Knowledge of symptoms and 
appropriate management can be improved and is a matter of practical interest. 
Several algorithms exist for discharge, admission or for cranial computed 
tomography (CT).These employ different risk factors and calculate their 
sensitivity of correctly identifying children with traumatic brain injury (TBI). 
In contrast, a multicenter, prospective study in the United States developed a 
prediction model to diagnose the absence of intracranial injury when certain 
symptoms are missing (negative prediction value). An acute concussion presents 
with a combination of physical, cognitive, and emotional symptoms, which are 
usually self-limited. In young athletes, a second impact before full recovery 
from the first may have deleterious consequences and should be avoided by strict 
"return to play" rules. Recent research suggests that repetitive minor hits may 
cause delayed brain damage (dementia pugilistica, "punch-drunk syndrome"). A 
link to neurodegenerative diseases such as dementia, Alzheimer's disease and 
parkinsonism (tauopathies) is described by amyloid β plaques in the brain of 
such patients. A genetic predisposition (apolipoprotein) is discussed. This 
review focuses on the rules attempting to determine the need for cranial CT in 
the emergency department and the impact of mild head injuries in young athletes. 
We describe in detail standardized guidelines for appropriate diagnosis and 
treatment and discuss the association between repetitive minor injuries and 
chronic traumatic encephalopathy and neurodegenerative diseases.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajem.2013.04.007
PMID: 23702075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3121. World J Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Dec;17(8):587-599. doi: 
10.3109/15622975.2013.797104. Epub 2013 May 24.

Developmental neuroplasticity and the origin of neurodegenerative diseases.

Schaefers AT(1), Teuchert-Noodt G(1).

Author information:
(1)a Department of Biology , University of Bielefeld , Bielefeld , Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Neurodegenerative diseases like Alzheimer's and Parkinson's Disease, 
marked by characteristic protein aggregations, are more and more accepted to be 
synaptic disorders and to arise from a combination of genetic and environmental 
factors. In this review we propose our concept that neuroplasticity might 
constitute a link between early life challenges and neurodegeneration.
METHODS: After introducing the general principles of neuroplasticity, we show 
how adverse environmental stimuli during development impact adult 
neuroplasticity and might lead to neurodegenerative processes.
RESULTS: There are significant overlaps between neurodevelopmental and 
neurodegenerative processes. Proteins that represent hallmarks of 
neurodegeneration are involved in plastic processes under physiological 
conditions. Brain regions - particularly the hippocampus - that retain life-long 
plastic capacities are the key targets of neurodegeneration. Neuroplasticity is 
highest in young age making the brain more susceptible to external influences 
than later in life. Impacts during critical periods have life-long consequences 
on neuroplasticity and structural self-organization and are known to be common 
risk factors for neurodegenerative diseases.
CONCLUSIONS: Several lines of evidence support a link between developmental 
neuroplasticity and neurodegenerative processes later in life. A deeper insight 
into these processes is necessary to design strategies to mitigate or even 
prevent neurodegenerative pathologies.

DOI: 10.3109/15622975.2013.797104
PMID: 23705632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3122. Int J Clin Pharm. 2013 Oct;35(5):711-8. doi: 10.1007/s11096-013-9793-9. Epub 
2013 May 25.

Prescription patterns of anticholinergic agents and their associated factors in 
Korean elderly patients with dementia.

Lee EK(1), Lee YJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyung Hee University Hospital, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Dementia is a disorder that is characterized by a chronic, 
progressive loss of cognitive function. Anticholinergic agents that are often 
used with elderly patients may cause a decline in cognitive capacity; therefore, 
they must be used with caution.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to identify the prescription patterns for anticholinergic 
drugs in elderly outpatients with a documented diagnosis of dementia through a 
retrospective analysis of electronic medical records. In addition, the study 
aimed to identify factors influencing these prescription patterns.
SETTING: The Kyung Hee University Hospital in Korea.
METHODS: We studied outpatients aged ≥ 65 years registered with dementia between 
January 1, 2011 and December 31, 2011. We reviewed prescription histories, 
identified anticholinergic prescriptions during the study period using the 
anticholinergic risk scale (ARS), and examined prescription patterns in the 
subjects. After analysing the ARS scores for each drug and subject, we performed 
a statistical analysis of the factors affecting prescription patterns for 
anticholinergic medications in patients with ARS scores of ≥ 2.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Prescription data on anticholinergic agents.
RESULTS: Of 773 elderly dementia patients, 362 patients (46.83 %) were 
prescribed at least one anticholinergic medication. Of the ARS 2-point 
anticholinergics, nortriptyline was prescribed most frequently. Among ARS 
3-point anticholinergics, cyproheptadine was prescribed most frequently. An ARS 
score of ≥ 2 was given in 255 (32.98 %) patients. A multivariate logistic 
regression analysis of the factors associated with anticholinergic prescription 
patterns revealed that those patients with comorbid Parkinson's disease received 
significantly fewer prescriptions (OR = 0.544; 95% CI 0.364-0.813) and those 
patients who were prescribed 6-10 or ≥ 11 medications were significantly more 
likely to receive anticholinergic prescriptions (OR = 3.410; 95 % CI 2.228-5.220 
and OR = 4.688; 95 % CI 2.993-7.344, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Approximately 33% of the elderly dementia patients in this study 
were prescribed clinically significant medication regimens totaling an ARS score 
of ≥ 2. Our findings show that the total number of medications and comorbid 
Parkinson's disease both influence prescription patterns for anticholinergic 
medications.

DOI: 10.1007/s11096-013-9793-9
PMID: 23708883 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3123. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2013;2013:726954. doi: 10.1155/2013/726954. Epub 2013 Apr 
17.

Metal dyshomeostasis and inflammation in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's diseases: 
possible impact of environmental exposures.

Myhre O(1), Utkilen H, Duale N, Brunborg G, Hofer T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental Medicine, Department of Chemicals and Radiation, 
The Norwegian Institute of Public Health, P.O. Box 4404, Nydalen, 0403 Oslo, 
Norway.

A dysregulated metal homeostasis is associated with both Alzheimer's (AD) and 
Parkinson's (PD) diseases; AD patients have decreased cortex and elevated serum 
copper levels along with extracellular amyloid-beta plaques containing copper, 
iron, and zinc. For AD, a putative hepcidin-mediated lowering of cortex copper 
mechanism is suggested. An age-related mild chronic inflammation and/or elevated 
intracellular iron can trigger hepcidin production followed by its binding to 
ferroportin which is the only neuronal iron exporter, thereby subjecting it to 
lysosomal degradation. Subsequently raised neuronal iron levels can induce 
translation of the ferroportin assisting and copper binding amyloid precursor 
protein (APP); constitutive APP transmembrane passage lowers the copper pool 
which is important for many enzymes. Using in silico gene expression analyses, 
we here show significantly decreased expression of copper-dependent enzymes in 
AD brain and metallothioneins were upregulated in both diseases. Although few AD 
exposure risk factors are known, AD-related tauopathies can result from 
cyanobacterial microcystin and β-methylamino-L-alanine (BMAA) intake. Several 
environmental exposures may represent risk factors for PD; for this disease 
neurodegeneration is likely to involve mitochondrial dysfunction, microglial 
activation, and neuroinflammation. Administration of metal chelators and 
anti-inflammatory agents could affect disease outcomes.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/726954
PMCID: PMC3654362
PMID: 23710288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3124. Eur Neurol. 2013;70(1-2):42-5. doi: 10.1159/000348571. Epub 2013 May 23.

Impact of cognitive dysfunction on drooling in Parkinson's disease.

Rana AQ(1), Khondker S, Kabir A, Owalia A, Khondker S, Emre M.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Clinic of Eastern Toronto, Scarborough, Ont., Canada. ranaaq @ 
yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease (PD) is commonly characterized by its motor 
symptoms such as resting tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia and postural 
instability; however, some of the most debilitating symptoms of this disease are 
non-motor ones such as dementia and sialorrhea (drooling). Drooling is caused by 
impaired swallowing and it can have a significant impact on the quality of life. 
However, it is still unclear whether cognitive dysfunction could exacerbate 
drooling. We wanted to examine if any relationship existed between drooling and 
dementia in PD patients. Identifying the correlation will aid physicians to 
screen and initiate early management of drooling in the course of PD. This can 
possibly lead to improvements in the quality of life in these patients.
METHODS: In this retrospective study, we investigated the prevalence of drooling 
in 314 PD patients and further compared the difference in the prevalence of 
drooling in patients with dementia and without dementia. In addition, we studied 
the impact of gender on drooling in this patient population.
RESULTS: Our results show that a significant correlation exists between drooling 
and dementia in our sample of PD patients. Furthermore, in males, the 
correlation between the prevalence of drooling and dementia was found to be 
clinically significant as compared to the female population.
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that drooling is a major concern in the course 
of PD and should therefore be addressed early and more aggressively in patients 
with dementia.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000348571
PMID: 23711510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3125. Ann Neurol. 2013 Oct;74(4):580-91. doi: 10.1002/ana.23944. Epub 2013 Sep 16.

Mediterranean diet, stroke, cognitive impairment, and depression: A 
meta-analysis.

Psaltopoulou T(1), Sergentanis TN, Panagiotakos DB, Sergentanis IN, Kosti R, 
Scarmeas N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Hygiene, Epidemiology and Medical Statistics University of 
Athens School of Medicine, Athens, Greece.

Comment in
    Ann Neurol. 2014 Apr;75(4):614.
    Ann Neurol. 2014 Apr;75(4):613.

OBJECTIVE: This meta-analysis aims to quantitatively synthesize all studies that 
examine the association between adherence to a Mediterranean diet and risk of 
stroke, depression, cognitive impairment, and Parkinson disease.
METHODS: Potentially eligible publications were those providing effect estimates 
of relative risk (RR) for the association between Mediterranean diet and the 
aforementioned outcomes. Studies were sought in PubMed up to October 31, 2012. 
Maximally adjusted effect estimates were extracted; separate analyses were 
performed for high and moderate adherence.
RESULTS: Twenty-two eligible studies were included (11 covered stroke, 9 covered 
depression, and 8 covered cognitive impairment; only 1 pertained to Parkinson's 
disease). High adherence to Mediterranean diet was consistently associated with 
reduced risk for stroke (RR = 0.71, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 0.57-0.89), 
depression (RR = 0.68, 95% CI = 0.54-0.86), and cognitive impairment (RR = 0.60, 
95% CI = 0.43-0.83). Moderate adherence was similarly associated with reduced 
risk for depression and cognitive impairment, whereas the protective trend 
concerning stroke was only marginal. Subgroup analyses highlighted the 
protective actions of high adherence in terms of reduced risk for ischemic 
stroke, mild cognitive impairment, dementia, and particularly Alzheimer disease. 
Meta-regression analysis indicated that the protective effects of Mediterranean 
diet in stroke prevention seemed more sizeable among males. Concerning 
depression, the protective effects of high adherence seemed independent of age, 
whereas the favorable actions of moderate adherence seemed to fade away with 
more advanced age.
INTERPRETATION: Adherence to a Mediterranean diet may contribute to the 
prevention of a series of brain diseases; this may be of special value given the 
aging of Western societies.

© 2013 American Neurological Association.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.23944
PMID: 23720230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3126. J Geriatr Psychiatry Neurol. 2013 Sep;26(3):151-7. doi: 
10.1177/0891988713490994. Epub 2013 May 29.

Clock drawing test: is it useful for dementia screening in patients having 
Parkinson disease with and without depression?

Riedel O(1), Klotsche J, Förstl H, Wittchen HU; GEPAD Study Group.

Author information:
(1)Technische Universitaet Dresden, Institute of Clinical Psychology and 
Psychotherapy, Germany.

Despite the wide use of clock drawing tests (CDTs) for screening cognitive 
impairment, their use in patients having Parkinson disease (PD) with dementia 
has not been systematically investigated until date. In this cross-sectional 
study, neurological and neuropsychiatric statuses of 1449 outpatients having PD 
with and without dementia were comprehensively assessed. The CDT revealed 
cognitive impairment in 42.7% of the 1383 patients whose drawings were 
available. Overall, CDT sensitivity and specificity were 70.7% and 68.9%, 
respectively. The positive and negative predictive values were 48.0% and 85.3%, 
respectively. In patients with depression, CDT specificity dropped significantly 
to 55.8% (71.3% in nondepressed patients, P < .001). Classification performance 
was not impacted by motor symptoms. The estimated classification performances 
and predictive values correspond to those reported previously for non-PD 
populations. Our results indicate that CDT is a suitable screening instrument in 
patients with PD, but test results from patients with depression warrant careful 
consideration.

DOI: 10.1177/0891988713490994
PMID: 23720572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3127. Neurobiol Learn Mem. 2013 Sep;104:73-81. doi: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.05.005. Epub 
2013 May 27.

Transgenic expression of the FTDP-17 tauV337M mutation in brain dissociates 
components of executive function in mice.

Reichelt AC(1), Killcross S, Wilkinson LS, Humby T, Good MA.

Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. 
reichelt@unsw.edu.au

Frontotemporal lobe dementia (FTD) is a heterogeneous range of disorders, a 
subset of which arise from fully penetrant, autosomal dominant point mutations 
in the gene coding for the microtubule associated protein tau. These genetic 
tauopathies are associated with complex behavioural/cognitive disturbances, 
including compromised executive function. In the present study, we modelled the 
effects of the FTD with Parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) tauV337M 
mutation (known as the Seattle Family A mutation) expressed in mice on executive 
processes using a novel murine analogue of the Stroop task. Employing 
biconditional discrimination procedures, Experiment 1 showed that normal mice, 
but not mice with excitotoxic lesions of the medial prefrontal cortex, were able 
to use context cues to resolve response conflict generated by incongruent 
stimulus compounds. In contrast to predictions, response conflict resolution was 
not disrupted by the tauV337M mutation (Experiment 2). However, while context 
appropriate actions were goal-directed in wild-type mice, performance of 
tauV337M mice was not goal-directed (Experiment 3). The results indicate that 
the tauV337M mutation in mice disrupts, selectively, a subset of processes 
related to executive function.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nlm.2013.05.005
PMID: 23721814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3128. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Feb;29(2):178-81. doi: 10.1002/gps.3986. Epub 
2013 May 31.

History of a suspected delirium is more common in dementia with Lewy bodies than 
Alzheimer's disease: a retrospective study.

Vardy E(1), Holt R, Gerhard A, Richardson A, Snowden J, Neary D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Older Peoples Medicine, Newcastle upon Tyne hospitals NHS 
Foundation Trust, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE7 7DN, UK; Institute 
of Ageing and Health, Campus of Ageing and Vitality, Newcastle University, 
Newcastle upon Tyne, NE4 5PL, UK.

BACKGROUND: Delirium is common and is associated with an increased risk of 
dementia. However, it is not clear whether delirium confers increased risk of 
any particular type of dementia. We performed a retrospective study of 
Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) to ascertain 
whether a suspected episode of preceding delirium was more common prior to 
diagnosis in either type of dementia.
METHODS: The study was carried out in a tertiary referral unit for the diagnosis 
of dementia. Clinic letters from the first presentation to the unit of 85 cases 
with DLB and 95 cases of AD were reviewed for documentation of any previous 
episodes of suspected delirium.
RESULTS: In this study, 25% of DLB cases had at least one reported episode of 
suspected delirium as compared to 7% of AD cases (p = 0.001). For the DLB cases 
who had a prior suspected delirium, 23% had more than one episode compared with 
14% of the AD group. The median time between most recent suspected episode of 
delirium and diagnosis of dementia in both groups was less than a year
CONCLUSIONS: A greater proportion of those presenting and diagnosed with DLB had 
a documentation of a suspected delirium than those diagnosed with AD. Delirium 
may lead to a higher risk of DLB as opposed to other forms of dementia, or 
delirium may, at least in some cases, represent the early stages of DLB. These 
data suggest that a diagnosis of DLB should be specifically considered in those 
presenting with a delirium.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.3986
PMID: 23722989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3129. Eur J Neurol. 2013 Sep;20(9):1319-24. doi: 10.1111/ene.12211. Epub 2013 May 31.

Plasma progranulin levels in cortical dementia phenotypes with asymmetric 
perisylvian atrophy.

Gómez-Tortosa E(1), Guerrero-López R, Gil-Neciga E, Franco E, del Ser T, Jiménez 
Escrig A, Pérez-Pérez J, Sainz MJ.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Fundación Jiménez Díaz, Madrid, Spain. 
egomezt@fjd.es

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Decreased plasma progranulin levels are a very specific 
marker for the diagnosis of frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD) caused by 
mutations in the progranulin gene (GRN). A frequent neuroimaging pattern in this 
type of dementia is asymmetric cortical atrophy. The aim of this study was to 
screen for GRN-linked FTLD in cases with different cortical dementia phenotypes 
and asymmetric perisylvian atrophy.
METHODS: Progranulin plasma levels were analyzed in a variety of FTLD phenotypes 
(n = 71), dementia of the Alzheimer type (DAT) (n = 22) and probable Lewy body 
dementia (n = 8), both latter groups presented with asymmetric perisylvian 
atrophy. A group of elderly controls (n = 29) and DAT cases with symmetric 
atrophy (n = 33) were also analyzed. The GRN gene was sequenced in cases with 
lower plasma levels.
RESULTS: Four cases with clinical FTLD phenotypes and plasma levels below 70 
ng/ml were found to carry different GRN mutations: M1?, C139R, a point mutation 
in the splice donor site of intron 3 (A89VfsX41), and a deletion in exon 9 
(A303AfsX57), this latter one being a new mutation. Thirteen cases with levels 
between 72 and 85 ng/ml did not show pathogenic changes in the GRN gene. None of 
the cases with asymmetric atrophy and clinical phenotypes other than FTLD had 
GRN mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Asymmetric perisylvian atrophy is not likely to predict 
progranulin-linked FTLD unless it is associated with a consistent FTLD clinical 
phenotype.

© 2013 The Author(s) European Journal of Neurology © 2013 EFNS.

DOI: 10.1111/ene.12211
PMID: 23724906 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3130. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 May;10(3):360-5. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.011. Epub 
2013 May 30.

Parkinsonism and distinct dementia patterns in a family with the MAPT R406W 
mutation.

Carney RM(1), Kohli MA(1), Kunkle BW(1), Naj AC(1), Gilbert JR(2), Züchner S(2), 
Pericak-Vance MA(3).

Author information:
(1)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, John P. Hussman Institute for 
Human Genomics, Miami, FL, USA.
(2)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, John P. Hussman Institute for 
Human Genomics, Miami, FL, USA; University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, 
Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, Miami, FL, USA.
(3)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, John P. Hussman Institute for 
Human Genomics, Miami, FL, USA; University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, 
Dr. John T. Macdonald Foundation Department of Human Genetics, Miami, FL, USA. 
Electronic address: mpericak@med.miami.edu.

BACKGROUND: The Arg406Trp (R406W) missense mutation in the 
microtubule-associated protein-tau gene (MAPT) is a known cause of early-onset 
dementia. Various dementia phenotypes have been described, including 
frontotemporal dementia (FTD), FTD with parkinsonism, and early-onset Alzheimer 
disease (EOAD)-like presentations.
METHODS: Using whole-exome capture with subsequent sequencing, we identified the 
R406W mutation in a family with multiple individuals with clinically diagnosed 
EOAD, in a pattern suggesting autosomal dominant inheritance. We reevaluated all 
available family members clinically.
RESULTS: Each of the affected individuals had a course meeting clinical criteria 
for EOAD. Two distinct disease trajectories were apparent: one rapidly 
progressive, and the other long and gradual. Four of five affected individuals 
also manifested parkinsonian symptoms. FTD features were not prominent and, when 
present, appeared only late in the course of dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: The MAPT R406W mutation is associated with EOAD-like symptoms and 
parkinsonism without FTD, as well as distinct cognitive courses.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. Published by Elsevier Inc. All 
rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.02.011
PMCID: PMC3762928
PMID: 23727082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3131. Rev Neurosci. 2013;24(3):267-78. doi: 10.1515/revneuro-2013-0004.

Prefrontal dopamine signaling and cognitive symptoms of Parkinson's disease.

Narayanan NS(1), Rodnitzky RL, Uc EY.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Iowa, Carver College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, IA, USA. nandakumar-narayanan@uiowa.edu

Cognitive dysfunction is a common symptom of Parkinson's disease (PD) that 
causes significant morbidity and mortality. The severity of these symptoms 
ranges from minor executive symptoms to frank dementia involving multiple 
domains. In the present review, we will concentrate on the aspects of cognitive 
impairment associated with prefrontal dopaminergic dysfunction, seen in 
non-demented patients with PD. These symptoms include executive dysfunction and 
disorders of thought, such as hallucinations and psychosis. Such symptoms may go 
on to predict dementia related to PD, which involves amnestic dysfunction and is 
typically seen later in the disease. Cognitive symptoms are associated with 
dysfunction in cholinergic circuits, in addition to the abnormalities in the 
prefrontal dopaminergic system. These circuits can be carefully studied and 
evaluated in PD, and could be leveraged to treat difficult clinical problems 
related to cognitive symptoms of PD.

DOI: 10.1515/revneuro-2013-0004
PMCID: PMC3836593
PMID: 23729617 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3132. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2013 May 18;3(1):148-60. doi: 10.1159/000351423. 
Print 2013 Jan.

Prevalence and clinical implication of microbleeds in dementia with lewy bodies 
in comparison with microbleeds in Alzheimer's disease.

Fukui T(1), Oowan Y, Yamazaki T, Kinno R.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurology, Internal Medicine, Showa University Northern Yokohama 
Hospital, Yokohama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Cerebral microbleeds (MBs) have been well investigated in 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), but not very extensively in non-AD dementias or in 
dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB).
AIMS: To elucidate the clinical significance of MBs in DLB.
METHODS: We compared the prevalence, locations and risk factors for MBs in 59 
DLB and 81 AD patients. We visually counted MBs in each of the cortical and 
subjacent areas (frontal, temporal, parietal and occipital), the basal ganglia 
and the thalamus, and the brainstem and the cerebellar hemispheres on 1.5-tesla 
T2*-weighted gradient-recalled-echo MRI images. White matter lesions were 
semiquantified in fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images according to the 
Fazekas rating scale.
RESULTS: While the prevalence of MBs was comparable, MBs tended to be more 
abundant in DLB than in AD in all brain areas with the exception of the 
occipital lobes. The number of MBs was positively associated with the severity 
of white matter lesions but not with other vascular risk factors in either AD or 
DLB. The presence of MBs could be associated with cognitive impairment at onset. 
MB-positive DLB patients showed less impairment on 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine myocardial scintigraphy (MIBG scintigraphy) 
images, supporting the notion of an inverse relationship between vascular 
lesions and Lewy body pathology.
CONCLUSION: It was suggested that an intricate association between Lewy body 
pathology, AD-type pathologies and vascular lesions seems to be related to the 
initial symptoms and results of MIBG scintigraphy in DLB.

DOI: 10.1159/000351423
PMCID: PMC3670631
PMID: 23741227


3133. Dement Geriatr Cogn Dis Extra. 2013 May 18;3(1):161-7. doi: 10.1159/000351419. 
Print 2013 Jan.

Lack of Genetic Associations of PPAR-γ and PGC-1α with Alzheimer's Disease and 
Parkinson's Disease with Dementia.

Shibata N(1), Motoi Y, Tomiyama H, Ohnuma T, Kuerban B, Tomson K, Komatsu M, 
Shimazaki H, Hattori N, Arai H.

Author information:
(1)Departments of Psychiatry, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Similar clinical and pathological features have been 
observed in Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease with dementia 
(PDD). Both the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ (PPAR-γ) gene and 
the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-γ coactivator-1α (PGC-1α) gene 
are candidates modifying the risk for both diseases. The aim of this study was 
to clarify whether common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the PPAR-γ 
gene and the PGC-1α gene affect the onset of AD and PDD genetically.
METHODS: Four exonic SNPs of both genes (rs1801282 and rs3856806 of the PPAR-γ 
gene, rs3736265 and rs8192678 of the PGC-1α gene) were genotyped in 171 AD 
patients, 136 age-matched controls and 53 PDD patients. Haplotype analysis and 
logistic regression analysis with apolipoprotein E (APO E) status were performed 
for AD.
RESULTS: There was no statistical difference between AD cases and controls for 
the 4 SNPs, nor was there any statistical difference between PDD cases and 
controls for the 4 SNPs. We could not find any synergetic associations between 
these SNPs, APO E4 and AD.
CONCLUSIONS: The 4 SNPs studied here did not influence the risk for AD in a 
Japanese population. As the number of PDD cases was small, comprehensive genetic 
studies considering diabetes would be needed.

DOI: 10.1159/000351419
PMCID: PMC3670632
PMID: 23741228


3134. PLoS One. 2013 May 31;8(5):e64649. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064649. Print 
2013.

Altered serum IgG levels to α-synuclein in dementia with Lewy bodies and 
Alzheimer's disease.

Koehler NK(1), Stransky E, Shing M, Gaertner S, Meyer M, Schreitmüller B, Leyhe 
T, Laske C, Maetzler W, Kahle P, Celej MS, Jovin TM, Fallgatter AJ, Batra A, 
Buchkremer G, Schott K, Richartz-Salzburger E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Eberhard-Karls-University, 
Tübingen, Germany. niklaskoehler@yahoo.com

Natural self-reactive antibodies in the peripheral blood may play a considerable 
role in the control of potentially toxic proteins that may otherwise accumulate 
in the aging brain. The significance of serum antibodies reactive against 
α-synuclein is not well known. We explored serum IgG levels to monomeric 
α-synuclein in dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and Alzheimer's disease (AD) with 
a novel and validated highly sensitive ELISA assay. Antibody levels revealed 
stark differences in patients compared to healthy subjects and were dependent on 
diagnosis, disease duration and age. Anti-α-synuclein IgG levels were increased 
in both patient groups, but in early DLB to a much greater extent than in AD. 
Increased antibody levels were most evident in younger patients, while with 
advanced age relatively low levels were observed, similar to healthy 
individuals, exhibiting stable antibody levels independent of age. Our data show 
the presence of differentially altered IgG levels against α-synuclein in DLB and 
AD, which may relate to a disturbed α-synuclein homeostasis triggered by the 
disease process. These observations may foster the development of novel, 
possibly preclinical biomarkers and immunotherapeutic strategies that target 
α-synuclein in neurodegenerative disease.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0064649
PMCID: PMC3669378
PMID: 23741358 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.


3135. Mov Disord. 2013 Jun;28(6):813-7. doi: 10.1002/mds.25518. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

Alpha-synuclein gene duplication: marked intrafamilial variability in two novel 
pedigrees.

Elia AE(1), Petrucci S, Fasano A, Guidi M, Valbonesi S, Bernardini L, Consoli F, 
Ferraris A, Albanese A, Valente EM.

Author information:
(1)Neurologia I, Istituto Neurologico Carlo Besta, Milano, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Multiplications of the SNCA gene that encodes alpha-synuclein are a 
rare cause of autosomal dominant Parkinson's disease (PD).
METHODS: Here, we describe 2 novel families in which there is autosomal dominant 
PD associated with SNCA duplication, and we compare the clinical features of all 
known patients carrying 3 or 4 SNCA copies.
RESULTS: Affected members in family A presented with early onset PD that was 
variably associated with nonmotor features, such as dysautonomia, cognitive 
deficits, and psychiatric disturbances. In family B, the clinical presentation 
ranged from early onset PD-dementia with psychiatric disturbances to late onset 
PD with mild cognitive impairment.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of 4 SNCA copies is associated with a rich phenotype, 
characterized by earlier onset of motor and nonmotor features compared with 
patients who bear 3 SNCA copies. The clinical spectrum associated with SNCA 
duplications is wide, even within a single family, suggesting a role for as yet 
unidentified genetic or environmental modifiers.

Copyright © 2013 Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25518
PMID: 23744550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3136. Mov Disord. 2013 Sep;28(10):1416-23. doi: 10.1002/mds.25523. Epub 2013 Jun 6.

Analysis of video-polysomnographic sleep findings in dementia with Lewy bodies.

Terzaghi M(1), Arnaldi D, Rizzetti MC, Minafra B, Cremascoli R, Rustioni V, 
Zangaglia R, Pasotti C, Sinforiani E, Pacchetti C, Manni R.

Author information:
(1)Sleep Unit, C. Mondino National Institute of Neurology Foundation, IRCCS, 
Pavia, Italy.

Knowledge of sleep architecture and disorders of nocturnal sleep in dementia 
with Lewy bodies (DLB) is limited by a lack of systematic video-polysomnographic 
(video-PSG) investigations. We describe video-PSG findings in 29 consecutive 
subjects diagnosed with DLB. All the patients underwent a clinical interview and 
overnight video-PSG monitoring. Twenty-nine nondemented patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD) matched for age and sex with the DLB cases were 
selected for comparison. The DLB subjects showed less 1NREM sleep (P = .000) and 
more 2NREM sleep (P = .000) than the PD subjects. Sleep apnea (30.7% vs. 34.8%) 
and periodic limb movements (60.9% versus 50.0%) were frequent in both groups. 
Disruptive motor behavioral manifestations were more frequent in subjects with 
DLB (69.6% vs. 26.9%, P = .008) and consisted of not only REM sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) but also confusional events (30.3% vs. 3.8%, P = .020) and 
arousal-related episodes mimicking RBD. Subjects with DLB in whom a sleep 
disturbance had been the presenting symptom performed better than those with 
other onset symptoms on both the Mini-Mental State Examination (22.2 ± 4.1 vs. 
18.1 ± 4.6, P = .019) and the Frontal Assessment Battery (15.8 vs. 10.3, P = 
.010). Polysomnographic findings in DLB show a complex mix of overlapping sleep 
alterations: impaired sleep structure, sleep comorbidities, and various 
motor-behavioral events (not restricted to RBD). Clinicians should be aware of 
the possibility of misleading symptoms and of the risk of overlooking sleep 
comorbidities, and consider performing polysomnographic sleep investigations in 
selected cases. We found evidence that a sleep disturbance as the presenting 
symptom might indicate a different phenotype of the disease, characterized by 
milder cognitive impairment.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25523
PMID: 23744574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3137. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2013 Nov-Dec;34(11):2113-8. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A3567. Epub 
2013 Jun 6.

Evaluation of Parkinson disease and Alzheimer disease with the use of 
neuromelanin MR imaging and (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy.

Miyoshi F(1), Ogawa T, Kitao SI, Kitayama M, Shinohara Y, Takasugi M, Fujii S, 
Kaminou T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Radiology, Department of Pathophysiological Therapeutic Science.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Progressive changes in the substantia nigra pars 
compacta and locus ceruleus of patients with Parkinson disease and Alzheimer 
disease visualized by neuromelanin MRI and cardiac postganglionic sympathetic 
nerve function on (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigraphy have not been 
fully evaluated. We compared the diagnostic value of these modalities among 
patients with early Parkinson disease, late Parkinson disease, and Alzheimer 
disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We compared contrast ratios of signal intensity in medial 
and lateral regions of the substantia nigra pars compacta and locus ceruleus 
with those of the tegmentum of the midbrain and the pons, respectively, by use 
of neuromelanin MRI in patients with early Parkinson disease (n = 13), late 
Parkinson disease (n = 31), Alzheimer disease (n = 6), and age-matched healthy 
control subjects (n = 20). We calculated heart-to-mediastinum ratios on 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigrams after setting regions of interest on 
the left cardiac ventricle and upper mediastinum.
RESULTS: The signal intensity of the lateral substantia nigra pars compacta on 
neuromelanin MRI was significantly reduced in early and late Parkinson disease, 
and that of the medial substantia nigra pars compacta was gradually and 
stage-dependently reduced in Parkinson disease. The signal intensity of the 
locus ceruleus was obviously reduced in late Parkinson disease. Signal reduction 
was not significant in the substantia nigra pars compacta and locus ceruleus of 
patients with Alzheimer disease. The heart-to-mediastinum ratio on 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigrams was stage-dependently reduced in 
Parkinson disease and normal in Alzheimer disease. The signal intensity ratios 
in substantia nigra pars compacta and locus ceruleus on neuromelanin MRI 
positively correlated with the heart-to-mediastinum ratio on 
(123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine scintigrams.
CONCLUSIONS: Both neuromelanin MRI and (123)I-metaiodobenzylguanidine 
scintigraphy can help to evaluate disease progression in Parkinson disease and 
are useful for differentiating Parkinson disease from Alzheimer disease.

DOI: 10.3174/ajnr.A3567
PMCID: PMC7964843
PMID: 23744697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3138. Fluids Barriers CNS. 2013 Jun 10;10(1):22. doi: 10.1186/2045-8118-10-22.

Influence of comorbidities in idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus - 
research and clinical care. A report of the ISHCSF task force on comorbidities 
in INPH.

Malm J(1), Graff-Radford NR, Ishikawa M, Kristensen B, Leinonen V, Mori E, Owler 
BK, Tullberg M, Williams MA, Relkin NR.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Umeå University, Umeå, 901 85, Sweden. 
jan.malm@neuro.umu.se.

Idiopathic normal pressure hydrocephalus (INPH) is a syndrome of 
ventriculomegaly, gait impairment, cognitive decline and incontinence that 
occurs in an elderly population prone to many types of comorbidities. 
Identification of the comorbidities is thus an important part of the clinical 
management of INPH patients. In 2011, a task force was appointed by the 
International Society for Hydrocephalus and Cerebrospinal Fluid Disorders 
(ISHCSF) with the objective to compile an evidence-based expert analysis of what 
we know and what we need to know regarding comorbidities in INPH. This article 
is the final report of the task force. The expert panel conducted a 
comprehensive review of the literature. After weighing the evidence, the various 
proposals were discussed and the final document was approved by all the task 
force members and represents a consensus of expert opinions. Recommendations 
regarding the following topics are given: I. Musculoskeletal conditions; II. 
Urinary problems; III. Vascular disease including risk factors, Binswanger 
disease, and white matter hyperintensities; IV. Mild cognitive impairment and 
Alzheimer disease including biopsies; V. Other dementias (frontotemporal 
dementia, Lewy body, Parkinson); VI. Psychiatric and behavioral disorders; VII. 
Brain imaging; VIII. How to investigate and quantify. The task force concluded 
that comorbidity can be an important predictor of prognosis and post-operative 
outcome in INPH. Reported differences in outcomes among various INPH cohorts may 
be partly explained by variation in the rate and types of comorbidities at 
different hydrocephalus centers. Identification of comorbidities should thus be 
a central part of the clinical management of INPH where a detailed history, 
physical examination, and targeted investigations are the basis for diagnosis 
and grading. Future INPH research should focus on the contribution of 
comorbidity to overall morbidity, mortality and long-term outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/2045-8118-10-22
PMCID: PMC3689166
PMID: 23758953


3139. Age Ageing. 2013 Sep;42(5):645-9. doi: 10.1093/ageing/aft065. Epub 2013 Jun 11.

Validation and internal consistency of Patient Health Questionnaire-9 for major 
depression in Parkinson's disease.

Chagas MH(1), Tumas V, Rodrigues GR, Machado-de-Sousa JP, Filho AS, Hallak JE, 
Crippa JA.

Author information:
(1)Behavior and Neurosciences Department, University of São Paulo, Av., 
Bandeirantes, 3900, Ribeirão Preto, SP 14048-900, Brazil. mchagas@fmrp.usp.br

BACKGROUND: depression is common in Parkinson's disease (PD), although 
frequently under-recognised. Among the scales used to investigate depressive 
features in PD, the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) has been largely 
used, but no specific cut-off scores for depression have been established thus 
far, which hinders the use of the PHQ-9 in clinical and research settings.
OBJECTIVE: we assessed the discriminant validity of the PHQ-9 in order to 
establish the best cut-off score for the diagnosis of major depression in PD 
patients.
METHOD: one hundred and ten patients with a diagnosis of PD without dementia 
were evaluated with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID), 
considered as the gold standard for the diagnosis of major depression. 
Eighty-four PD patients completed the PHQ-9, the 15-item Geriatric Depression 
Scale (GDS-15) and the Zung Self-rating Depression Scale (SDS).
RESULTS: the prevalence of current depression in the sample of PD patients was 
25.5%. Maximal discrimination between depressed and non-depressed patients was 
reached with a cut-off score of 9 in the PHQ-9 (sensitivity of 100% and 
specificity of 83.1%). The internal consistency of the scale was 0.83 and, when 
used as a diagnostic instrument, the PHQ-9 had a sensitivity of 52.6% and 
specificity of 95.4%. The correlation coefficient between the PHQ-9 and the 
other two scales was 0.63.
CONCLUSIONS: the PHQ-9 is an adequate instrument for the screening-but not 
diagnosis-of depression in PD patients, with optimal sensitivity and specificity 
attained with a cut-off score of 9.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/aft065
PMID: 23761457 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3140. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Sep;19(9):800-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.05.005. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Nigral involvement and nigrostriatal dysfunction in Huntington's disease: 
evidences from an MRI and SPECT study.

Kiferle L(1), Mazzucchi S, Unti E, Pesaresi I, Fabbri S, Nicoletti V, Volterrani 
D, Cosottini M, Bonuccelli U, Ceravolo R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Section of Neurology, 
University of Pisa, Italy. l.kiferle@virgilio.it

BACKGROUND: Huntington disease (HD) is pathologically characterized by a 
selective neurodegeneration of vulnerable populations of neurons, with an early 
marked neuronal loss and atrophy in the neostriatum. Dopaminergic innervations 
of neostriatal neurons originate in the substantia nigra pars compacta. Few 
studies investigated the neuronal loss and the functional role of the substantia 
nigra in modulating clinical features in HD.
METHODS: 12 patients and 12 age-matched controls underwent SPECT scans with 
(123)I-FP-CIT and a 1.5 T MRI scan with inversion recovery technique. The 
association between both clinical and neuropsychological features and striatal 
uptake and volume of substantia nigra was explored.
RESULTS: Striatal (p < 0.05), caudate (p < 0.05), and putaminal (p < 0.01) 
uptake was significantly lower in patients with respect to controls. Further, 
the volume of substantia nigra was reduced in HD when compared to controls 
(p < 0.01). No relationship between the volume of SN and tracer striatal uptake 
was found as well as between clinical and neuropsychological features with the 
SPECT and MRI results.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results confirm that the degeneration of nigrostriatal pathway 
may occur in symptomatic HD patients. If confirmed by larger studies, the lack 
of any kind of correlation between clinical and neuropsychological features with 
striatal uptake and volume of substantia nigra suggests that motor and cognitive 
aspects in HD are not directly related to nigrostriatal degeneration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.05.005
PMID: 23769177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3141. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2013 Nov;84(11):1258-64. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-305277. Epub 2013 Jun 18.

The CamPaIGN study of Parkinson's disease: 10-year outlook in an incident 
population-based cohort.

Williams-Gray CH(1), Mason SL, Evans JR, Foltynie T, Brayne C, Robbins TW, 
Barker RA.

Author information:
(1)John Van Geest Centre for Brain Repair, Department of Clinical Neurosciences, 
University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2013 Dec 17;159(12):JC10.

BACKGROUND: Prognosis in Parkinson's disease (PD) remains poorly understood due 
to a lack of unbiased data on the natural history of treated PD. The CamPaIGN 
study has been the first to prospectively track disease evolution from diagnosis 
in an unselected population-representative incident cohort. We now report the 
10-year follow-up data, focusing on three key irreversible milestones: postural 
instability (Hoehn and Yahr 3), dementia and death.
METHODS: The cohort was collected between December 2000 and 2002. Those meeting 
diagnostic criteria (n=142) were followed-up until 1 January 2012. Clinical, 
neuropsychological and genetic testing were performed. Progression to key 
milestones was evaluated using Kaplan-Meier and Cox regression survival 
analyses.
RESULTS: At 10 years, 55% had died, 68% had postural instability and 46% 
dementia. 23% had a good outcome at 10 years (surviving free of 
dementia/postural instability). Death rate was comparable with the UK population 
(standardised mortality ratio 1.29 (0.97-1.61)). Death certificates indicated PD 
was a substantial contributor in only 20%, with pneumonia being the commonest 
cause of death. Age, non-tremor-dominant motor phenotype and comorbidity 
predicted earlier postural instability. Baseline predictors of dementia were 
age, motor impairment, 'posterior-cortical' cognitive deficits and MAPT 
genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: (1) outlook in PD is heterogeneous, with most dying or developing 
dementia or postural instability by 10 years from diagnosis, but a quarter still 
doing well, with preserved mobility and intact cognition; (2) death is not 
directly related to PD in the majority; (3) baseline clinical and genetic 
variables are predictive of outcome and may be helpful in selecting patients for 
clinical trials.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-305277
PMID: 23781007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3142. Curr Opin Neurol. 2013 Aug;26(4):428-34. doi: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283632cef.

Sleep and movement disorders.

Giannoccaro MP(1), Antelmi E, Plazzi G.

Author information:
(1)IRCCS Istituto delle Scienze Neurologiche, University of Bologna, Bologna, 
Italy.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The aim is to review sleep disturbances in different movement 
disorders, mainly Parkinson's disease, and highlight current concepts on merging 
the boundaries between movement disorders and dissociative states of being.
RECENT FINDINGS: Since the observation that rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) may be an early marker of neurodegeneration, many studies focused 
on this disorder for the opportunity to explore the pathogenetic mechanisms 
underlying movement disorder and future neuroprotective therapies. It is also 
increasingly evident that this disorder is a possible marker for incoming 
dementia and for a general worst prognosis. Mechanisms of excessive daytime 
sleepiness in Parkinson's disease are still to be clarified and, if the role of 
hypocretin neuron loss is still doubtful, attention is moving to the role of 
monoaminergic system disruption. The role of dopamine in circadian rhythm 
regulation is opening new scenarios, namely the disruption of clock genes 
expression. Finally, the close relationship between sleep and movement disorder 
is emerging also in primarly sleep disorders.
SUMMARY: Recent studies provided new insights into the links between sleep and 
movement disorder that may simplify the diagnostic process and shed light on the 
underlying pathophysiological mechanisms.

DOI: 10.1097/WCO.0b013e3283632cef
PMID: 23787770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3143. Neurochem Int. 2013 Sep;63(3):201-29. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2013.06.005. Epub 
2013 Jun 19.

Biomarkers in Parkinson's disease (recent update).

Sharma S(1), Moon CS, Khogali A, Haidous A, Chabenne A, Ojo C, Jelebinkov M, 
Kurdi Y, Ebadi M.

Author information:
(1)Saint James School of Medicine, Bonaire, The Netherlands. 
Sharma@mail.sjsm.org

Parkinson's disease (PD) is the second most common neurodegenerative disorder 
mostly affecting the aging population over sixty. Cardinal symptoms including, 
tremors, muscle rigidity, drooping posture, drooling, walking difficulty, and 
autonomic symptoms appear when a significant number of nigrostriatal 
dopaminergic neurons are already destroyed. Hence we need early, sensitive, 
specific, and economical peripheral and/or central biomarker(s) for the 
differential diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of PD. These can be classified 
as clinical, biochemical, genetic, proteomic, and neuroimaging biomarkers. Novel 
discoveries of genetic as well as nongenetic biomarkers may be utilized for the 
personalized treatment of PD during preclinical (premotor) and clinical (motor) 
stages. Premotor biomarkers including hyper-echogenicity of substantia nigra, 
olfactory and autonomic dysfunction, depression, hyposmia, deafness, REM sleep 
disorder, and impulsive behavior may be noticed during preclinical stage. 
Neuroimaging biomarkers (PET, SPECT, MRI), and neuropsychological deficits can 
facilitate differential diagnosis. Single-cell profiling of dopaminergic neurons 
has identified pyridoxal kinase and lysosomal ATPase as biomarker genes for PD 
prognosis. Promising biomarkers include: fluid biomarkers, neuromelanin 
antibodies, pathological forms of α-Syn, DJ-1, amyloid β and tau in the CSF, 
patterns of gene expression, metabolomics, urate, as well as protein profiling 
in the blood and CSF samples. Reduced brain regional N-acetyl-aspartate is a 
biomarker for the in vivo assessment of neuronal loss using magnetic resonance 
spectroscopy and T2 relaxation time with MRI. To confirm PD diagnosis, the PET 
biomarkers include [(18)F]-DOPA for estimating dopaminergic neurotransmission, 
[(18)F]dG for mitochondrial bioenergetics, [(18)F]BMS for mitochondrial 
complex-1, [(11)C](R)-PK11195 for microglial activation, SPECT imaging with 
(123)Iflupane and βCIT for dopamine transporter, and urinary salsolinol and 
8-hydroxy, 2-deoxyguanosine for neuronal loss. This brief review describes the 
merits and limitations of recently discovered biomarkers and proposes coenzyme 
Q10, mitochondrial ubiquinone-NADH oxidoreductase, melatonin, α-synculein index, 
Charnoly body, and metallothioneins as novel biomarkers to confirm PD diagnosis 
for early and effective treatment of PD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2013.06.005
PMID: 23791710 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3144. Free Radic Biol Med. 2013 Dec;65:509-527. doi: 
10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.06.029. Epub 2013 Jun 21.

Clinical perspective on oxidative stress in sporadic amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis.

D'Amico E(1), Factor-Litvak P(2), Santella RM(3), Mitsumoto H(4).

Author information:
(1)Eleanor and Lou Gehrig MDA/ALS Research Center, The Neurological Institute of 
New York, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Mailman School of Public Health, Columbia 
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(3)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Mailman School of Public Health, 
Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.
(4)Eleanor and Lou Gehrig MDA/ALS Research Center, The Neurological Institute of 
New York, Columbia University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA. 
Electronic address: hm264@columbia.edu.

Sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is one of the most devastating 
neurological diseases; most patients die within 3 to 4 years after symptom 
onset. Oxidative stress is a disturbance in the pro-oxidative/antioxidative 
balance favoring the pro-oxidative state. Autopsy and laboratory studies in ALS 
indicate that oxidative stress plays a major role in motor neuron degeneration 
and astrocyte dysfunction. Oxidative stress biomarkers in cerebrospinal fluid, 
plasma, and urine are elevated, suggesting that abnormal oxidative stress is 
generated outside of the central nervous system. Our review indicates that 
agricultural chemicals, heavy metals, military service, professional sports, 
excessive physical exertion, chronic head trauma, and certain foods might be 
modestly associated with ALS risk, with a stronger association between risk and 
smoking. At the cellular level, these factors are all involved in generating 
oxidative stress. Experimental studies indicate that a combination of insults 
that induce modest oxidative stress can exert additive deleterious effects on 
motor neurons, suggesting that multiple exposures in real-world environments are 
important. As the disease progresses, nutritional deficiency, cachexia, 
psychological stress, and impending respiratory failure may further increase 
oxidative stress. Moreover, accumulating evidence suggests that ALS is possibly 
a systemic disease. Laboratory, pathologic, and epidemiologic evidence clearly 
supports the hypothesis that oxidative stress is central in the pathogenic 
process, particularly in genetically susceptive individuals. If we are to 
improve ALS treatment, well-designed biochemical and genetic epidemiological 
studies, combined with a multidisciplinary research approach, are needed and 
will provide knowledge crucial to our understanding of ALS etiology, 
pathophysiology, and prognosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2013.06.029
PMCID: PMC3859834
PMID: 23797033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3145. Mol Neurodegener. 2013 Jun 21;8:19. doi: 10.1186/1750-1326-8-19.

TREM2 in neurodegeneration: evidence for association of the p.R47H variant with 
frontotemporal dementia and Parkinson's disease.

Rayaprolu S(1), Mullen B, Baker M, Lynch T, Finger E, Seeley WW, Hatanpaa KJ, 
Lomen-Hoerth C, Kertesz A, Bigio EH, Lippa C, Josephs KA, Knopman DS, White CL 
3rd, Caselli R, Mackenzie IR, Miller BL, Boczarska-Jedynak M, Opala G, 
Krygowska-Wajs A, Barcikowska M, Younkin SG, Petersen RC, Ertekin-Taner N, Uitti 
RJ, Meschia JF, Boylan KB, Boeve BF, Graff-Radford NR, Wszolek ZK, Dickson DW, 
Rademakers R, Ross OA.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, FL, USA.

BACKGROUND: A rare variant in the Triggering Receptor Expressed on Myeloid cells 
2 (TREM2) gene has been reported to be a genetic risk factor for Alzheimer's 
disease by two independent groups (Odds ratio between 2.9-4.5). Given the key 
role of TREM2 in the effective phagocytosis of apoptotic neuronal cells by 
microglia, we hypothesized that dysfunction of TREM2 may play a more generalized 
role in neurodegeneration. With this in mind we set out to assess the genetic 
association of the Alzheimer's disease-related risk variant in TREM2 
(rs75932628, p.R47H) with other related neurodegenerative disorders.
RESULTS: The study included 609 patients with frontotemporal dementia, 765 with 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, 1493 with Parkinson's disease, 772 with 
progressive supranuclear palsy, 448 with ischemic stroke and 1957 controls 
subjects free of neurodegenerative disease. A significant association was 
observed for the TREM2 p.R47H substitution in susceptibility to frontotemporal 
dementia (OR = 5.06; p-value = 0.001) and Parkinson's disease (OR = 2.67; 
p-value = 0.026), while no evidence of association with risk of amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis, progressive supranuclear palsy or ischemic stroke was 
observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that the TREM2 p.R47H substitution is a risk 
factor for frontotemporal dementia and Parkinson's disease in addition to 
Alzheimer's disease. These findings suggest a more general role for TREM2 
dysfunction in neurodegeneration, which could be related to its role in the 
immune response.

DOI: 10.1186/1750-1326-8-19
PMCID: PMC3691612
PMID: 23800361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3146. Bone. 2013 Oct;56(2):266-70. doi: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.06.018. Epub 2013 Jun 22.

Five-year fracture risk estimation in patients with Parkinson's disease.

Pouwels S(1), Bazelier MT, de Boer A, Weber WE, Neef CK, Cooper C, de Vries F.

Author information:
(1)Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Universiteit Utrecht, The 
Netherlands. s.pouwels@uu.nl

BACKGROUND: Previous studies have shown that patients with Parkinson's disease 
(PD) are at increased risk of fractures. However, no specific prediction model 
for fracture estimation among PD patients is currently available. Therefore, the 
aim of this study was to develop a simple score for estimating the 5-year 
osteoporotic and hip fracture risks among patients with PD.
METHODS: The U.K. Clinical Practice Research Datalink (1987-2011) was used to 
identify incident PD patients. Cox proportional-hazards models were used to 
calculate the 5-year risks of osteoporotic and hip fracture among PD patients. 
The regression model was fitted with various risk factors for fracture and the 
final Cox model was converted into integer risk scores.
RESULTS: We identified 4411 incident PD patients without a history of 
osteoporotic treatment. The 5-year risks of osteoporotic and hip fracture were 
plotted in relation to the risk score. Risk scores increased with age, female 
gender, history of renal disease and history of dementia. The C-statistic, which 
is a parameter to test the internal validity of the model, was reasonable for 
the prediction of osteoporotic fracture (0.69) and hip fracture (0.73).
CONCLUSION: In this study, we developed a simple model to estimate 5-year 
fracture risk among incident PD patients. It may be useful in daily practice 
after external validation.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bone.2013.06.018
PMID: 23800516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3147. Mov Disord. 2013 Sep;28(10):1360-9. doi: 10.1002/mds.25541. Epub 2013 Jun 25.

Mild cognitive impairment in patients with Parkinson's disease is associated 
with increased cortical degeneration.

Hanganu A(1), Bedetti C, Jubault T, Gagnon JF, Mejia-Constain B, Degroot C, 
Lafontaine AL, Chouinard S, Monchi O.

Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche, Institut Universitaire de Gériatrie de Montréal, 
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

Mild cognitive impairment (MCI) can occur early in the course of Parkinson's 
disease (PD), and its presence increases the risk of developing dementia. 
Determining the cortical changes associated with MCI in PD, thus, may be useful 
in predicting the future development of dementia. To address this objective, 37 
patients with PD, divided into 2 groups according to the presence or absence MCI 
(18 with and 19 without) and 16 matched controls, underwent anatomic magnetic 
resonance imaging. Corticometry analyses were performed to measure the changes 
in cortical thickness and surface area as well as their correlation with disease 
duration. Compared with healthy controls, the PD-MCI group exhibited increased 
atrophy and changes of local surface area in the bilateral occipital, left 
temporal, and frontal cortices; whereas the PD non-MCI group exhibited only 
unilateral thinning and decreased surface area in the occipital lobe and in the 
frontal cortex. In addition, a comparison between the PD-MCI and PD non-MCI 
groups revealed increased local surface area in the occipital lobe, temporal 
lobe, and postcentral gyrus for the cognitively impaired patients. It is 
noteworthy that, in the PD-MCI group, cortical thickness had a significant 
negative correlation with disease duration in the precentral, supramarginal, 
occipital, and superior temporal cortices; whereas, in the PD non-MCI group, 
such a correlation was absent. The findings from this study reveal that, at the 
same stage of PD evolution, the presence of MCI is associated with a higher 
level of cortical changes, suggesting that cortical degeneration is increased in 
patients with PD because of the presence of MCI.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25541
PMID: 23801590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3148. Brain. 2013 Jul;136(Pt 7):2109-19. doi: 10.1093/brain/awt151.

Relation of lead trajectory and electrode position to neuropsychological 
outcomes of subthalamic neurostimulation in Parkinson's disease: results from a 
randomized trial.

Witt K(1), Granert O, Daniels C, Volkmann J, Falk D, van Eimeren T, Deuschl G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Kiel University, Kiel, Germany. 
k.witt@neurologie.uni-kiel.de

Comment in
    Brain. 2014 May;137(Pt 5):e274.
    Brain. 2014 May;137(Pt 5):e275.

Deep brain stimulation of the subthalamic nucleus improves motor functions in 
patients suffering from advanced Parkinson's disease but in some patients, it is 
also associated with a mild decline in cognitive functioning about one standard 
deviation from the preoperative state. We assessed the impact of the cortical 
lead entry point, the subcortical electrode path and the position of the active 
electrode contacts on neuropsychological changes after subthalamic nucleus-deep 
brain stimulation compared to a control group of patients receiving best medical 
treatment. Sixty-eight patients with advanced Parkinson's disease were randomly 
assigned to have subthalamic nucleus-deep brain stimulation or best medical 
treatment for Parkinson's disease. All patients had a blinded standardized 
neuropsychological exam (Mattis Dementia Rating scale, backward digit span, 
verbal fluency and Stroop task performance) at baseline and after 6 months of 
treatment. Patients with subthalamic nucleus-deep brain stimulation were defined 
as impaired according to a mild decline of one or more standard deviations 
compared to patients in the best medical treatment group. The cortical entry 
point of the electrodes, the electrode trajectories and the position of the 
active electrode contact were transferred into a normalized brain volume by an 
automated, non-linear registration algorithm to allow accurate statistical group 
analysis using pre- and postoperative magnetic resonance imaging data. Data of 
31 patients of the subthalamic nucleus-deep brain stimulation group and 31 
patients of the best medical treatment group were analysed. The subthalamic 
nucleus-deep brain stimulation group showed impaired semantic fluency compared 
with the best medical treatment group 6 months after surgery (P = 0.02). 
Electrode trajectories intersecting with caudate nuclei increased the risk of a 
decline in global cognition and working memory performance. Statistically, for 
every 0.1 ml overlap with a caudate nucleus, the odds for a decline >1 standard 
deviation increased by a factor of 37.4 (odds ratio, confidence interval 
2.1-371.8) for the Mattis Dementia Rating Scale and by a factor of 8.8 (odds 
ratio, confidence interval 1.0-70.9) for the backward digit span task. Patients 
with subthalamic nucleus-deep brain stimulation who declined in semantic verbal 
fluency, Stroop task and the backward digit span task performance showed a 
position of the active electrode outside the volume built by the active 
electrodes of stable performers. Passage of the chronic stimulation lead through 
the head of the caudate increases the risk of global cognitive decline and 
working memory performance after subthalamic nucleus-deep brain stimulation in 
Parkinson's disease. Therefore the electrode path should be planned outside the 
caudate nuclei, whenever possible. This study also stresses the importance of 
precise positioning of the active stimulating contact within the subthalamic 
volume to avoid adverse effects on semantic verbal fluency and response 
inhibition.

DOI: 10.1093/brain/awt151
PMID: 23801735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3149. Hum Mutat. 2013 Sep;34(9):1208-15. doi: 10.1002/humu.22373. Epub 2013 Aug 6.

Mutation in the SYNJ1 gene associated with autosomal recessive, early-onset 
Parkinsonism.

Quadri M(1), Fang M, Picillo M, Olgiati S, Breedveld GJ, Graafland J, Wu B, Xu 
F, Erro R, Amboni M, Pappatà S, Quarantelli M, Annesi G, Quattrone A, Chien HF, 
Barbosa ER; International Parkinsonism Genetics Network; Oostra BA, Barone P, 
Wang J, Bonifati V.

Collaborators: Bonifati V, Maat-Kievit A, Rood J, Boon A, van de Warrenburg B, 
Delnooz C, Rietveld A, Bloem B, Ferreira J, Correia Guedes L, Tolosa E, Janssens 
S, Emre M, Hanagasi H, Bilgic B, Elibol B, Socal M, Jardim L, Chien HF, Barbosa 
ER, Lu CS, Wu-Chou YH, Yeh TH, Atadzhanov M, Kelly P, Lopiano L, Tassorelli C, 
Pacchetti C, Nappi G, Riboldazzi G, Bono G, Padovani A, Borroni B, Raudino F, Di 
Fonzo A, Volonte A, Fincati E, Bertolasi L, Tinazzi M, Bonizzato A, Ferracci C, 
Dalla Libera A, Cortelli P, Capellari S, Marini P, Massaro F, Federico A, Taglia 
I, Battisti C, Marconi R, Onofrj M, Thomas A, Vanacore N, Meco G, Fabbrini G, 
Fabrizio E, Manfredi M, Berardelli A, Stocchi F, Vacca L, De Michele G, 
Criscuolo C, Santoro L, Filla A, De Mari M, Dell C, Iliceto G, Lamberti P, Toni 
V, Trianni G, Gagliardi M, Annesi G, Quattrone A, Saddi V, Francesco S, Saddi V, 
Cossu G, Melis M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Autosomal recessive, early-onset Parkinsonism is clinically and genetically 
heterogeneous. Here, we report the identification, by homozygosity mapping and 
exome sequencing, of a SYNJ1 homozygous mutation (p.Arg258Gln) segregating with 
disease in an Italian consanguineous family with Parkinsonism, dystonia, and 
cognitive deterioration. Response to levodopa was poor, and limited by side 
effects. Neuroimaging revealed brain atrophy, nigrostriatal dopaminergic 
defects, and cerebral hypometabolism. SYNJ1 encodes synaptojanin 1, a 
phosphoinositide phosphatase protein with essential roles in the postendocytic 
recycling of synaptic vesicles. The mutation is absent in variation databases 
and in ethnically matched controls, is damaging according to all prediction 
programs, and replaces an amino acid that is extremely conserved in the 
synaptojanin 1 homologues and in SAC1-like domains of other proteins. Sequencing 
the SYNJ1 ORF in unrelated patients revealed another heterozygous mutation 
(p.Ser1422Arg), predicted as damaging, in a patient who also carries a 
heterozygous PINK1 truncating mutation. The SYNJ1 gene is a compelling candidate 
for Parkinsonism; mutations in the functionally linked protein auxilin cause a 
similar early-onset phenotype, and other findings implicate endosomal 
dysfunctions in the pathogenesis. Our data delineate a novel form of human 
Mendelian Parkinsonism, and provide further evidence for abnormal synaptic 
vesicle recycling as a central theme in the pathogenesis.

© 2013 WILEY PERIODICALS, INC.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.22373
PMID: 23804577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3150. Alzheimers Res Ther. 2013 Jul 1;5(4):27. doi: 10.1186/alzrt181. eCollection 
2013.

Dementia in the oldest old: a multi-factorial and growing public health issue.

Gardner RC(1), Valcour V(2), Yaffe K(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, 675 Nelson Rising Lane - Box 1207, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.
(2)Department of Neurology, Memory and Aging Center, University of California, 
San Francisco, 675 Nelson Rising Lane - Box 1207, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA ; 
Division of Geriatric Medicine, Department of Medicine, University of 
California, San Francisco, 675 Nelson Rising Lane - Box 1207, San Francisco, CA 
94158, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Neurology, Epidemiology and Biostatistics, School 
of Medicine, University of California, 4150 Clement Street - Box 181, San 
Francisco, CA 94121, USA ; Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 4150 Clement Street 
- Box 181, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

The population of oldest old, or people aged 85 and older, is growing rapidly. A 
better understanding of dementia in this population is thus of increasing 
national and global importance. In this review, we describe the major 
epidemiological studies, prevalence, clinical presentation, neuropathological 
and imaging features, risk factors, and treatment of dementia in the oldest old. 
Prevalence estimates for dementia among those aged 85+ ranges from 18 to 38%. 
The most common clinical syndromes are Alzheimer's dementia, vascular dementia, 
and mixed dementia from multiple etiologies. The rate of progression appears to 
be slower than in the younger old. Single neuropathological entities such as 
Alzheimer's dementia and Lewy body pathology appear to have declining relevance 
to cognitive decline, while mixed pathology with Alzheimer's disease, vascular 
disease (especially cortical microinfarcts), and hippocampal sclerosis appear to 
have increasing relevance. Neuroimaging data are sparse. Risk factors for 
dementia in the oldest old include a low level of education, poor mid-life 
general health, low level of physical activity, depression, and delirium, 
whereas apolipoprotein E genotype, late-life hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and 
elevated peripheral inflammatory markers appear to have less relevance. 
Treatment approaches require further study, but the oldest old may be more prone 
to negative side effects compared with younger patients and targeted therapies 
may be less efficacious since single pathologies are less frequent. We also 
highlight the limitations and challenges of research in this area, including the 
difficulty of defining functional decline, a necessary component for a dementia 
diagnosis, the lack of normative neuropsychological data, and other shortcomings 
inherent in existing diagnostic criteria. In summary, our understanding of 
dementia in the oldest old has advanced dramatically in recent years, but more 
research is needed, particularly among varied racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic 
groups, and with respect to biomarkers such as neuroimaging, modifiable risk 
factors, and therapy.

DOI: 10.1186/alzrt181
PMCID: PMC3706944
PMID: 23809176


3151. Acta Neuropathol. 2013 Nov;126(5):683-97. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1148-z. Epub 
2013 Jun 29.

CSF α-synuclein improves diagnostic and prognostic performance of CSF tau and Aβ 
in Alzheimer's disease.

Toledo JB(1), Korff A, Shaw LM, Trojanowski JQ, Zhang J.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Institute on Aging, Center 
for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, University of Pennsylvania School of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Lewy body diseases (LBD), e.g., Parkinson's disease 
(PD) dementia and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), are common causes of 
geriatric cognitive impairments. In addition, AD and LBD are often found in the 
same patients at autopsy; therefore, biomarkers that can detect the presence of 
both pathologies in living subjects are needed. In this investigation, we report 
the assessment of α-synuclein (α-syn) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and its 
association with CSF total tau (t-tau), phosphorylated tau181 (p-tau181), and 
amyloid beta1-42 (Aβ1-42) in subjects of the Alzheimer's Disease Neuroimaging 
Initiative (ADNI; n = 389), with longitudinal clinical assessments. A strong 
correlation was noted between α-syn and t-tau in controls, as well as in 
patients with AD and mild cognitive impairment (MCI). However, the correlation 
is not specific to subjects in the ADNI cohort, as it was also seen in PD 
patients and controls enrolled in the Parkinson's Progression Markers Initiative 
(PPMI; n = 102). A bimodal distribution of CSF α-syn levels was observed in the 
ADNI cohort, with high levels of α-syn in the subjects with abnormally increased 
t-tau values. Although a correlation was also noted between α-syn and p-tau181, 
there was a mismatch (α-syn-p-tau181-Mis), i.e., higher p-tau181 levels 
accompanied by lower α-syn levels in a subset of ADNI patients. We hypothesize 
that this α-syn-p-tau181-Mis is a CSF signature of concomitant LBD pathology in 
AD patients. Hence, we suggest that inclusion of measures of CSF α-syn and 
calculation of α-syn-p-tau181-Mis improves the diagnostic 
sensitivity/specificity of classic CSF AD biomarkers and better predicts 
longitudinal cognitive changes.

DOI: 10.1007/s00401-013-1148-z
PMCID: PMC3812407
PMID: 23812319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3152. Neurobiol Aging. 2013 Nov;34(11):2695.e1-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.05.022. Epub 2013 Jun 29.

Alzheimer's disease and Parkinson's disease genome-wide association study top 
hits and risk of Parkinson's disease in Korean population.

Chung SJ(1), Jung Y, Hong M, Kim MJ, You S, Kim YJ, Kim J, Song K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Parkinson's disease (PD) have overlapping clinical 
and pathological features, suggesting a common pathway for these 2 
neurodegenerative disorders. Here we investigated the association of both AD and 
PD GWAS top hits with PD susceptibility. We selected 25 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms (SNPs) in 9 genes (ABCA7, APOE, BST1, CLU, CR1, LRRK2, PARK16, 
PICALM, and SNCA) that were genotyped in 1036 PD case patients and 1208 
controls. Case patients and controls were all ethnic Koreans. Logistic 
regression analysis was performed to calculate age- and sex-adjusted odds 
ratios. None of the AD-susceptibility loci (ABCA7, APOE, CLU, CR1, and PICALM) 
showed statistically significant association with PD susceptibility. In 
contrast, we replicated associations of SNCA, LRRK2, BST1, and PARK16 with PD 
susceptibility in Koreans. Of those, the SNCA SNP rs11931074 showed the most 
significant association with PD susceptibility (adjusted odds ratio = 1.48; 95% 
confidence interval = 1.31-1.67; p = 2.20E-10). In a logistic regression 
analysis with SNPs coded under an additive model, there was no significant 
genetic interaction between the LRRK2 and the PARK16 locus gene RAB7L1 in PD 
risk. Our results confirm the associations of SNCA, LRRK2, BST1, and PARK16 with 
PD susceptibility and fail to show significant associations of AD genome-wide 
association study (GWAS) top hits with PD susceptibility in a Korean population.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2013.05.022
PMID: 23820587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3153. Am J Alzheimers Dis Other Demen. 2013 Sep;28(6):634-41. doi: 
10.1177/1533317513494443. Epub 2013 Jul 2.

The unique experience of spouses in early-onset dementia.

Ducharme F(1), Kergoat MJ, Antoine P, Pasquier F, Coulombe R.

Author information:
(1)Faculté des sciences infirmières, Université de Montréal, Centre de 
recherche, Institut universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec, 
Canada. francine.ducharme@umontreal.ca

To date, few studies have examined the experience of spouse caregivers living 
with a person with early-onset dementia. Moreover, few support resources are 
offered to these family caregivers and fewer are still tailored to their unique 
trajectory. The aim of this qualitative study was to document the lived 
experience of spouse caregivers of young patients in order to inform the 
development of professional support tailored to their reality. A sample of 12 
spouses of persons diagnosed with dementia before the age of 65 participated in 
semistructured interviews. Six themes emerged from their caregiver trajectories, 
namely, difficulty managing behavioral and psychological symptoms, long quest 
for diagnosis, nondisclosure to others and denial of diagnosis, grief for loss 
of spouse and midlife projects, difficulty juggling unexpected role and daily 
life responsibilities, and difficulty planning for future. Results open up 
innovative avenues for the development of interventions geared to facilitating 
role transition for these spouse caregivers.

DOI: 10.1177/1533317513494443
PMCID: PMC10852552
PMID: 23823140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This article was presented in abstract format at 
the Congrès National 2012 des unités de soins, d’évaluation et de prise en 
charge Alzheimer; December 13-14, 2012; Paris. The authors declared no potential 
conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or 
publication of this article.


3154. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 Jan;85(1):7-16. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp-2013-305062. Epub 2013 Jul 4.

Exploratory analysis of neuropsychological and neuroanatomical correlates of 
progressive mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Lee JE(1), Cho KH, Song SK, Kim HJ, Lee HS, Sohn YH, Lee PH.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Brain Research Institute, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, , Seoul, Korea.

Comment in
    J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2014 Jan;85(1):2.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease with mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI) is a 
heterogeneous entity in terms of cognitive profiles and conversion to dementia. 
However, the risk factors for ongoing cognitive decline in patients with PD-MCI 
are not clearly defined.
METHODS: 51 patients with PD-MCI were prospectively followed-up for a minimum of 
2 years. Subjects were classified as MCI converters (n=15) or MCI non-converters 
(n=36) based on whether they were subsequently diagnosed with PD dementia. We 
explored cognitive profiles and neuroanatomical characteristics of PD-MCI 
converters using voxel based morphometry (VBM) of grey matter (GM) density and 
region of interest based volumetric analysis of the substantia innominata (SI).
RESULTS: PD-MCI converters showed more severe cognitive deficits in frontal 
executive functions, immediate verbal memory and visual recognition memory 
compared with PD-MCI non-converters. VBM analysis revealed that PD-MCI 
converters had significantly lower GM density in the left prefrontal areas, left 
insular cortex and bilateral caudate nucleus compared with that in PD-MCI 
non-converters. The mean normalised SI volume was significantly smaller in both 
PD-MCI converters (1.19±0.35, p<0.001) and PD-MCI non-converters (1.52±0.27, 
p<0.001) compared with that in controls (1.87±0.19). PD-MCI converters had a 
significantly smaller normalised SI volume than PD-MCI non-converters (p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that atrophy in the frontostriatal areas and 
cholinergic structures, as well as frontal lobe associated cognitive 
performance, may act as predictors of dementia in PD-MCI patients, suggesting 
distinctive patterns of cognitive profiles and a neuroanatomical basis for 
progressive PD-MCI.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp-2013-305062
PMID: 23828835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3155. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2015 Jan;23(1):23-37. doi: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.03.001. 
Epub 2013 Jul 3.

Amyloid PET Imaging in Lewy body disorders.

Donaghy P(1), Thomas AJ(2), O'Brien JT(3).

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
paul.donaghy@ncl.ac.uk.
(2)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Cambridge, Addenbrooke's Hospital, 
Cambridge, UK.

Lewy body (LB) disorders, including Parkinson disease (PD), Parkinson disease 
dementia (PDD), and dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB), are the second most common 
type of neurodegenerative dementia. Although the pathological hallmarks of LB 
disorders are Lewy bodies and Lewy neurites, cortical amyloid-beta (Aβ) 
deposition is also often seen. The relationship between Aβ pathology and 
dementia in LB disorders is unclear. Recently, positron emission tomography Aβ 
ligands have been developed that enable in vivo imaging of Aβ. In this paper we 
review amyloid imaging studies in LB disorders. LB disorders are associated with 
lower mean cortical Aβ ligand binding compared with Alzheimer disease. In DLB 
and PDD many subjects have normal levels of cortical Aβ, though a subset show 
increased Aβ ligand binding. Those with DLB show greater ligand binding than 
PDD; binding does not appear to be increased in PD without dementia. Cortical Aβ 
deposition may be a factor in the development of cognitive impairment in some 
cases of dementia in LB disorders. Amyloid imaging is of limited use in the 
diagnosis of LB disorders but Aβ deposition may predict the future development 
of dementia in PD. Reports of correlation between Aβ deposition and symptom 
profile, severity, and progression have been inconsistent. Some results suggest 
a synergistic interaction between Aβ and α-synuclein. Interpretation of the 
current evidence is hampered by differing methodologies across studies and small 
sample sizes. Large, prospective longitudinal studies are needed to clarify the 
association of Aβ with symptom development, progression, severity, and treatment 
response in LB disorders.

Copyright © 2015 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.03.001
PMID: 23831180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3156. Nervenarzt. 2013 Aug;84(8):918-26. doi: 10.1007/s00115-013-3756-1.

[Early recognition of Parkinson's disease. Objectifiable non-motor symptoms and 
biomarkers].

[Article in German]

Mollenhauer B(1), Sixel-Döring F, Storch A, Schneider C, Hilker R, Kalbe E.

Author information:
(1)Paracelsus-Elena-Klinik, Klinikstr. 16, 34119, Kassel, Deutschland. 
brit.mollenhauer@pk-mx.de

The clinical diagnosis of Parkinson's disease (PD) according to the UK Brain 
Bank criteria is based on the presence of motor symptoms and the response to 
dopaminergic medication. According to these criteria the clinical diagnosis is 
delineated too late when more than 50 % of the dopaminergic neurons are already 
degenerated. In recent years interest has shifted increasingly more towards 
non-motor symptoms (NMS), such as rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD), constipation, hyposmia and neuropsychiatric as well as cognitive 
symptoms. It was shown that NMS can precede the motor symptoms by some years and 
may thus possibly enable support of an earlier clinical diagnosis. Furthermore, 
cerebrospinal fluid or blood biomarkers as well as brain imaging techniques can 
objectively support an earlier diagnosis of PD. This article reviews important 
NMSs (e.g. RBD, hyposmia and neuropsychiatric/cognitive symptoms) as well as the 
current status on biomarkers and brain imaging in early (premotor) phases of PD 
and their relevance for the early diagnosis.

DOI: 10.1007/s00115-013-3756-1
PMID: 23831930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3157. Palliat Med. 2013 Oct;27(9):805-10. doi: 10.1177/0269216313495287. Epub 2013 Jul 
9.

Palliative care for Parkinson's disease: a summary of the evidence and future 
directions.

Richfield EW(1), Jones EJ, Alty JE.

Author information:
(1)Supportive Care, Early Diagnosis and Advanced disease research group, 
University of Hull, Hull York Medical School, Hull, UK.

BACKGROUND: Parkinson's disease is a common, life-limiting, neurodegenerative 
condition. Despite calls for improved access to palliative care for people with 
Parkinson's disease, services have been slow in developing. Obstacles include 
poor understanding and recognition of palliative care needs, the role for 
specialist palliative care services and an agreed structure for sustainable 
palliative care provision.
AIM: To summarise the evidence base for palliative care in Parkinson's disease, 
linking current understanding with implications for clinical practice and 
identifying areas for future research.
WHAT IS KNOWN: Convention recognises a final 'palliative phase' in Parkinson's 
disease, while qualitative studies suggest the presence of palliative care need 
in Parkinson's disease from diagnosis. Clinical tools to quantify palliative 
symptom burden exist and have helped to identify targets for intervention. 
Dementia is highly prevalent and influences many aspects of palliative care in 
Parkinson's disease, with particular implications for end-of-life care and 
advance care planning.
IMPLICATIONS FOR CLINICAL PRACTICE: The 'palliative phase' represents a poor 
entry point for consideration of palliative care need in Parkinson's disease. An 
alternative, integrated model of care, promoting collaboration between 
specialist palliative and neurological services, is discussed, along with some 
specific palliative interventions. WHAT IS UNKNOWN: Limited evidence exists 
regarding timing of palliative interventions, triggers for specialist referral 
and management of terminal care.
IMPLICATIONS FOR FUTURE RESEARCH: Research examining access to palliative care 
and management of terminal symptoms will assist development of sustainable, 
integrated palliative care services for Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1177/0269216313495287
PMID: 23838377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3158. Eur Radiol. 2013 Dec;23(12):3393-404. doi: 10.1007/s00330-013-2957-0. Epub 2013 
Jul 10.

Neuroimaging of dementia in 2013: what radiologists need to know.

Haller S(1), Garibotto V, Kövari E, Bouras C, Xekardaki A, Rodriguez C, 
Lazarczyk MJ, Giannakopoulos P, Lovblad KO.

Author information:
(1)Department of Imaging and Medical Informatics, University Hospitals of Geneva 
and Faculty of Medicine of the University of Geneva, Geneva, Switzerland, 
sven.haller@me.com.

The structural and functional neuroimaging of dementia have substantially 
evolved over the last few years. The most common forms of dementia, Alzheimer 
disease (AD), Lewy body dementia (LBD) and fronto-temporal lobar degeneration 
(FTLD), have distinct patterns of cortical atrophy and hypometabolism that 
evolve over time, as reviewed in the first part of this article. The second part 
discusses unspecific white matter alterations on T2-weighted and 
fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) images as well as cerebral 
microbleeds, which often occur during normal aging and may affect cognition. The 
third part summarises molecular neuroimaging biomarkers recently developed to 
visualise amyloid deposits, tau protein deposits and neurotransmitter systems. 
The fourth section reviews the utility of advanced image analysis techniques as 
predictive biomarkers of cognitive decline in individuals with early symptoms 
compatible with mild cognitive impairment (MCI). As only about half of MCI cases 
will progress to clinically overt dementia, whereas the other half remain stable 
or might even improve, the discrimination of stable versus progressive MCI is of 
paramount importance for both individual patient treatment and patient selection 
for clinical trials. The fifth and final part discusses the inter-individual 
variation in the neurocognitive reserve, which is a potential constraint for all 
proposed methods.

DOI: 10.1007/s00330-013-2957-0
PMID: 23839168 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3159. Ann Hum Genet. 2013 Sep;77(5):351-63. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12033. Epub 2013 Jul 12.

C9ORF72 intermediate repeat copies are a significant risk factor for Parkinson 
disease.

Nuytemans K(1), Bademci G, Kohli MM, Beecham GW, Wang L, Young JI, Nahab F, 
Martin ER, Gilbert JR, Benatar M, Haines JL, Scott WK, Züchner S, Pericak-Vance 
MA, Vance JM.

Author information:
(1)University of Miami, Miller School of Medicine, John P. Hussman Institute for 
Human Genomics, Biomedical Research building, 1501 NW 10th Ave, Miami, FL, 
33136, USA.

We set out to determine whether expansions in the C9ORF72 repeat found in 
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and frontotemporal dementia (FTD) families 
are associated with Parkinson disease (PD). We determined the repeat size in a 
total of 889 clinically ascertained patients (including PD and essential tremor 
plus Parkinsonism (ETP)) and 1144 controls using a repeat-primed PCR assay. We 
found that large C9ORF72 repeat expansions (>30 repeats) were not contributing 
to PD risk. However, PD and ETP cases had a significant increase in intermediate 
(>20 to 30+) repeat copies compared to controls. Overall, 14 cases (13 PD, 1 
ETP) and three controls had >20 repeat copies (Fisher's exact test p = 0.002). 
Further, seven cases and no controls had >23 repeat copies (p = 0.003). Our 
results suggest that intermediate copy numbers of the C9ORF72 repeat contribute 
to risk for PD and ETP. This also suggests that PD, ALS and FTD share some 
pathophysiological mechanisms of disease. Further studies are needed to 
elucidate the contribution of the C9ORF72 repeat in the overall PD population 
and to determine whether other common genetic risk factors exist between these 
neurodegenerative disorders.

© 2013 The Authors. Annals of Human Genetics published by John Wiley & Sons 
Ltd/University College London.

DOI: 10.1111/ahg.12033
PMCID: PMC3815478
PMID: 23845100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3160. Med Arch. 2013;67(3):171-3. doi: 10.5455/medarh.2013.67.171-173.

Factors influencing mini-mental state (MMSE) score in stroke patients.

Naço D(1), Dobi D, Zekja I, Mijo S, Kapisyzi M, Kruja J.

Author information:
(1)Neurology unit, Specialistic Polyclinic, Tirana, Albania.

AIM: To evaluate the usefulness of MMSE score in vascular dementia and the 
influence of different factors on the MMSE score.
SUBJECT AND METHODS: We studied 78 stroke patients followed up at the neurology 
unit, Specialistic Polyclinic 2, Tirana. A neurological visit is done and the 
MMSE score is calculated for each of them. We noted the stroke form (ischemic, 
hemorrhagic), patient's age, education, time from stroke onset, accompanying 
neurological disorders (parkinsonism, epilepsy), risk factors (arterial 
hypertension, cardiac diseases, diabetes mellitus, smoking, carotid stenosis). 
The imaging (CT and/or MRI) of the brain is requested. Independent Samples Test, 
t-test for Equality of Means, 2 - tailed, is applied for the statistical 
evaluation.
RESULTS: The mean age of the patients in the study is 70.31 years old. There are 
37 females (47.43%) and 41 males (52.56%). 12 (15.38%) patients had hemorrhagic 
and 66 (84.61%) ischemic stroke. The mean time from stroke onset is 4.55 years. 
15 (19.2%) patients have parkinsonism, 1 other extra pyramidal disorder, 3 
(3.8%) secondary generalized epilepsy. The mean MMSE score for all patients is 
23.48. The multi ischemic cerebral lesions were present in the imaging of 12 
(15.38%) patients. The generalized cortical atrophy is found in 25 (32%) 
patients and the temporal atrophy in 14 (17.94%) patients. We analyzed the data 
of 37 patients [16 (43.24%) females and 21 (56.75%) males], with MMSE score < or 
= 23. The mean age is 75.39 years old. 6 (16.21%) patients are diagnosed with 
hemorrhagic stroke. 3 (8.1%) patients have secondary generalized epilepsy, 9 
(24.32%) are suffering of parkinsonism and the mean time from stroke onset is 
4.31 years. The imaging study revealed multi ischemic cerebral lesions in 9 
(24.3%) patients. We found accompanying temporal atrophy in 10 (27%) patients, 
frontal atrophy in 2 (5.4%) patients, and generalized cortical atrophy in 17 
(45.9%) patients.
CONCLUSION: Dementia after stroke is frequent. The MMSE is still a useful scale 
to evaluate the VaD and is related to age, gender, education, stroke age, 
cardiovascular risk factors, stroke type and localization, other neurological 
disorders as epilepsy and parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.5455/medarh.2013.67.171-173
PMID: 23848035 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3161. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Mar;10(2):171-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.04.003. Epub 
2013 Jul 11.

Accounting for functional loss in Alzheimer's disease and dementia with Lewy 
bodies: beyond cognition.

Hamilton JM(1), Salmon DP(2), Raman R(3), Hansen LA(4), Masliah E(4), Peavy 
GM(2), Galasko D(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA. Electronic address: jhamilton@anhsocal.com.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA.
(3)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Family and Preventive Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.
(4)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Pathology, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA.
(5)Department of Neurosciences, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, 
CA, USA; Neurology Service, Veterans Affairs San Diego Healthcare System, La 
Jolla, CA, USA.

BACKGROUND: The relative contributions of cognitive, motor, and behavioral 
deficits to the impairment of physical or instrumental activities of daily 
living (ADLs) may differ in patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and 
Alzheimer's disease (AD).
METHODS: Multiple linear regression analyses were used to identify the amount of 
variability in physical self-maintenance and instrumental ADL ratings predicted 
by cognitive, motor, and behavioral indices separately for patients with 
autopsy-diagnosed DLB (n = 39) or AD (n = 39).
RESULTS: Motor dysfunction accounted for significant variance in physical ADLs 
in DLB (R(2) change = 0.17), whereas behavioral (R(2) change = 0.23) and motor 
dysfunction (R(2) change = 0.13) accounted for significant variance in AD. Motor 
(R(2) change = 0.32) and cognitive (R(2) change = 0.10) dysfunction accounted 
for significant variance in instrumental ADLs in DLB, whereas cognitive (R(2) 
change = 0.36) and behavioral (R(2) change = 0.12) dysfunction accounted for 
significant variance in AD.
CONCLUSIONS: Cognitive, motor, and behavioral deficits contribute differently to 
ADL changes in DLB and AD. Thus, treatments designed to ameliorate a certain 
aspect of AD or DLB (e.g., cognitive dysfunction) may have a larger impact on 
everyday functioning in one disorder than the other.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.04.003
PMCID: PMC4339266
PMID: 23850331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3162. Alzheimers Dement. 2014 Jan;10(1):115-31. doi: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.01.013. Epub 
2013 Jul 11.

The future of blood-based biomarkers for Alzheimer's disease.

Henriksen K(1), O'Bryant SE(2), Hampel H(3), Trojanowski JQ(4), Montine TJ(5), 
Jeromin A(6), Blennow K(7), Lönneborg A(8), Wyss-Coray T(9), Soares H(10), 
Bazenet C(11), Sjögren M(8), Hu W(12), Lovestone S(11), Karsdal MA(13), Weiner 
MW(14); Blood-Based Biomarker Interest Group.

Collaborators: Bain LJ, Wholley D, Siuciak J, Holtzman D, Kong G, Martins R, 
Roche J, Saykin A, Nagele R, Shaw L, German D, Stephenson D, Watt A, Foroud T, 
Soares H, Laske C, Breteler M, Kirby L, Schulman H, Barnham K, Pesini P, Phelps 
T, Younkin S, Kodadek T, Suhy J, Perry D, Nosheny RL, Edwards M, Vanderstiechele 
H.

Author information:
(1)Nordic Bioscience Biomarkers and Research, Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
Herlev, Denmark. Electronic address: kh@nordicbioscience.com.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, University of North Texas Health Science 
Center, Fort Worth, Texas, USA.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, University of Frankfurt, Frankfurt, Germany.
(4)Institute on Aging, Alzheimer's Disease Core Center, Udall Parkinson's 
Research Center, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, Department of 
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University 
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.
(5)Department of Pathology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA.
(6)NextGen Sciences, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(7)Clinical Neurochemistry Laboratory, Department of Neuroscience and 
Physiology, University of Goteborg, Sahlgrenska University Hospital, Molndal, 
Sweden.
(8)DiaGenic ASA, Oslo, Norway.
(9)Department of Neurology and Neurological Sciences, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA.
(10)Bristol-Myers Squibb, Wallingford, CT, USA.
(11)King's College London, Department of Old Age Psychiatry, Institute of 
Psychiatry, De Crespigny Park, London, UK.
(12)Department of Neurology, Center for Neurodegenerative Disease Research, 
Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(13)Nordic Bioscience Biomarkers and Research, Neurodegenerative Diseases, 
Herlev, Denmark.
(14)Departments of Medicine, Radiology, Psychiatry, and Neurology, University of 
California, San Francisco, CA, USA.

Treatment of Alzheimer's disease (AD) is significantly hampered by the lack of 
easily accessible biomarkers that can detect disease presence and predict 
disease risk reliably. Fluid biomarkers of AD currently provide indications of 
disease stage; however, they are not robust predictors of disease progression or 
treatment response, and most are measured in cerebrospinal fluid, which limits 
their applicability. With these aspects in mind, the aim of this article is to 
underscore the concerted efforts of the Blood-Based Biomarker Interest Group, an 
international working group of experts in the field. The points addressed 
include: (1) the major challenges in the development of blood-based biomarkers 
of AD, including patient heterogeneity, inclusion of the "right" control 
population, and the blood-brain barrier; (2) the need for a clear definition of 
the purpose of the individual markers (e.g., prognostic, diagnostic, or 
monitoring therapeutic efficacy); (3) a critical evaluation of the ongoing 
biomarker approaches; and (4) highlighting the need for standardization of 
preanalytical variables and analytical methodologies used by the field.

Copyright © 2014 The Alzheimer's Association. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jalz.2013.01.013
PMCID: PMC4128378
PMID: 23850333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3163. Neurologia. 2013 Oct;28(8):503-21. doi: 10.1016/j.nrl.2013.05.001. Epub 2013 Jul 
13.

[Advanced Parkinson's disease: clinical characteristics and treatment (part 1)].

[Article in Spanish]

Kulisevsky J(1), Luquin MR, Arbelo JM, Burguera JA, Carrillo F, Castro A, Chacón 
J, García-Ruiz PJ, Lezcano E, Mir P, Martinez-Castrillo JC, Martínez-Torres I, 
Puente V, Sesar A, Valldeoriola-Serra F, Yañez R.

Author information:
(1)Servicio de Neurología, Hospital Sant Pau, IIB Sant Pau, CIBERNED, 
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Barcelona, España. Electronic address: 
JKulisevsky@santpau.cat.

INTRODUCTION: A large percentage of patients with Parkinson's disease (PD) 
develop motor fluctuations, dyskinesias, and severe non-motor symptoms within 3 
to 5 years of starting dopaminergic therapy, and these motor complications are 
refractory to treatment. Several authors refer to this stage of the disease as 
advanced Parkinson's disease.
OBJECTIVE: To define the clinical manifestations of advanced PD and the risk 
factors for reaching this stage of the disease.
DEVELOPMENT: This consensus document has been prepared by using an exhaustive 
literature search and by discussion of the contents by an expert group on 
movement disorders of the Sociedad Española de Neurología (Spanish Neurology 
Society), coordinated by two of the authors (JK and MRL).
CONCLUSIONS: Severe motor fluctuations and dyskinesias, axial motor symptoms 
resistant to levodopa, and cognitive decline are the main signs in the clinical 
phenotype of advanced PD.

Copyright © 2013 Sociedad Española de Neurología. Published by Elsevier Espana. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nrl.2013.05.001
PMID: 23856182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3164. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2013 Oct;33(5):691-4. doi: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e3182979830.

A single-center, cross-sectional prevalence study of impulse control disorders 
in Parkinson disease: association with dopaminergic drugs.

Poletti M(1), Logi C, Lucetti C, Del Dotto P, Baldacci F, Vergallo A, Ulivi M, 
Del Sarto S, Rossi G, Ceravolo R, Bonuccelli U.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy.

The current study aimed at establishing the prevalence of impulse control 
disorders (ICDs) in patients with Parkinson disease (PD) and their association 
with demographic, drug-related, and disease-related characteristics. We 
performed a single-center cross-sectional study of 805 PD patients. Impulse 
control disorders were investigated with the Questionnaire for Impulsive 
Compulsive Disorders in Parkinson's Disease; also comorbid neuropsychiatric 
complications (dementia, delusions, visual hallucinations) were investigated 
with clinical interviews and ad hoc instruments (Parkinson Psychosis 
Questionnaire and Neuropsychiatry Inventory). Impulse control disorders were 
identified in 65 patients (prevalence, 8.1%), with pathological gambling and 
hypersexuality the most frequent. Impulse control disorders were present in 57 
of 593 cognitively preserved patients (prevalence, 9.6%) and in 8 of 212 
demented patients (prevalence, 3.8%). Impulse control disorders were 
significantly associated with dopamine agonists (odds ratio [OR], 5.50; 95% 
confidence interval [CI], 2.60-12.46; P < 0.0001) and levodopa (OR, 2.43; 95% 
CI, 1.06-6.35; P = 0.034). Impulse control disorders frequency was similar for 
pramipexole and ropinirole (16.6% vs 12.5%; OR, 1.45; 95% CI, 0.79-2.74; P = 
0.227). Additional variables associated with ICDs were male sex and younger age. 
These findings suggested that dopaminergic treatments in PD are associated with 
increased odds of having an ICD, but also other demographic and clinical 
variables are associated with ICDs, suggesting the multifactorial nature of the 
ICD phenomenon in PD.

DOI: 10.1097/JCP.0b013e3182979830
PMID: 23857310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3165. J Nucl Med. 2013 Aug;54(8):1331-8. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.112.105379. Epub 2013 Jul 
17.

Nigrostriatal dopamine terminal imaging with dopamine transporter SPECT: an 
update.

Tatsch K(1), Poepperl G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Nuclear Medicine, Municipal Hospital Karlsruhe, Inc, Karlsruhe, 
Germany. klaus.tatsch@klinikum-karlsruhe.de

This article gives an update on nigrostriatal dopamine terminal imaging, with 
emphasis on SPECT performed with the presynaptic dopamine transporter (DAT) 
ligand (123)I-FP-CIT. The paper covers the rational use of this technique in the 
diagnostic work-up of patients with known or suspected parkinsonian syndromes. 
In detail, it addresses the impact of the method for the proof or exclusion of 
neurodegenerative parkinsonism, for its early and preclinical diagnosis, and for 
the evaluation of disease progression. The importance of normal DAT binding for 
differentiating symptomatic parkinsonism and relevant tremor syndromes from 
neurodegeneration is highlighted. Particularly emphasized is the role of DAT 
SPECT for diagnosing Lewy body dementia and its separation from Alzheimer 
dementia. Finally, some remarks deal with the economic aspects of the use of 
these imaging techniques in the clinical setting.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.112.105379
PMID: 23864718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3166. Age Ageing. 2013 Sep;42(5):567-76. doi: 10.1093/ageing/aft085. Epub 2013 Jul 17.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease.

Yarnall AJ(1), Rochester L, Burn DJ.

Author information:
(1)Institute for Ageing and Health, Newcastle University, Campus for Ageing and 
Vitality, Newcastle upon Tyne, Tyne and Wear NE4 5PL, UK. 
alison.yarnall@ncl.ac.uk

The concept of mild cognitive impairment (MCI) in the general population has 
received increased attention over recent years, and is associated with risk of 
progression to Alzheimer's disease. Within Parkinson's disease (PD), MCI 
(PD-MCI) is also now recognised to be relatively common, with certain subtypes 
predicting progression to Parkinson's disease dementia (PDD). Recently, criteria 
to better characterise PD-MCI and its subtypes have been produced by the 
Movement Disorder Society. In contrast to the population as a whole, where 
amnestic MCI is the most common subtype, non-amnestic PD-MCI dominates, with 
prominent executive and attention dysfunction. Although the pathophysiology of 
PD-MCI is poorly understood and encompasses both PD and non-PD pathology, it is 
most likely the result of a complex interaction between neurotransmitter 
dysfunction, synaptic pathology, protein aggregation and neuronal damage. 
Determining the factors that influence the progression of these pathologies in 
PD and the individuals at risk of ultimately developing PDD is critical for 
targeted intervention and drug discovery studies. Further work is required, 
however, to determine the significance of PD-MCI and also to validate the 
diagnostic criteria. This would be best delivered in the form of longitudinal 
studies in homogenous cohorts of PD participants, to allow prognostication and 
generalisation among the PD population. At the present time, no drug therapies 
are available for PD-MCI. Management includes screening for the disorder, 
excluding treatable causes of cognitive decline and cautious use of dopamine 
agonists and medications such as anticholinergics.

DOI: 10.1093/ageing/aft085
PMID: 23868092 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3167. Mov Disord. 2013 Sep;28(10):1376-83. doi: 10.1002/mds.25568. Epub 2013 Jul 19.

Parkinson's disease-cognitive rating scale: psychometrics for mild cognitive 
impairment.

Fernández de Bobadilla R(1), Pagonabarraga J, Martínez-Horta S, Pascual-Sedano 
B, Campolongo A, Kulisevsky J.

Author information:
(1)Movement Disorders Unit, Neurology Department, Sant Pau Hospital, Barcelona, 
Spain; Movement Disorders Section, Biomedical Research Institute (IIB-Sant Pau), 
Barcelona, Spain; Departament de Medicina, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
Barcelona, Spain.

Lack of validated data on cutoff scores for mild cognitive impairment (MCI) and 
sensitivity to change in predementia stages of Parkinson's disease (PD) limit 
the utility of instruments measuring global cognition as screening and outcome 
measures in therapeutic trials. Investigators who were blinded to PD-Cognitive 
Rating Scale (PD-CRS) scores classified a cohort of prospectively recruited, 
nondemented patients into a PD with normal cognition (PD-NC) group and a PD with 
MCI (PD-MCI) group using Clinical Dementia Rating (CDR) and the Mattis Dementia 
Rating Scale-2 (MDRS-2). The discriminative power of the PD-CRS for PD-MCI was 
examined in a representative sample of 234 patients (145 in the PD-NC group; 89 
in the PD-MCI group) and in a control group of 98 healthy individuals. 
Sensitivity to change in the PD-CRS score (the minimal clinically important 
difference was examined with the Clinical Global Impression of Change scale and 
was calculated with a combination of distribution-based and anchor-based 
approaches) was explored in a 6-month observational multicenter trial involving 
a subset of 120 patients (PD-NC, 63; PD-MCI, 57). Regression analysis 
demonstrated that PD-CRS total scores (P < 0.001) and age (P = 0.01) 
independently differentiated PD-NC from PD-MCI. Area under the receiver 
operating characteristic curve (AUC) analysis (AUC, 0.85; 95% confidence 
interval, 0.80-0.90) indicated that a score ≤ 81 of 134 was the optimal cutoff 
point on the total score for the PD-CRS (sensitivity, 79%; specificity, 80%; 
positive predictive value, 59%; negative predictive value, 91%). A range of 
change from 10 to 13 points on the PD-CRS total score was indicative of 
clinically significant change. These findings suggest that the PD-CRS is a 
useful tool to identify PD-MCI and to track cognitive changes in nondemented 
patients with PD.

© 2013 International Parkinson and Movement Disorder Society.

DOI: 10.1002/mds.25568
PMID: 23873810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3168. J Affect Disord. 2013 Oct;151(1):248-58. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.06.001. Epub 
2013 Jul 20.

Suicidal ideation in a European Huntington's disease population.

Hubers AA(1), van Duijn E, Roos RA, Craufurd D, Rickards H, Bernhard 
Landwehrmeyer G, van der Mast RC, Giltay EJ; REGISTRY investigators of the 
European Huntington's Disease Network.

Collaborators: Bachoud-Lévi AC, Bentivoglio AR, Biunno I, Bonelli RM, Burgunder 
JM, Dunnett SB, Ferreira JJ, Handley OJ, Heiberg A, llmann TI, Landwehrmeyer GB, 
Levey J, Ramos-Arroyo MA, Nielsen JE, ProKoivisto S, Päivärinta M, Roos RA, Rojo 
Sebastián A, Tabrizi SJ, Vandenberghe W, Verellen- Dumoulin C, Zaremba J, Uhrova 
T, Wahlström J, Barth K, Correia-Guedes L, Finisterra AM, Garde MB, Bos R, Betz 
S, Callaghan J, Fullam R, Ecker D, Nielsen MG, Handley OJ, Hvalstedt C, Held C, 
Koppers K, Laurà M, Horta SM, Descals AM, Mestre T, Minster S, Monza D, Mütze L, 
Oehmen M, Townhill J, Orth M, Padieu H, Paterski L, Peppa N, Pro Koivisto S, 
Roedig V, Rialland A, Røren N, Šašinková P, Seliverstov Y, Cubillo PT, Walsem 
MR, Wright A, da Silva WV, Witjes-Ané MN, Yudina E, Zielonka D, Zielonka E, 
Zinzi P, Bonelli RM, Herranhof B, Holl A, Kapfhammer HP, Koppitz M, Magnet M, 
Otti D, Painold A, Reisinger K, Scheibl M, Hecht K, Lilek S, Müller N, Schöggl 
H, Ullah J, Brugger F, Hepperger C, Hotter A, Seppi K, Wenning G, Buratti L, 
Hametner EM, Holas C, Hametner EM, Hussl A, Poewe W, Braunwarth EM, Sprenger F, 
Müller C, Lilek S, Sinadinosa D, Walleczek AM, Bonelli RM, Ladurner G, Staffen 
W, Flamez A, Morez V, de Raedt S, Boogaerts A, Vandenberghe W, van Reijen D, 
Klempíř J, Majerová V, Roth J, Hartikainen P, Hiivola H, Martikainen K, Tuuha K, 
Ignatius J, Kärppä M, Åman J, Mustonen A, Kajula O, Santala M, Allain P, Guérid 
MA, Gohier B, Olivier A, Prundean A, Scherer- Gagou C, Verny C, Bost M, Babiloni 
B, Debruxelles S, Duché C, Goizet C, Lafoucrière D, Jameau L, Spampinato U, De 
Bruycker C, Cabaret M, Carette AS, Defebvre L, Decorte E, Delval A, Delliaux M, 
Destee A, Dujardin K, Peter M, Plomhouse L, Sablonnière B, Simonin C, Defebvre 
L, Lemaire MH, Manouvrier S, Thibault-Tanchou S, Vuillaume I, Krystkowiak P, 
Duru C, Roussel M, Wannepain S, Berrissoul H, Bellonet M, Courtin F, Mantaux B, 
Fasquel V, Godefroy O, Azulay JP, Fluchère F, Delfini M, Eusebio A, Mundler L, 
Longato N, Rudolf G, Steinmetz G, Tranchant C, Wagner C, Zimmermann M, Marcel C, 
Calvas F, Pariente J, Démonet JF, Cheriet S, Kosinski CM, Milkereit E, Probst D, 
Reetz K, Sass C, Schiefer J, Schlangen C, Werner CJ, Gelderblom H, Priller J, 
Prüß H, Spruth EJ, Andrich J, Ellrichmann G, Hoffmann R, Kaminski B, Saft C, 
Stamm C, Lange H, Bosredon C, Maass A, Schmidt S, Storch A, Wolz M, Kohl Z, 
Winkler J, Capetian P, Lambeck J, Zucker B, Boelmans K, Ganos C, Goerendt I, 
Hidding U, Lewerenz J, Münchau A, Orth M, Schmalfeld J, Stubbe L, Zittel S, 
Diercks G, Dressler D, Gorzolla H, Schrader C, Tacik P, Heinicke W, Longinus B, 
Bürk K, Möller JC, Rissling I, Mühlau M, Peinemann A, Städtler M, Weindl A, 
Winkelmann J, Ziegler C, Bohlen S, Hölzner E, Lange H, Reilmann R, Sass C, Dose 
M, Leythaeuser G, Marquard R, Raab T, Schrenk C, Schuierer M, Barth K, Buck A, 
Connemann J, Ecker D, Eschenbach C, Held C, Landwehrmeyer B, Lezius F, Nepper S, 
Niess A, Orth M, Schwenk D, Süßmuth S, Trautmann S, Weydt P, Cormio C, 
Sciruicchio V, Serpino C, Tommaso M, Capellari S, Cortelli P, Gallassi R, Poda 
R, Rizzo G, Scaglione C, Bertini E, Ghelli E, Ginestroni A, Massaro F, Mechi C, 
Paganini M, Piacentini S, Pradella S, Romoli AM, Sorbi S, Abbruzzese G, di 
Poggio MB, Di Maria E, Ferrandes G, Mandich P, Marchese R, Albanese A, Di Bella 
D, Di Donato S, Gellera C, Genitrini S, Mariotti C, Monza D, Nanetti L, Paridi 
D, Soliveri P, Tomasello C, De Michele G, Di Maio L, Salvatore E, Rinaldi C, 
Rossi F, Massarelli M, Roca A, Ammendola S, Russo CV, Squitieri F, Elifani F, 
Maglione V, Di Pardo A, Alberti S, Griguoli A, Amico E, Martino T, Petrollini M, 
Bentivoglio AR, Catalli C, Di Giacopo R, Fasano A, Frontali M, Guidubaldi A, 
Ialongo T, Jacopini G, Loria G, Piano C, Chiara P, Quaranta D, Romano S, Soleti 
F, Spadaro M, Zinzi P, Rinaldi C, Rossi F, Massarelli M, Roca A, Ammendola S, 
Russo CV, Squitieri F, Elifani F, Maglione V, Alberti S, Griguoli A, Amico E, 
Martino T, Petrollini M, Bentivoglio AR, Catalli C, Di Giacopo R, Fasano A, 
Frontali M, Guidubaldi A, Ialongo T, Jacopini G, Loria G, Piano C, Chiara P, 
Quaranta D, Romano S, Soleti F, Spadaro M, Zinzi P, van Hout MS, van Vugt JP, 
Weert A, Bolwijn J, Dekker M, Leenders K, Kremer HP, Bos R, Dumas EM, van den 
Bogaard SJ, Roos RA, 't Hart EP, van Duijn E, Økland E, Hauge E, Tyvoll H, 
Heiberg A, Walsem MR, Frich J, Aaserud O, Wehus R, Bjørgo K, Fannemel M, Gørvell 
P, Lorentzen E, Koivisto SP, Retterstøl L, Overland T, Stokke B, Sando B, 
Dziadkiewicz A, Nowak M, Robowski P, Sitek E, Slawek J, Soltan W, Szinwelski M, 
Blaszcyk M, Boczarska-Jedynak M, Ciach-Wysocka E, Gorzkowska A, Jasinska-Myga B, 
Opala G, Kłodowska-Duda G, Stompel D, Banaszkiewicz K, Boćwińska D, Szczudlik A, 
Rudzińska M, Wójcik M, Dec M, Krawczyk M, Jaremek KB, Szczygieł E, Stenwak A, 
ielewska AW, Bryl A, Ciesielska A, Klimberg A, Marcinkowski J, Sempołowicz J, 
Zielonka D, Samara H, Wiśniewski B, Janik P, Gogol A, Kwiecinski H, Jamrozik Z, 
Kaminska A, Antczak J, Jachinska K, Rakowicz M, Richter P, Rola R, Ryglewicz D, 
Sienkiewicz-Jarosz H, Stępniak I, Witkowski G, Zdzienicka E, Zaremba J, Sułek A, 
Krysa W, Stępniak I, Zieora-Jakutowicz K, Júlio F, Januário C, Mestre T, 
Correia-Guedes L, Coelho M, Mendes T, Valadas A, Ferreira JJ, Timóteo Â, Costa 
C, Cavaco S, Damásio J, Loureiro R, Magalhães M, Andrade C, Gago M, Garrett C, 
Guerra MR, Lima J, Massano J, Meireles J, Herrera CD, Garcia PM, Barrero F, 
Morales B, Cubo E, Mariscal N, Sánchez J, Alonso-Frech F, Perez MR, Fenollar M, 
García RG, Quiroga PP, Rivera SV, Villanueva C, Alegre J, Bascuñana M, Caldentey 
JG, Ventura MF, Ribas GG, Yébenes JG, López-Sendón Moreno JL, Cubillo PT, García 
Ruíz PJ, Martínez-Descals A, Artiga MJ, Sánchez V, Guerrero R, Bárcenas AH, 
Noguera Perea MF, Fortuna L, Martirio M, Torres A, Reinante G, Moreau LV, 
Barbera MA, Guia DB, Hernanz LC, Catena JL, Sebastián AR, Ferrer PQ, Carruesco 
GT, Bas J, Busquets N, Calopa M, Elorza MD, Díez-AjaLópez C, Terol SD, Robert 
MF, Ruíz BG, Casado AG, Martínez IH, Viladrich CM, Càrdenas RP, Roca E, Llesoy 
JR, Idiago JM, Vergara MR, García SS, Riballo AV, González SG, Guisasola LM, 
Salvador C, San Martín ES, González M, Gorospe A, Legarda I, Arques PN, Torres 
Rodríguez MJ, Vives B, Gaston I, Ramos-Arroyo MA, Martinez-Jaurrieta MD, Manuel 
J, Moreno G, Peña JC, Avarvarei LD, Bastida AM, Recio MF, Vergé LR, Sánchez VS, 
Carrillo F, Cáceres MT, Mir P, Suarez MJ, Bosca M, Burguera JA, Garcia AC, 
Brugada FC, Martínez LM, Val JL, Loutfi G, Olofsson C, Stattin EL, Westman L, 
Wikström B, lhagen SE, Paucar M, Svenningsson P, Reza- Soltani TW, Höglund A, 
Sandström B, Wahlström J, Høsterey-Ugander U, Fredlund G, Constantinescu R, 
Neleborn-Lingefjärd L, Tedr- off J, Esmaeilzadeh M, Winnberg E, Pålhagen S, 
Svennigsson P, Paucar M, Riza-Soltani TW, Sundblom J, Johansson A, Wiklund L, 
Ekwall C, Göller ML, Petersén A, Reimer J, Widner H, Burgunder JM, Stebler Y, 
Kaelin A, Romero I, Schüpbach M, Weber S, Miedzybrodzka Z, Rae D, Downie L, 
Simpson S, Summers F, Ure A, Jack R, Matheson K, Akhtar S, Crooks J, Curtis A, 
Souza J, Rickards H, Wright J, Hayward B, Sieradzan K, Wright A, Barker RA, 
O'Keefe D, Di Pietro A, Fisher K, Hill S, Mason S, Swain R, Valle N, Guzman, 
Bisson J, Busse M, Butcher C, Callaghan J, Clenaghan C, Dunnett S, Fullam R, 
Handley O, Hunt S, Hughes A, Johnstone C, Jones L, Jones U, Khalil H, Minster S, 
Owen M, Price K, Rose LE, Townhill J, Rosser A, Porteous M, Edwards M, Ho C, 
McGill M, Pearson P, Brockie P, Foster J, Johns N, McKenzie S, Rothery J, Thomas 
G, Yates S, Miller J, Ritchie S, Burrows L, Fletcher A, Harding A, Laver F, 
Silva M, Thomson A, Rowett L, Gallantrae D, Longthorpe M, Markova I, Raman A, 
Hamer S, Wild S, Yarduiman P, Chu C, Kraus A, Wild S, Yardumian P, Musgrave H, 
Rowett L, Toscano J, Jamieson S, Hobson E, Clayton C, Dipple H, Middleton J, 
Freire-Patino D, Andrews T, Dougherty A, Kavalier F, Golding C, Laing H, 
Lashwood A, Robertson D, Ruddy D, Whaite A, Santhouse A, Patton M, Peterson M, 
Rose S, Andrews T, Bruno S, Chu E, Doherty K, Golding C, Haider S, Hensman D, 
Lahiri N, Lewis M, Novak M, Patel A, Robertson N, Rosser E, Tabrizi S, Taylor R, 
Warner T, Wild E, Craufurd D, Fullam R, Howard L, Sollom A, Snowden J, Thompson 
J, Callaghan J, Jones M, Murphy H, Trender-Gerhard I, Rogers D, Bek J, Oughton 
E, Johnson L, Hare M, Arran N, Verstraelen N, Partington-Jones L, Huson S, 
Stopford C, Westmoreland L, Davidson J, Morgan K, Savage L, Singh B, Komati S, 
Nemeth AH, Armstrong R, Valentine R, Siuda G, Harrison D, Hughes M, Parkinson A, 
Soltysiak B, Burn J, Coleman C, Bandmann O, Bradbury A, Gill P, Fairtlough H, 
Fillingham K, Foustanos I, Kazoka M, O'Donovan K, Peppa N, Taylor C, Tidswell K, 
Quarrell O.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands. a.a.m.hubers@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Previous studies indicate increased prevalences of suicidal 
ideation, suicide attempts, and completed suicide in Huntington's disease (HD) 
compared with the general population. This study investigates correlates and 
predictors of suicidal ideation in HD.
METHODS: The study cohort consisted of 2106 HD mutation carriers, all 
participating in the REGISTRY study of the European Huntington's Disease 
Network. Of the 1937 participants without suicidal ideation at baseline, 945 had 
one or more follow-up measurements. Participants were assessed for suicidal 
ideation by the behavioural subscale of the Unified Huntington's Disease Rating 
Scale (UHDRS). Correlates of suicidal ideation were analyzed using logistic 
regression analysis and predictors were analyzed using Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: At baseline, 169 (8.0%) mutation carriers endorsed suicidal ideation. 
Disease duration (odds ratio [OR]=0.96; 95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.9-1.0), 
anxiety (OR=2.14; 95%CI: 1.4-3.3), aggression (OR=2.41; 95%CI: 1.5-3.8), a 
previous suicide attempt (OR=3.95; 95%CI: 2.4-6.6), and a depressed mood 
(OR=13.71; 95%CI: 6.7-28.0) were independently correlated to suicidal ideation 
at baseline. The 4-year cumulative incidence of suicidal ideation was 9.9%. 
Longitudinally, the presence of a depressed mood (hazard ratio [HR]=2.05; 95%CI: 
1.1-4.0) and use of benzodiazepines (HR=2.44; 95%CI: 1.2-5.0) at baseline were 
independent predictors of incident suicidal ideation, whereas a previous suicide 
attempt was not predictive.
LIMITATIONS: As suicidal ideation was assessed by only one item, and 
participants were a selection of all HD mutation carriers, the prevalence of 
suicidal ideation was likely underestimated.
CONCLUSIONS: Suicidal ideation in HD frequently occurs. Assessment of suicidal 
ideation is a priority in mutation carriers with a depressed mood and in those 
using benzodiazepines.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2013.06.001
PMID: 23876196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3169. Clin Pract Epidemiol Ment Health. 2013 Jun 14;9:88-95. doi: 
10.2174/1745017901309010088. Print 2013.

Epidemiology of early-onset dementia: a review of the literature.

Vieira RT(1), Caixeta L, Machado S, Silva AC, Nardi AE, Arias-Carrión O, Carta 
MG.

Author information:
(1)Dementia Outpatient Unit, Hospital of the Clinics, Federal University of 
Goiás, Brazil.

Presenile Dementia or Early Onset Dementia (EOD) is a public health problem, it 
differs from Senile Dementia, and encloses a significant number of cases; 
nevertheless, it is still poorly understood and underdiagnosed. This study aims 
to review the prevalence and etiology of EOD, comparing EOD with Senile 
Dementia, as well as to show the main causes of EOD and their prevalence in 
population and non-population based studies. The computer-supported search used 
the following databases: Pubmed/Medline, ISI Web of Knowledge and Scielo. The 
search terms were alcohol-associated dementia, Alzheimer's disease, dementia, 
Creutzfeldt-jakob disease, dementia with lewy bodies, early onset dementia, 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration, Huntington's disease, mixed dementia, 
neurodegenerative disorders, Parkinson's disease dementia, presenile dementia, 
traumatic brain injury, vascular dementia. Only papers published in English and 
conducted from 1985 up to 2012 were preferentially reviewed. Neurodegenerative 
diseases are the most common etiologies seen in EOD. Among the general 
population, the prevalence of EOD was found to range between 0 to 700 per 
100.000 habitants in groups of 25-64 years old, with an increasing incidence 
with age. The progression of EOD was found to range between 8.3 to 22.8 new 
cases per 100.000 in those aged under 65 years. Alzheimer's disease (AD) is the 
major etiology, followed by Vascular Dementia (VaD) and Frontotemporal Lobar 
Degeneration (FTLD). A larger number of epidemiological studies to elucidate how 
environmental issues contribute to EOD are necessary, thus, we can collaborate 
in the planning and prevention of services toward dementia patients.

DOI: 10.2174/1745017901309010088
PMCID: PMC3715758
PMID: 23878613


3170. Am J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Jan;22(1):4-13.e1. doi: 
10.1016/j.jagp.2013.02.004. Epub 2013 Jul 20.

Cortical changes associated with depression and antidepressant use in Alzheimer 
and Lewy body dementia: an MRI surface-based morphometric study.

Lebedev AV(1), Beyer MK, Fritze F, Westman E, Ballard C, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Centre for Age-Related Medicine, Stavanger University Hospital, Stavanger, 
Norway. Electronic address: alexander.vl.lebedev@gmail.com.

CONTEXT: Depression is common in dementia, especially in the early stages, with 
important clinical implications, but the etiology is unknown and most likely 
heterogeneous. Antidepressant use in the elderly without dementia has previously 
been shown to be associated with high risks of adverse events and with 
structural brain alterations.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate cortical changes associated with depression and 
antidepressant use in patients with mild Alzheimer's disease (AD) and Lewy body 
dementia (LBD).
METHODS: 74 subjects with mild AD and LBD from geriatric and psychiatry 
outpatient clinics in Western Norway were included. The Montgomery-Asberg 
Depression Rating Scale (MADRS) was used to assess depression. Automatic 
preprocessing using Freesurfer included steps for white and grey matter surface 
reconstruction. The resulting cortical thickness was analyzed using linear 
modeling.
RESULTS: Clusters of depression-associated thinning were found in prefrontal and 
temporal areas. Treatment-associated thinning was observed in the 
parahippocampal region and was significant even after correction for age, sex, 
AD/LBD diagnosis, and MADRS scores.
CONCLUSION: Depression in mild AD and LBD is associated with cortical thinning 
in prefrontal and temporal areas. The findings suggest that depressive symptoms 
in mild dementia could develop due to neurodegeneration in the same neural 
circuits that are critical for depression across different brain disorders. 
Antidepressant use in patients with mild AD and LBD is associated with 
parahippocampal thinning. Taken together with low efficacy of antidepressants in 
cognitively impaired patients and high risks of adverse events, our results 
suggest a need to re-evaluate the treatment approaches for depression and the 
role of antidepressants in patients with dementia.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Geriatric Psychiatry. Published by 
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jagp.2013.02.004
PMID: 23880336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3171. Sleep Med. 2013 Aug;14(8):795-806. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.02.016. Epub 2013 
Jul 22.

Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder: devising controlled active treatment 
studies for symptomatic and neuroprotective therapy--a consensus statement from 
the International Rapid Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder Study Group.

Schenck CH(1), Montplaisir JY, Frauscher B, Hogl B, Gagnon JF, Postuma R, Sonka 
K, Jennum P, Partinen M, Arnulf I, Cochen de Cock V, Dauvilliers Y, Luppi PH, 
Heidbreder A, Mayer G, Sixel-Döring F, Trenkwalder C, Unger M, Young P, Wing YK, 
Ferini-Strambi L, Ferri R, Plazzi G, Zucconi M, Inoue Y, Iranzo A, Santamaria J, 
Bassetti C, Möller JC, Boeve BF, Lai YY, Pavlova M, Saper C, Schmidt P, Siegel 
JM, Singer C, St Louis E, Videnovic A, Oertel W.

Author information:
(1)Minnesota Regional Sleep Disorders Center, Department of Psychiatry, Hennepin 
County Medical Center and University of Minnesota Medical School, Minneapolis, 
MN, USA. schen010@umn.edu

Erratum in
    Sleep Med. 2014 Jan;15(1):157.

OBJECTIVES: We aimed to provide a consensus statement by the International Rapid 
Eye Movement Sleep Behavior Disorder Study Group (IRBD-SG) on devising 
controlled active treatment studies in rapid eye movement sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD) and devising studies of neuroprotection against Parkinson disease 
(PD) and related neurodegeneration in RBD.
METHODS: The consensus statement was generated during the fourth IRBD-SG 
symposium in Marburg, Germany in 2011. The IRBD-SG identified essential 
methodologic components for a randomized trial in RBD, including potential 
screening and diagnostic criteria, inclusion and exclusion criteria, primary and 
secondary outcomes for symptomatic therapy trials (particularly for melatonin 
and clonazepam), and potential primary and secondary outcomes for eventual 
trials with disease-modifying and neuroprotective agents. The latter trials are 
considered urgent, given the high conversion rate from idiopathic RBD (iRBD) to 
Parkinsonian disorders (i.e., PD, dementia with Lewy bodies [DLB], multiple 
system atrophy [MSA]).
RESULTS: Six inclusion criteria were identified for symptomatic therapy and 
neuroprotective trials: (1) diagnosis of RBD needs to satisfy the International 
Classification of Sleep Disorders, second edition, (ICSD-2) criteria; (2) 
minimum frequency of RBD episodes should preferably be ⩾2 times weekly to allow 
for assessment of change; (3) if the PD-RBD target population is included, it 
should be in the early stages of PD defined as Hoehn and Yahr stages 1-3 in Off 
(untreated); (4) iRBD patients with soft neurologic dysfunction and with 
operational criteria established by the consensus of study investigators; (5) 
patients with mild cognitive impairment (MCI); and (6) optimally treated 
comorbid OSA. Twenty-four exclusion criteria were identified. The primary 
outcome measure for RBD treatment trials was determined to be the Clinical 
Global Impression (CGI) efficacy index, consisting of a four-point scale with a 
four-point side-effect scale. Assessment of video-polysomnographic (vPSG) 
changes holds promise but is costly and needs further elaboration. Secondary 
outcome measures include sleep diaries; sleepiness scales; PD sleep scale 2 
(PDSS-2); serial motor examinations; cognitive indices; mood and anxiety 
indices; assessment of frequency of falls, gait impairment, and apathy; fatigue 
severity scale; and actigraphy and customized bed alarm systems. Consensus also 
was established for evaluating the clinical and vPSG aspects of RBD. End points 
for neuroprotective trials in RBD, taking lessons from research in PD, should be 
focused on the ultimate goal of determining the performance of disease-modifying 
agents. To date no compound with convincing evidence of disease-modifying or 
neuroprotective efficacy has been identified in PD. Nevertheless, iRBD patients 
are considered ideal candidates for neuroprotective studies.
CONCLUSIONS: The IRBD-SG provides an important platform for developing 
multinational collaborative studies on RBD such as on environmental risk factors 
for iRBD, as recently reported in a peer-reviewed journal article, and on 
controlled active treatment studies for symptomatic and neuroprotective therapy 
that emerged during the 2011 consensus conference in Marburg, Germany, as 
described in our report.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.02.016
PMCID: PMC8783206
PMID: 23886593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3172. Neuropathology. 2014 Feb;34(1):77-82. doi: 10.1111/neup.12053. Epub 2013 Jul 29.

TDP-43 pathology in polyglutamine diseases: with reference to amyotrphic lateral 
sclerosis.

Toyoshima Y(1), Takahashi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, Brain Research Institute, University of Niigata, 
Niigata, Japan.

A nuclear protein, transactivation response (TAR) DNA binding protein 43 kDa 
(TDP-43), is the major component of neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions (NCIs) in 
frontotemporal lobar degeneration with ubiquitin inclusions (FTLD-U) and 
sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (SALS). While initially thought to be 
relatively specific to FTLD-U and ALS, TDP-43 pathology has now been detected in 
a number of other neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer's disease and 
Parkinson's disease. In such tauopathies and α-synucleinopathies, occurrence of 
TDP-43-positive neuronal cytoplasmic inclusions may be associated with other 
distinct molecular pathologic processes primarily involving their own 
pathological proteins, tau and α-synuclein, respectively (secondary TDP-43 
proteinopathies). On the other hand, in several polyglutamine (polyQ) diseases, 
TDP-43 appears to play an important pathomechanistic role. Interestingly, 
intermediate-length polyQ expansions (27-33 Qs) in ataxin 2, the causative gene 
of spinocerebellar ataxia type 2, have recently been reported to be a genetic 
risk factor for SALS. Here, with a review of the literature, we discuss the 
relationship between ALS and polyQ diseases from the viewpoint of TDP-43 
neuropathology.

© 2013 Japanese Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/neup.12053
PMID: 23889603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3173. Sleep Med. 2013 Oct;14(10):1035-7. doi: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.04.018. Epub 2013 
Jul 25.

Rapid eye movement sleep behavior disorder in treatment-naïve Parkinson disease 
patients.

Plomhause L(1), Dujardin K, Duhamel A, Delliaux M, Derambure P, Defebvre L, 
Monaca Charley C.

Author information:
(1)EA 4559, Lille Nord de France University, Lille, France; Department of 
Clinical Neurophysiology, Lille University Medical Center, Lille, France.

Comment in
    Sleep Med. 2013 Oct;14(10):931-3.

OBJECTIVE: Rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD) is a risk 
factor for dementia in Parkinson disease (PD) patients. The objectives of our 
study were to prospectively evaluate the frequency of RBD in a sample of 
treatment-naïve, newly diagnosed PD patients and compare sleep characteristics 
and cognition in RBD and non-RBD groups.
METHODS: Fifty-seven newly diagnosed PD patients were consecutively recruited in 
a university medical center. All patients underwent two overnight 
polysomnography (PSG) sessions and were diagnosed with RBD according to the 
International Classification of Sleep Disorders, Second Revision criteria. 
Daytime sleepiness was measured in a multiple sleep latency test (MSLT). 
Cognition was assessed in a standard neuropsychologic examination.
RESULTS: Seventeen PD patients (30%) met the criteria for RBD. The RBD patients 
and non-RBD patients did not significantly differ in mean age, gender ratio, 
disease duration, motor symptom subtype and severity, total sleep time, 
percentage of REM sleep, apnea-hypopnea index, mean oxygen saturation, and 
importantly cognitive performance. However, non-RBD patients had a significantly 
shorter mean daytime sleep latency than RBD patients (15 vs. 18 min, 
respectively; P=.014).
CONCLUSION: A high frequency of RBD was found in our sample of 57 newly 
diagnosed PD patients. At this stage in the disease, RBD was not found to be 
associated with other sleep disorders or cognitive decline. Follow-up is needed 
to assess the risk for developing dementia in early-stage PD patients with RBD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.sleep.2013.04.018
PMID: 23890957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3174. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Nov;19(11):1009-12. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.07.003. Epub 2013 Jul 26.

A predictive model of neurodegeneration in idiopathic REM-sleep behavior 
disorder.

de la Fuente-Fernández R(1).

Author information:
(1)Section of Neurology, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de Ferrol (CHUF), 
Hospital A. Marcide, 15405 Ferrol, Spain. Electronic address: 
rfuente@medynet.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether Parkinson's disease (PD) and dementia are 
competing risks in subjects with idiopathic rapid-eye-movement sleep behavior 
disorder (RBD).
METHODS: The number of incidental PD cases observed in 11 longitudinal RBD 
studies was compared with the corresponding expected number as estimated by a 
simple mathematical model based on population parameters for PD age-of-onset.
RESULTS: The expected number of incidental PD cases exceeded observed PD cases 
(p-value < 0.001) but was in agreement with the sum of observed PD cases and 
observed mild cognitive impairment/dementia cases (p-value = 0.34). Sensitivity 
analyses confirmed the results.
CONCLUSION: In the RBD population, PD and dementia cases are competing risks, 
suggesting that alpha-synuclein pathology occurs simultaneously in substantia 
nigra and neocortex. This observation has implications for the design and 
analysis of trials of neuroprotection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.07.003
PMID: 23891697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3175. Neurology. 2013 Aug 27;81(9):833-40. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a2cbd1. Epub 
2013 Jul 26.

Risk factors for dementia with Lewy bodies: a case-control study.

Boot BP(1), Orr CF, Ahlskog JE, Ferman TJ, Roberts R, Pankratz VS, Dickson DW, 
Parisi J, Aakre JA, Geda YE, Knopman DS, Petersen RC, Boeve BF.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Mayo Clinic College of Medicine, Rochester MN, 
Scottsdale, AZ, USA.

Comment in
    Neurology. 2013 Aug 27;81(9):838.
    Neurology. 2014 Apr 15;82(15):1384-5.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the risk factors associated with dementia with Lewy 
bodies (DLB).
METHODS: We identified 147 subjects with DLB and sampled 2 sex- and age-matched 
cognitively normal control subjects for each case. We also identified an 
unmatched comparison group of 236 subjects with Alzheimer disease (AD). We 
evaluated 19 candidate risk factors in the study cohort.
RESULTS: Compared with controls, subjects with DLB were more likely to have a 
history of anxiety (odds ratio; 95% confidence interval) (7.4; 3.5-16; p < 
0.0001), depression (6.0; 3.7-9.5; p < 0.0001), stroke (2.8; 1.3-6.3; p = 0.01), 
a family history of Parkinson disease (PD) (4.6; 2.5-8.6; p < 0.0001), and carry 
APOE ε4 alleles (2.2; 1.5-3.3; p < 0.0001), but less likely to have had cancer 
(0.44; 0.27-0.70; p = 0.0006) or use caffeine (0.29; 0.14-0.57; p < 0.0001) with 
a similar trend for alcohol (0.65; 0.42-1.0; p = 0.0501). Compared with subjects 
with AD, subjects with DLB were younger (72.5 vs 74.9 years, p = 0.021) and more 
likely to be male (odds ratio; 95% confidence interval) (5.3; 3.3-8.5; p < 
0.0001), have a history of depression (4.3; 2.4-7.5; p < 0.0001), be more 
educated (2.5; 1.1-5.6; p = 0.031), have a positive family history of PD (5.0; 
2.4-10; p < 0.0001), have no APOE ε4 alleles (0.61; 0.40-0.93; p = 0.02), and to 
have had an oophorectomy before age 45 years (7.6; 1.5-39; p = 0.015).
CONCLUSION: DLB risk factors are an amalgam of those for AD and PD. Smoking and 
education, which have opposing risk effects on AD and PD, are not risk factors 
for DLB; however, depression and low caffeine intake, both risk factors for AD 
and PD, increase risk of DLB more strongly than in either.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a2cbd1
PMCID: PMC3908463
PMID: 23892702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3176. Neurology. 2013 Aug 27;81(9):801-7. doi: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a05ba5. Epub 2013 
Jul 26.

Cognitive impairment and PD patients' capacity to consent to research.

Karlawish J(1), Cary M, Moelter ST, Siderowf A, Sullo E, Xie S, Weintraub D.

Author information:
(1)University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA. 
Jason.Karlawish@uphs.upenn.edu

Comment in
    Neurology. 2013 Aug 27;81(9):780-1.
    Neurology. 2013 Aug 27;81(9):e62-4.

OBJECTIVE: To examine how cognitive impairment affects Parkinson disease (PD) 
patients' research consent capacity.
METHODS: A cross-sectional study of 90 patients with PD, divided using Mattis 
Dementia Rating Scale-2 scores into 3 groups of 30 (normal, borderline, and 
impaired), and 30 neurologically normal older adults completed 2 capacity 
interviews (an early-phase randomized and controlled drug trial and a 
sham-controlled surgical implantation of genetic tissue) using the MacArthur 
Competence Assessment Tool for Clinical Research. Expert clinicians used the 
interviews to classify the patients as either capable or not capable of 
providing their own informed consent. These judgments were compared with 
performance on the Montreal Cognitive Assessment (MoCA) and the Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE).
RESULTS: Cognitively normal PD patients typically scored well on the capacity 
measures. In contrast, patients with impaired cognition were not capable of 
providing their own informed consent: 17% (5/30) on the drug trial and 3% (1/30) 
on the surgery trial were judged capable. Patients with borderline impairment 
showed adequate performance on measures of appreciation and reasoning, but 
impaired performance on understanding the drug trial compared with normal 
controls and normal PD patients, and on understanding the surgery trial compared 
with normal controls. Sixty-seven percent (20/30) on the drug trial and 57% 
(17/30) on the surgery trial were judged capable of consent. Receiver operating 
characteristic analyses showed that the MMSE and MoCA could detect the 
likelihood of impaired capacity, with the MoCA demonstrating greater 
sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: PD patients with borderline cognitive impairment have impairments 
in their decisional capacity. The MoCA may be useful to identify the patients at 
risk of impaired capacity.

DOI: 10.1212/WNL.0b013e3182a05ba5
PMCID: PMC3908465
PMID: 23892706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3177. Genome Biol. 2013 Jul 29;14(7):R78. doi: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-7-r78.

A blood based 12-miRNA signature of Alzheimer disease patients.

Leidinger P, Backes C, Deutscher S, Schmitt K, Mueller SC, Frese K, Haas J, 
Ruprecht K, Paul F, Stähler C, Lang CJ, Meder B, Bartfai T, Meese E, Keller A.

Comment in
    Genome Biol. 2013;14(7):125.

BACKGROUND: Alzheimer disease (AD) is the most common form of dementia but the 
identification of reliable, early and non-invasive biomarkers remains a major 
challenge. We present a novel miRNA-based signature for detecting AD from blood 
samples.
RESULTS: We apply next-generation sequencing to miRNAs from blood samples of 48 
AD patients and 22 unaffected controls, yielding a total of 140 unique mature 
miRNAs with significantly changed expression levels. Of these, 82 have higher 
and 58 have lower abundance in AD patient samples. We selected a panel of 12 
miRNAs for an RT-qPCR analysis on a larger cohort of 202 samples, comprising not 
only AD patients and healthy controls but also patients with other CNS 
illnesses. These included mild cognitive impairment, which is assumed to 
represent a transitional period before the development of AD, as well as 
multiple sclerosis, Parkinson disease, major depression, bipolar disorder and 
schizophrenia. miRNA target enrichment analysis of the selected 12 miRNAs 
indicates an involvement of miRNAs in nervous system development, neuron 
projection, neuron projection development and neuron projection morphogenesis. 
Using this 12-miRNA signature, we differentiate between AD and controls with an 
accuracy of 93%, a specificity of 95% and a sensitivity of 92%. The 
differentiation of AD from other neurological diseases is possible with 
accuracies between 74% and 78%. The differentiation of the other CNS disorders 
from controls yields even higher accuracies.
CONCLUSIONS: The data indicate that deregulated miRNAs in blood might be used as 
biomarkers in the diagnosis of AD or other neurological diseases.

DOI: 10.1186/gb-2013-14-7-r78
PMCID: PMC4053778
PMID: 23895045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3178. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Nov;19(11):986-90. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.06.017. Epub 2013 Jul 27.

Impaired financial abilities in Parkinson's disease patients with mild cognitive 
impairment and dementia.

Martin RC(1), Triebel KL, Kennedy RE, Nicholas AP, Watts RL, Stover NP, Brandon 
M, Marson DC.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL, 
USA; Alzheimer's Disease Research Center, University of Alabama at Birmingham, 
Birmingham, AL, USA.

PURPOSE: Financial capacity (FC) is an instrumental activity of daily living 
(IADL) critical to independent functioning and sensitive to cognitive impairment 
in dementia. Little is known about FC in cognitively impaired patients with 
Parkinson's disease (PD). The present study investigated FC in PD patients with 
prodromal and clinical dementia.
METHODS: Participants were 20 older controls and 35 PD patients who met 
consensus criteria for either mild cognitive impairment (PD-MCI, n = 18) or PD 
dementia (PDD, n = 17). FC was assessed using a standardized performance based 
measure consisting of 9 domain and two global scores (Financial Capacity 
Instrument; FCI) (1). FCI domain and global performance scores were compared 
across groups. Capacity impairment ratings (no impairment, mild/moderate 
impairment, severe impairment) were calculated for each PD patient's domain and 
global scores.
RESULTS: Relative to controls, PD-MCI patients were impaired on both FCI global 
scores and domains of basic monetary skills, financial concepts, and investment 
decision-making. Relative to both controls and PD-MCI patients, PDD patients 
were impaired on virtually all FCI variables. With respect to impairment 
ratings, greater than 50% of PD-MCI patients and greater than 90% of PDD 
patients were classified as either mild/moderate or severely impaired on the two 
FCI global scores.
CONCLUSIONS: Impairment of financial capacity is already present in PD-MCI and 
is advanced in PDD. Complex cognitively-mediated IADLs such as financial 
capacity appear to be impaired early in the course of PD dementia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.06.017
PMCID: PMC4652594
PMID: 23899743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3179. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 Jan;121(1):59-69. doi: 10.1007/s00702-013-1070-5. 
Epub 2013 Jul 31.

The diagnostic utility of EEG in early-onset dementia: a systematic review of 
the literature with narrative analysis.

Micanovic C(1), Pal S.

Author information:
(1)College of Medicine and Veterinary Medicine, University of Edinburgh, 
Edinburgh, UK.

Early-onset dementia (EOD) is characterized by functionally impairing 
deterioration in memory, language, personality or visuospatial skills emerging 
under the age of 65. Cerebral functioning can be assessed by visual 
electroencephalography (EEG) interpretation. The aim of this systematic review 
is to evaluate the diagnostic utility of visual EEG in EOD focusing on 
Alzheimer's disease (AD), vascular dementia (VAD), dementia with Lewy bodies 
(DLB), and frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Medline, Embase, Scopus, Web of 
Knowledge, and Google Scholar were systematically searched for studies where 
EEGs were included in the diagnostic evaluation of patients with dementia under 
the age of 65. Each paper was quality assessed and the results grouped according 
to dementia cause with a narrative summary. 4,157 papers were screened, 12 
studies met the eligibility criteria with a total of 965 patients. An abnormal 
EEG was common to all causes of EOD. EEG abnormalities are more severe in 
early-onset AD patients. EEG severity grade is independent of disease duration. 
Slow wave activity is common to all dementias, but is most prominent in DLB. 
Frontal intermittent rhythmic delta activity could be considered as supportive 
for the diagnosis of DLB as can a Grand Total EEG score of over 9.5. EEG is 
usually normal in FTD. Focal changes can be seen in advanced VAD. Studies 
employed small patient groups, varying diagnostic criteria, and only a minority 
of patient diagnoses was pathologically confirmed. EEG may be useful as an 
adjunct in the diagnosis of DLB and AD. Further prospective well-powered studies 
are required to investigate diagnostic utility more robustly.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-013-1070-5
PMID: 23900731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3180. Int Psychogeriatr. 2013 Nov;25(11):1867-76. doi: 10.1017/S1041610213001300. Epub 
2013 Aug 2.

Incidence of dementia: evidence for an effect modification by gender. The ILSA 
Study.

Noale M(1), Limongi F, Zambon S, Crepaldi G, Maggi S; ILSA Working Group.

Collaborators: Scafato E, Farchi G, Galluzzo L, Gandin C, Capurso A, Panza F, 
Solfrizzi V, Lepore V, Livrea P, Motta L, Carnazzo G, Motta M, Bentivegna P, 
Bonaiuto S, Cruciani G, Postacchini D, Inzitari D, Amaducci L, Di Carlo A, 
Baldereschi M, Gandolfo C, Conti M, Canal N, Franceschi M, Scarlato G, Candelise 
L, Scapini E, Rengo F, Abete P, Cacciatore F, Enzi G, Battistin L, Sergi G, 
Crepaldi G, Maggi S, Minicuci N, Noale M, Grigoletto F, Perissinotto E, Carbonin 
P.

Author information:
(1)CNR -Institute of Neuroscience, Aging Branch, Via Giustiniani 2, 35128 
Padova, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Gender differences for incidence of dementia among elderly people 
have been usually investigated considering gender as a predictor and not as a 
stratification variable.
METHODS: Analyses were based on data collected by the Italian Longitudinal Study 
on Aging (ILSA), which enrolled 5,632 participants aged 65-84 years between 1992 
and 2000. During a median follow-up of 7.8 years, there were 194 cases of 
incident dementia in the participants with complete data. Cox proportional 
hazard models for competing risks, stratified by sex, were defined to determine 
risk factors in relation to developing dementia.
RESULTS: The incidence rate of dementia increased from 5.57/1,000 person-years 
at 65-69 years of age to 30.06/1,000 person-years at 80-84 years. Cox 
proportional hazard models for competing risks of incidence of dementia and 
death revealed that, among men, significant risk factors were heart failure, 
Parkinson's disease, family history of dementia, mild depressive symptomatology 
and age, while triglycerides were associated with a lower risk of developing 
dementia. Significant risk factors in women were age, both mild and severe 
depressive symptomatology, glycemia ≥109 mg/dL, and a BMI < 24.1 kg/m². Even as 
little as three years of schooling was found to be a significant protective 
factor against the incidence of dementia only for women.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that there is an effect modification by gender 
in our study population in relation to the association between low education 
level, lipid profile, BMI, and glycemia and dementia.

DOI: 10.1017/S1041610213001300
PMID: 23905558 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3181. Rambam Maimonides Med J. 2012 Oct 31;3(4):e0026. doi: 10.5041/RMMJ.10092. Print 
2012 Oct.

Cognitive decline and dementia in the oldest-old.

Kravitz E(1), Schmeidler J, Beeri MS.

Author information:
(1)The Joseph Sagol Neuroscience Center, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, 
Israel; ; Parkinson's Disease and Movement Disorders Clinic, Department of 
Neurology, Sheba Medical Center, Ramat Gan, Israel; and.

The oldest-old are the fastest growing segment of the Western population. Over 
half of the oldest-old will have dementia, but the etiology is yet unknown. Age 
is the only risk factor consistently associated with dementia in the oldest-old. 
Many of the risk and protective factors for dementia in the young elderly, such 
as ApoE genotype, physical activity, and healthy lifestyle, are not relevant for 
the oldest-old. Neuropathology is abundant in the oldest-old brains, but 
specific pathologies of Alzheimer's disease (AD) or vascular dementia are not 
necessarily correlated with cognition, as in younger persons. It has been 
suggested that accumulation of both AD-like and vascular pathologies, loss of 
synaptic proteins, and neuronal loss contribute to the cognitive decline 
observed in the oldest-old. Several characteristics of the oldest-old may 
confound the diagnosis of dementia in this age group. A gradual age-related 
cognitive decline, particularly in executive function and mental speed, is 
evident even in non-demented oldest-old. Hearing and vision losses, which are 
also prevalent in the oldest-old and found in some cases to precede/predict 
cognitive decline, may mechanically interfere in neuropsychological evaluations. 
Difficulties in carrying out everyday activities, observed in the majority of 
the oldest-old, may be the result of motor or physical dysfunction and of 
neurodegenerative processes. The oldest-old appear to be a select population, 
who escapes major illnesses or delays their onset and duration toward the end of 
life. Dementia in the oldest-old may be manifested when a substantial amount of 
pathology is accumulated, or with a composition of a variety of pathologies. 
Investigating the clinical and pathological features of dementia in the 
oldest-old is of great importance in order to develop therapeutic strategies and 
to provide the most elderly of our population with good quality of life.

DOI: 10.5041/RMMJ.10092
PMCID: PMC3678827
PMID: 23908850


3182. Psychogeriatrics. 2013 Jun;13(2):128-38. doi: 10.1111/psyg.12005.

Dementia with Lewy bodies: early diagnostic challenges.

Fujishiro H(1), Iseki E, Nakamura S, Kasanuki K, Chiba Y, Ota K, Murayama N, 
Sato K.

Author information:
(1)PET/CT Dementia Research Center, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical 
Center; Department of Psychiatry, Juntendo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, 
Japan. fujishiro17@hotmail.co.jp

Comment in
    Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2014 Aug;68(8):652.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is defined pathologically as neurodegeneration 
associated with Lewy bodies (LB). LB-related symptoms, including olfactory 
dysfunction, dysautonomia, and mood and sleep disorders, are increasingly 
recognized as clinical signs that enable the early detection of DLB, because 
these symptoms often antedate dementia by years or even decades. It remains 
unknown if the clinical history of LB-related symptoms is sufficient for the 
prodromal state of DLB to be suspected in memory clinics. We retrospectively 
investigated the clinical courses, including olfactory dysfunction, 
dysautonomia, depression, and rapid eye movement sleep behaviour disorder, of 90 
patients with probable DLB. The timing of LB-related symptoms that preceded or 
followed relative to the onset of memory loss was calculated. LB-related 
symptoms were present in 79 of 90 patients (87.8%) with probable DLB before or 
at the time of memory loss onset. These symptoms preceded the onset of memory 
loss between 1.2 and 9.3 years. We also report on four non-demented patients 
with a clinical history of LB-related symptoms in our memory clinic. All four 
patients showed reduced cardiac [(123) I]-metaiodobenzylguanidine levels. 
Moreover, [(18) F]fluoro-D-glucose positron emission tomography scans revealed 
glucose hypometabolism in the occipital cortex in two patients. One patient 
converted to probable DLB with the development of parkinsonism 2 years after 
major depression was diagnosed. Based on a clinical history of LB-related 
symptoms, we propose a conceptual framework to identify these symptomatic but 
non-demented individuals that led us to suspect the underlying pathophysiology 
of Lewy body disease. Further prospective study is warranted to determine the 
clinical significance of LB-related symptoms in non-demented patients.

© 2013 The Authors. Psychogeriatrics © 2013 Japanese Psychogeriatric Society.

DOI: 10.1111/psyg.12005
PMID: 23909972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3183. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2014 Jan;121(1):33-40. doi: 10.1007/s00702-013-1073-2. 
Epub 2013 Aug 3.

Striatal volume is related to phonemic verbal fluency but not to semantic or 
alternating verbal fluency in early Parkinson's disease.

Ellfolk U(1), Joutsa J, Rinne JO, Parkkola R, Jokinen P, Karrasch M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Logopedics, Abo Akademi University, 20500, 
Turku, Finland, ulla.ellfolk@abo.fi.

Verbal fluency impairments are frequent in Parkinson's disease (PD) and they may 
be present already at early stages. Semantic fluency impairment is associated 
with Parkinson's disease dementia and temporal, frontal and cerebellar cortical 
changes. Few studies have addressed cerebral structural correlates of different 
verbal fluency tasks in early stage PD. We therefore studied gray matter volumes 
of T1-weighted MRI images using voxel-based morphometry in relation to semantic, 
phonemic, and alternating verbal fluency in younger (mean age <65 years), early 
stage (mean disease duration <3 years), non-demented PD patients (n = 28) and 
healthy controls (n = 27). We found a significant association between worse 
phonemic fluency and smaller striatal, namely right caudate gray matter volume 
in the PD group only (family-wise error corrected p = 0.007). Reduced semantic 
fluency was associated with smaller gray matter volumes in left parietal cortex 
(p = 0.037) and at trend level with smaller bilateral cerebellum gray matter 
volume across groups (p = 0.062), but not in the separate PD or control groups. 
There were no significant relationships between alternating fluency and gray 
matter volumes in the whole sample or in the groups separately. The fact that 
phonemic fluency, but not semantic or alternating fluency, was associated with 
caudate gray matter volume at early stage PD suggests that different fluency 
tasks rely on different neural substrates, and that language networks supporting 
semantic search and verbal-semantic switching are unrelated to brain gray matter 
volume at early disease stages in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s00702-013-1073-2
PMCID: PMC3889690
PMID: 23913130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3184. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Oct;70(10):1268-76. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.448.

Analysis of genome-wide association studies of Alzheimer disease and of 
Parkinson disease to determine if these 2 diseases share a common genetic risk.

Moskvina V, Harold D, Russo G, Vedernikov A, Sharma M, Saad M, Holmans P, Bras 
JM, Bettella F, Keller MF, Nicolaou N, Simón-Sánchez J, Gibbs JR, Schulte C, 
Durr A, Guerreiro R, Hernandez D, Brice A, Stefánsson H, Majamaa K, Gasser T, 
Heutink P, Wood N, Martinez M, Singleton AB, Nalls MA, Hardy J, Owen MJ, 
O'Donovan MC, Williams J, Morris HR, Williams NM; IPDGC and GERAD Investigators.

Collaborators: Dillman A, Hernandez DG, Brooks J, Chong S, Cookson MR, Gibbs J, 
Moore M, Keller MF, Nalls MA, Singleton AB, Traynor BJ, Arepalli S, Charlesworth 
G, Plagnol V, Ryten M, Trabzuni D, Guerreiro R, Hernandez DG, Bras JM, Gibbs J, 
Hardy J, Schulte C, Berg D, Brockmann K, Gasser T, Huber H, Sharma M, Sheerin 
UM, Bhatia K, Martinez M, Saad M, Simón-Sánchez J, Bochdanovits Z, Heutink P, 
Rizzu P, Lesage S, Vidailhet M, Brice A, Corvol JC, Curie Pe, Barker R, Hunt SE, 
Gray E, Edkins S, Tashakkori-Ghanbaria A, Barrett J, Deloukasm P, Potter S, 
Ben-Shlomo Y, van Dijk KD, Berendse HW, Velseboer D, de Bie RM, Biffi A, Bloem 
B, van deWarrenburg B, Post B, Riess O, Bonin M, Burn DJ.

IMPORTANCE: Despite Alzheimer disease (AD) and Parkinson disease (PD) being 
clinically distinct entities, there is a possibility of a pathological overlap, 
with some genome-wide association (GWA) studies suggesting that the 2 diseases 
represent a biological continuum. The application of GWA studies to idiopathic 
forms of AD and PD have identified a number of loci that contain genetic 
variants that increase the risk of these disorders.
OBJECTIVE: To assess the genetic overlap between PD and AD by testing for the 
presence of potentially pleiotropic loci in 2 recent GWA studies of PD and AD.
DESIGN: Combined GWA analysis.
SETTING: Data sets from the United Kingdom, Germany, France, and the United 
States.
PARTICIPANTS: Thousands of patients with AD or PD and their controls.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Meta-analysis of GWA studies of AD and PD.
METHODS: To identify evidence for potentially pleiotropic alleles that increased 
the risk for both PD and AD, we performed a combined PD-AD meta-analysis and 
compared the results with those obtained in the primary GWA studies.We also 
tested for a net effect of potentially polygenic alleles that were shared by 
both disorders by performing a polygenic score analysis. Finally, we also 
performed a gene-based association analysis that was aimed at detecting genes 
that harbor multiple disease-causing single-nucleotide polymorphisms, some of 
which confer a risk of PD and some a risk of AD.
RESULTS: Detailed interrogation of the single-nucleotide polymorphism, 
polygenic, and gene-based analyses resulted in no significant evidence that 
supported the presence of loci that increase the risk of both PD and AD.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Our findings therefore imply that loci that increase 
the risk of both PD and AD are not widespread and that the pathological overlap 
could instead be “downstream” of the primary susceptibility genes that increase 
the risk of each disease.

DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.448
PMCID: PMC5978422
PMID: 23921447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: None reported.


3185. J Neurol Sci. 2013 Nov 15;334(1-2):48-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.07.013. Epub 
2013 Jul 26.

A follow up study of non-demented patients with primary visual cortical 
hypometabolism: prodromal dementia with Lewy bodies.

Fujishiro H(1), Iseki E, Kasanuki K, Chiba Y, Ota K, Murayama N, Sato K.

Author information:
(1)PET/CT Dementia Research Center, Juntendo Tokyo Koto Geriatric Medical 
Center, 3-3-20 Shinsuna, Koto-ku, Tokyo 136-0075, Japan; Department of 
Psychiatry, Juntendo University School of Medicine, 3-3-20 Shinsuna, Koto-ku, 
Tokyo 136-0075, Japan. Electronic address: fujishiro17@hotmail.co.jp.

We previously reported non-demented patients with glucose hypometabolism in the 
primary visual cortex (PVC), which is the preferentially affected region in 
patients with dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB). It remains unknown, however, 
whether these patients represent a prodromal DLB state. Eleven non-demented 
patients who attended our memory clinic for more than three years (mean 
follow-up period: 44 ± 5 months) were examined. All the patients had glucose 
hypometabolism in the PVC on [(18)F]-fluoro-d-glucose (FDG) positron emission 
tomography (PET) scans at baseline. Four patients, including one with a clinical 
history of occipital bleeding, exhibited no core or suggestive features of DLB. 
Seven patients reported recurrent nocturnal dream-enactment behavior, which is 
consistent with probable rapid eye movement (REM) sleep behavior disorder (RBD). 
The condition of the patient with occipital bleeding was stable, which is 
consistent with an underlying non-neurodegenerative disorder. Of the remaining 
10 patients, 5 had stable cognitive conditions (non-converters) and 5 exhibited 
progression to dementia (converters). The clinical diagnoses of 4 patients with 
probable RBD were changed to probable DLB. Despite no differences in 
psychological profiles at baseline between non-converters and converters, the 
initial pattern of cortical metabolism differed: converters had lower glucose 
hypometabolism in the parietal and the lateral occipital cortex compared to 
non-converters. The metabolic reduction in the PVC is present in patients with 
prodromal DLB. Moreover, the spatial profiles of reduced glucose metabolism at 
baseline could help to define the distinct prognostic subgroup that has a 
greater risk of conversion to DLB.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2013.07.013
PMID: 23927939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3186. Neurol Res Int. 2013;2013:576091. doi: 10.1155/2013/576091. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

Mild cognitive impairment in Parkinson's disease: a review of current concepts.

Palavra NC(1), Naismith SL, Lewis SJ.

Author information:
(1)Parkinson's Disease Research Clinic, Brain & Mind Research Institute, 
University of Sydney, 94 Mallett Street, Camperdown, NSW 2050, Australia.

Mild Cognitive Impairment in Parkinson's Disease (PD-MCI) is common and may be 
associated with accelerated progression to dementia. Considering the importance 
of this emerging entity, new diagnostic criteria have recently been proposed. 
Early recognition and accurate classification of PD-MCI could offer 
opportunities for novel therapeutic interventions. This review discusses current 
definitions for PD-MCI, the screening tools used, the pattern of cognitive 
deficits observed, and the predictors of cognitive decline and transition to 
Parkinson's Disease Dementia. Emerging biomarkers, which may aid diagnosis, are 
also explored and the role of novel treatment options is considered.

DOI: 10.1155/2013/576091
PMCID: PMC3713320
PMID: 23936650


3187. J Parkinsons Dis. 2013;3(1):1-11. doi: 10.3233/JPD-130175.

Parkinson's disease--the debate on the clinical phenomenology, aetiology, 
pathology and pathogenesis.

Jenner P(1), Morris HR, Robbins TW, Goedert M, Hardy J, Ben-Shlomo Y, Bolam P, 
Burn D, Hindle JV, Brooks D.

Author information:
(1)Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Group, Institute of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, School of Biomedical Sciences, King's College, London, UK. 
peter.jenner@kcl.ac.uk

The definition of Parkinson's disease (PD) is changing with the expansion of 
clinical phenomenology and improved understanding of environmental and genetic 
influences that impact on the pathogenesis of the disease at the cellular and 
molecular level. This had led to debate and discussion with as yet, no general 
acceptance of the direction that change should take either at the level of 
diagnosis or of what should and should not be sheltered under an umbrella of PD. 
This article is one contribution to this on-going discussion. There are two 
different themes running through the article--widening the definition of 
PD/LBD/synucleinopathies and the heterogeneity that exists within PD itself from 
a clinical, pathological and genetic perspective. The conclusion reached is that 
in the future, further diagnostic categories will need to be recognized. These 
are likely to include--Parkinson's syndrome, Parkinson's syndrome likely to be 
Lewy body PD, clinical PD (defined by QSBB criteria), Lewy body disease (PD, 
LBD, REM SBD) and synucleinopathies (including LBD, MSA).

DOI: 10.3233/JPD-130175
PMCID: PMC4078250
PMID: 23938306 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3188. Dement Geriatr Cogn Disord. 2013;36(3-4):211-28. doi: 10.1159/000353892. Epub 
2013 Aug 12.

Pharmacological treatment of dementia: a scoping review of systematic reviews.

van de Glind EM(1), van Enst WA, van Munster BC, Olde Rikkert MG, Scheltens P, 
Scholten RJ, Hooft L.

Author information:
(1)Section of Geriatrics, Department of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical 
Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Until now, multiple reviews on the pharmacological treatment of 
dementia have been published.
METHODS: We performed a scoping review to summarize research findings and to 
identify gaps in the existing literature. We searched the literature and 
assessed the risk of bias of the included reviews. A team of clinical experts 
assessed the fields in which more research is necessary. Fifty-five reviews with 
a low risk of bias were included, most of them concerning the treatment of 
cognitive decline (n = 16) and behavioral symptoms (n = 10) in Alzheimer's 
disease (AD). For cognitive impairment, cholinesterase inhibitors (n = 13) and 
memantine (n = 7) were described most frequently. Little information was found 
about the treatment of depression in dementia.
CONCLUSIONS: For many current treatments, there is sufficient evidence. New 
research should focus on the symptomatic treatment of the earliest and most 
salient complaints in AD as well as on disease-modifying interventions acting at 
the level of the amyloid cascade.

© 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000353892
PMID: 23941762 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3189. Int J Geriatr Psychiatry. 2014 Apr;29(4):392-8. doi: 10.1002/gps.4015. Epub 2013 
Aug 13.

Time until nursing home admission in people with mild dementia: comparison of 
dementia with Lewy bodies and Alzheimer's dementia.

Rongve A(1), Vossius C, Nore S, Testad I, Aarsland D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Haugesund Hospital, Haugesund, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: We studied time until nursing home admission (NHA) in mild dementia 
and predictors for NHA in people with Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) and how it 
compares to Alzheimer's dementia (AD).
METHODS: Kaplan-Meier survival analysis and Cox proportional hazards were 
applied.
RESULTS: Median time until NHA was 1114 days (95% confidence interval [CI] [932, 
1296]). In DLB median time until NHA was 663 days [472, 998]) as compared with 
1336 days (1068, 1606) in AD, p < 0.0005. Predictors of shorter time to NHA in 
the DLB and AD groups in unadjusted analyses were a DLB diagnosis, the use of 
antipsychotic medication, more advanced age, longer duration of dementia 
symptoms prior to diagnosis, living alone, higher reported caregiver distress, 
and more neuropsychiatric symptoms. The use of cholinesterase inhibitors was 
associated with halved risk of NHA in the combined DLB/AD group in the 
unadjusted Cox regression. In adjusted Cox regression in the DLB group, we found 
the use of cholinesterase inhibitors to be associated with reduced risk of NHA 
(HR = 0.24) and the use of antipsychotic medication to be associated with 
increased risk of NHA (HR = 37) during the study period.
CONCLUSION: Patients diagnosed with DLB had nearly 2  years shorter time to NHA 
than those diagnosed with AD. In the DLB group, the use of cholinesterase 
inhibitors was associated with reduced and the use of antipsychotics with 
increased risk of NHA. Future studies should explore whether better 
identification and management of the variety of clinical problems in patients 
diagnosed with DLB can delay NHA.

Copyright © 2013 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

DOI: 10.1002/gps.4015
PMID: 23943275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3190. Curr Neurol Neurosci Rep. 2013 Sep;13(9):377. doi: 10.1007/s11910-013-0377-9.

Cholinergic dysfunction in Parkinson's disease.

Müller ML(1), Bohnen NI.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroimaging, Cognitive, and Mobility Laboratory, Department of 
Radiology, Division of Nuclear Medicine, University of Michigan, 24 Frank Lloyd 
Wright Dr, Box #362, Ann Arbor, MI 48105, USA. mtmuller@med.umich.edu

There is increasing interest in the clinical effects of cholinergic basal 
forebrain and tegmental pedunculopontine complex (PPN) projection degeneration 
in Parkinson's disease (PD). Recent evidence supports an expanded role beyond 
cognitive impairment, including effects on olfaction, mood, REM sleep behavior 
disorder, and motor functions. Cholinergic denervation is variable in PD without 
dementia and may contribute to clinical symptom heterogeneity. Early in vivo 
imaging evidence that impaired cholinergic integrity of the PPN associates with 
frequent falling in PD is now confirmed by human post-mortem evidence. Brainstem 
cholinergic lesioning studies in primates confirm the role of the PPN in 
mobility impairment. Degeneration of basal forebrain cholinergic projections 
correlates with decreased walking speed. Cumulatively, these findings provide 
evidence for a new paradigm to explain dopamine-resistant features of mobility 
impairments in PD. Recognition of the increased clinical role of cholinergic 
system degeneration may motivate new research to expand indications for 
cholinergic therapy in PD.

DOI: 10.1007/s11910-013-0377-9
PMCID: PMC3991467
PMID: 23943367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Martijn L.T.M. Müller, 
PhD1* & Nicolaas I. Bohnen declare that they have no conflict of interest.


3191. Brain Pathol. 2014 Mar;24(2):117-27. doi: 10.1111/bpa.12082. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Convection-enhanced drug delivery to the brain: therapeutic potential and 
neuropathological considerations.

Barua NU(1), Gill SS, Love S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Institute of Clinical Neurosciences, School of 
Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Frenchay Hospital, Bristol, UK.

Convection-enhanced delivery (CED) describes a direct method of drug delivery to 
the brain through intraparenchymal microcatheters. By establishing a pressure 
gradient at the tip of the infusion catheter in order to exploit bulk flow 
through the interstitial spaces of the brain, CED offers a number of advantages 
over conventional drug delivery methods-bypass of the blood-brain barrier, 
targeted distribution through large brain volumes and minimization of systemic 
side effects. Despite showing early promise, CED is yet to fulfill its potential 
as a mainstream strategy for the treatment of neurological disease. Substantial 
research effort has been dedicated to optimize the technology for CED and 
identify the parameters, which govern successful drug distribution. It seems 
likely that successful clinical translation of CED will depend on suitable 
catheter technology being used in combination with drugs with optimal 
physicochemical characteristics, and on neuropathological analysis in 
appropriate preclinical models. In this review, we consider the factors most 
likely to influence the success or failure of CED, and review its application to 
the treatment of high-grade glioma, Parkinson's disease (PD) and Alzheimer's 
disease (AD).

© 2013 International Society of Neuropathology.

DOI: 10.1111/bpa.12082
PMCID: PMC8028869
PMID: 23944716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3192. J Alzheimers Dis. 2013;37(4):769-76. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130413.

Juvenile frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism associated with tau mutation 
G389R.

Chaunu MP(1), Deramecourt V, Buée-Scherrer V, Le Ber I, Brice A, Ehrle N, El 
Hachimi K, Pluot M, Maurage CA, Bakchine S, Buée L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Maison Blanche Hospital, Reims University Hospital, 
Reims, France.

Frontotemporal lobe degeneration includes a large spectrum of neurodegenerative 
disorders. Patients with frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to 
chromosome 17 exhibit heterogeneity in both clinical and neuropathological 
features. Here, we report the case of a young patient with a G389R mutation. 
This teenager girl was 17 years old when she progressively developed severe 
behavioral disturbances. First, she was considered to be suffering from atypical 
depression. After 2 years, she was referred to the department of neurology. By 
this time, the patient exhibited typical frontotemporal dementia with mild 
extrapyramidal disorders. The main behavioral features included apathy and 
reduced speech output. MRI and SPECT showed a frontotemporal atrophy and 
hypofixation, respectively. She died 7 years after onset. Three relatives on her 
father side had also died after early onset dementia. Genetic testing revealed a 
heterozygous guanine to cytosine mutation at the first base of codon 389 (Exon 
13) of MAPT, the tau gene, resulting in a glycine to arginine substitution, in 
the patient and her non-affected father. Postmortem neuropathological and 
biochemical data indicate a Pick-like tau pathology but with phosphoserine 
262-positive immunoreactivity. This case is remarkable because of the extremely 
early onset of the disease.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-130413
PMID: 23948919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3193. J Alzheimers Dis. 2014;38(1):63-73. doi: 10.3233/JAD-130995.

Using cerebrospinal fluid marker profiles in clinical diagnosis of dementia with 
Lewy bodies, Parkinson's disease, and Alzheimer's disease.

Kaerst L(1), Kuhlmann A, Wedekind D, Stoeck K, Lange P, Zerr I.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Clinical Dementia Center, University Medical Center, 
Georg-August University, Göttingen, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is difficult to differentiate from 
other neuro-degenerative diseases. Patients are often mistaken to suffer from 
Parkinson's disease (PD) or Alzheimer's disease (AD) because of the overlapping 
clinical appearances concerning cognition and movement.
OBJECTIVE: We investigated the possibility for a valid differential diagnosis 
using cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) biomarkers.
METHODS: In the context of a large retrospective study, we analyzed data of 
patients suffering from degenerative, ischemic, or inflammatory CNS (central 
nervous system) diseases and identified those with DLB (n = 34), PD (n = 37), 
and AD (n = 47) for further analyses.
RESULTS: We detected abnormalities in the CSF profiles of those patients with 
DLB while using a combination of decreased amyloid-β (Aβ)42 and increased tau 
levels. By stratification of data by disease severity, we observed a high 
sensitivity of this combination especially in the subgroup of patients with 
advanced stages, while the sensitivity in early forms was lower. In addition, 
with clinical deterioration, the abnormalities in the CSF profile became more 
pronounced.
CONCLUSION: We conclude that DLB can be distinguished from PD, in spite of both 
being synucleinopathies, by CSF profiles using neurodegenerative marker 
analysis. The pathophysiology of increased tau and decreased Aβ levels in those 
conditions has to be elucidated further, since both proteins are known to be 
involved in the pathogenesis of AD, but no clear explanation has been postulated 
for DLB yet.

DOI: 10.3233/JAD-130995
PMID: 23948928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3194. Science. 2013 Aug 16;341(6147):722-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1243619.

Epidemiology. Paths from pesticides to Parkinson's.

Kamel F(1).

Author information:
(1)Epidemiology Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, 
Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA. kamel@niehs.nih.gov

DOI: 10.1126/science.1243619
PMID: 23950519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3195. Gene. 2013 Nov 1;530(1):155-7. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.073. Epub 2013 Aug 
18.

Dementia from the ABCD1 mutation c.1415-1416delAG in a female carrier.

Finsterer J(1), Lässer S, Stöphasius E.

Author information:
(1)Krankenanstalt Rudolfstiftung, Vienna, Austria. Electronic address: 
fifigs1@yahoo.de.

OBJECTIVES: Progressive dementia is a rare phenotypic feature of female X-ALD 
carriers. Even rarer is the additional presence of further risk factors for 
dementia, such as diabetes, hypothyroidism, and hepatopathy. We report a unique 
female X-ALD carrier presenting with severe, progressive dementia, 
paraspasticity, sphincteric dysfunction, and multisystem disease.
CASE REPORT: A 79 years-old female with a history of strumectomy, diabetes, 
hepatopathy, hypothyroidism, arterial hypertension, hiatal hernia, left retinal 
ablation, ovariectomy, hysterectomy, osteoporosis, bilateral hip endoprosthesis, 
and neurogenic bladder dysfunction developed slowly progressive cognitive 
decline since age of 77 years. She had been identified as a female carrier of 
X-ALD in 12/2010 upon a family screening. At age of 79 years she presented with 
severe dementia, anxiety, unsteadiness, helplessness, hypertelorism, exaggerated 
patella tendon reflexes, reduced Achilles tendon reflexes, club feet, 
contractures of the ankles, the knees, and the hips, and the inability to stay 
or walk. Cerebral CT showed diffuse atrophy, demyelination periventricularly, 
small lacunas in the basal ganglia, and small calcifications of the basal 
ganglia and the temporal lobe on the right side. Differential diagnoses of 
dementia were considered but were all excluded upon the clinical presentation, 
blood chemical investigations, imaging studies, and the pattern of 
neuropsychological deficits.
CONCLUSIONS: With progression of the disease manifesting X-ALD carriers may 
develop progressive severe dementia, severe paraspasticity, and sphincteric 
dysfunction. Female carriership of X-ALD can be a differential diagnosis of 
dementia.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.07.073
PMID: 23962690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3196. Clin Neurol Neurosurg. 2013 Oct;115(10):2103-7. doi: 
10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.07.027. Epub 2013 Aug 18.

The association between non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease and age at 
onset.

Zhou MZ(1), Gan J, Wei YR, Ren XY, Chen W, Liu ZG.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong, University, 
School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

OBJECTIVE: Age at onset is likely to be related to a wide range of problems in 
Parkinson's disease (PD), including cardinal motor features, motor complications 
and non-motor symptoms (NMS). This study investigated the effect of the age at 
onset on NMS.
METHODS: Two hundred and thirty patients were examined and classified into one 
of three groups based on age at onset: early onset PD (EOPD) group (<45 years), 
middle-age onset group (45-64 years) and old-age onset group (≥65 years). The 
trends relating to NMS were compared across the three groups. The EOPD and 
old-age onset groups were separately studied to determine their association to 
the appearance of non-motor features using logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: There were upward trends in the occurrence of dribbling (P=0.009; all P 
values are stated for trend), impaired taste/smelling (P=0.016), constipation 
(P=0.006), urinary urgency (P=0.002), nocturia (P=0.018), hallucinations 
(P=0.016) and acting out during dreams (P=0.011) with the increase of age at 
onset. Older age at onset is an independent risk factor for dementia (OR=8.42, 
CI 3.16-22.44), dribbling (OR=4.14, CI 1.93-8.87), impaired taste/smelling 
(OR=2.23, CI 1.20-4.13), constipation (OR=3.42, CI 1.88-6.24), incomplete bowel 
emptying (OR=2.23, CI 1.19-4.20), urinary urgency (OR=2.58 CI 1.46-4.57), 
nocturia (OR=2.65, CI 1.49-4.71), hallucinations (OR=5.32, CI 1.78-15.97), 
dizziness (OR=3.03, CI 1.59-5.79), falling (OR=3.60, CI 1.67-7.77), insomnia 
(OR=2.29, CI 1.28-4.11), intense vivid dreaming (OR=2.10, CI 1.21-3.66) and 
acting out during dreams (OR=2.23, CI 1.24-4.01).
CONCLUSIONS: PD patients with different ages at onset present clinically 
different symptoms in terms of NMS. Old-age onset PD is characterized by more 
olfactory and sensory symptoms, autonomic symptoms, sleep disorders, dementia 
and psychosis compared to EOPD.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.clineuro.2013.07.027
PMID: 23962754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3197. Parkinsonism Relat Disord. 2013 Nov;19(11):980-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.06.014. Epub 2013 Aug 19.

Predictors of survival in a series of clinically diagnosed progressive 
supranuclear palsy patients.

dell'Aquila C(1), Zoccolella S, Cardinali V, de Mari M, Iliceto G, Tartaglione 
B, Lamberti P, Logroscino G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Neurosciences and Organs of Senses, 
University of Bari, Piazza Giulio Cesare, 9, 70124 Bari, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Investigations into prognostic factors in progressive supranuclear 
palsy have shown conflicting results. We performed a retrospective study in 
order to identify clinical predictors of survival in clinically diagnosed 
progressive supranuclear palsy patients referred to our centre.
METHODS: Data on medical history, survival and five clinical disability 
milestones (inability to walk unassisted, unintelligible speech, severe 
dysphagia, dementia and institutionalization) were collected from outpatients' 
medical records and by a telephone interview to caregivers. Patients were 
subdivided into Richardson's syndrome and PSP-Parkinsonism according to symptoms 
during the first 2 years of disease. Survival was analyzed by the Kaplan-Meier 
method and Cox regression analysis.
RESULTS: Forty-three consecutive patients were enrolled (86% Richardson's 
syndrome). Motor disturbances were the most frequent symptoms of onset. During 
the follow-up, 60.5% of patients died after a median survival of 7.1 years 
(2.2-18). Older age at onset (>63) (HR 2.8; 95% CI: 1.3-5.7; p = 0.007), early 
dysphagia (HR 2.3; 95% CI: 1-5.3; p = 0.05) and early cognitive deficits (HR 
3.6; 95% CI: 1.6-8.2; p = 0.002) were predictors of shorter survival. Compared 
to PSP-Parkinsonism patients, Richardson's syndrome patients had shorter 
survival and higher mortality risk although not statistically significant (HR 3 
95% CI: 0.9-9.9; p = 0.07). Seventy-seven percent of patients developed severe 
disability during follow-up: shorter time to the first clinical disability 
milestone predicted shorter survival (HR 7.8; 95% CI: 2.3-26; p = 0.0008).
CONCLUSIONS: early dysphagia, cognitive impairment, older age at onset, and time 
to disability were predictors of shorter survival; Richardson's syndrome had a 
less favorable course than PSP-Parkinsonism. Clinical milestones should be 
considered as possible endpoints in future clinical trials.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.parkreldis.2013.06.014
PMID: 23968651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3198. Gerontology. 2014;60(1):16-21. doi: 10.1159/000353859. Epub 2013 Aug 17.

Association between frailty and dementia: a population-based study.

Kulmala J(1), Nykänen I, Mänty M, Hartikainen S.

Author information:
(1)Gerontology Research Center and Department of Health Sciences, University of 
Jyväskylä, Finland.

BACKGROUND: Frailty is commonly considered as a syndrome with several symptoms, 
including weight loss, exhaustion, weakness, slow walking speed and physical 
inactivity. It has been suggested that cognitive impairment should be included 
in the frailty index, however the association between frailty and cognition has 
not yet been fully established.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate cross-sectionally whether frailty is associated with 
cognitive impairment or clinically diagnosed dementia in older people.
METHODS: The study included a total of 654 persons aged 76-100 years (mean 82 ± 
4.6). Frailty status of the participants was assessed using the Cardiovascular 
Health Study criteria. Cognitive function was assessed with the Mini-Mental 
State Examination (MMSE). Clinically diagnosed dementia was assessed by 
specialists using diagnostic criteria. The associations between frailty and 
cognition were investigated using logistic regression.
RESULTS: A total of 93 (14%) participants were classified as frail. Cognitive 
impairment (MMSE score <25) was observed among 171 (26%) persons and 134 (21%) 
persons had clinically diagnosed dementia. 97 (15%) persons had Alzheimer's 
disease, 19 (3%) had vascular dementia, 12 (2%) had dementia with Lewy bodies 
and 8 persons (1%) had some other type of dementia. Multivariate logistic 
regression models showed that frail persons were almost 8 times more likely to 
have cognitive impairment (OR 7.8, 95% CI 4.0-15.0), 8 times more likely to have 
some kind of dementia (OR 8.0, 95% CI 4.0-15.9), almost 6 times more likely to 
have vascular dementia (OR 5.6, 95% CI 1.2-25.8) and over 4 times more likely to 
have Alzheimer's disease (OR 4.5, 95% CI 2.1-9.6) than persons who were robust.
CONCLUSION: Frailty is strongly associated with cognitive impairment and 
clinically diagnosed dementia among persons aged 76 and older. It is possible 
that cognitive impairment is a clinical feature of frailty and therefore should 
be included in the frailty definition.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

DOI: 10.1159/000353859
PMID: 23970189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3199. Psychiatry Res. 2013 Dec 30;210(3):694-701. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.07.031. 
Epub 2013 Aug 21.

Pathways to similar executive impairment: comparison of schizophrenia patients 
and healthy aging individuals.

Silver H(1), Bilker WB.

Author information:
(1)Brain Behavior Laboratory, Sha'ar Menashe Mental Health Center, Mobile Post 
Hefer 38814, Israel; Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion Institute of 
Technology, Haifa, Israel. Electronic address: mdsilver@tx.technion.ac.il.

Executive impairment is prominent in schizophrenia, in conditions such as 
Parkinson's disease and dementia and in healthy aging. Identifying processes 
that critically constrain executive function can advance investigation of their 
biological basis and treatment planning. Recent findings that elderly healthy 
individuals showed similar impairment on conditional exclusion task as 
schizophrenia patients raised the question whether similar processes are 
impaired. To test this we compared 56 schizophrenia patients, 57 elderly and 77 
young healthy individuals on three executive tests: conditional exclusion, 
abstraction and inhibition and tests of working memory and psychomotor speed. 
Schizophrenia patients performed worse than elderly healthy on abstraction, 
inhibition and verbal working memory. They were similarly impaired on Penn 
Conditional Exclusion Test (PCET) outcome measures but differed in performance 
characteristics. Schizophrenia patients needed relatively more trials to learn 
the first PCET category than the second or the third. This correlated with other 
cognitive impairments, particularly in working memory. Elderly healthy 
individuals found it most difficult to learn the last category. The two groups 
showed different error patterns. We propose that schizophrenia patients have 
particular difficulty in early (probabilistic) learning ("what to do") while 
aging individuals have selective impairment in executive integration. These 
constitute distinct targets for customized treatment in the two conditions.

© 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2013.07.031
PMID: 23972766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3200. Curr Transl Geriatr Exp Gerontol Rep. 2013 Sep 1;2(3):196-204. doi: 
10.1007/s13670-013-0053-6.

UPDATE ON DEMENTIA WITH LEWY BODIES.

Karantzoulis S(1), Galvin JE(2).

Author information:
(1)Comprehensive Center on Brain Aging and Department of Neurology, New York 
University Langone Medical Center, NY, USA.
(2)Comprehensive Center on Brain Aging and Departments of Neurology and 
Psychiatry, New York University Langone Medical Center, NY, USA.

Dementia with Lewy bodies (DLB) is the second most common form of dementia after 
Alzheimer disease (AD). DLB is characterized pathologically by Lewy body and 
Lewy neuritic pathology, often with variable levels of Alzheimer-type pathology. 
Core clinical features include fluctuating cognition, visual hallucinations, and 
parkinsonism resulting in greater impairments of quality of life, more caregiver 
burden, and higher health-related costs compared with AD. These issues, together 
with a high sensitivity to adverse events with treatment with antipsychotic 
agents, make the need for an early and accurate diagnosis of DLB essential. 
Unfortunately, current consensus criteria are highly specific but lack 
sufficient sensitivity. Use of composite risk scores may improve accuracy of 
clinical diagnosis. Imaging findings, particularly targeting dopaminergic 
systems have shown promise as potential markers to differentiate DLB from AD. A 
combination of non-pharmacologic treatments and pharmacotherapy interventions 
may maximize cognitive function and overall quality of life in DLB patients.

DOI: 10.1007/s13670-013-0053-6
PMCID: PMC4219734
PMID: 25379359


