1. Can Med Assoc J. 1965 Mar 6;92(10):514-6.

FINGERPRINT PATTERNS IN HUNTINGTON'S CHOREA AND PARKINSON'S DISEASE.

BARBEAU A, TRUDEAU JG, COITEUX C.

In the course of a continuing search for means of predicting Huntington's chorea 
before the onset of neurological symptoms, a study of fingerprint patterns was 
undertaken, using the technique employed by Hodges and Simon in the 
investigation of patients with Wilson's disease. Fingerprint patterns of 61 
patients with Huntington's chorea and 50 with Parkinson's disease were compared 
with norms established by Scotland Yard. Although an increased incidence of the 
"whorl" pattern was seen in the left second and third fingers in patients with 
Huntington's chorea, this finding could not be interpreted as having diagnostic 
or prognostic value as it was found also in some normal subjects and in 
occasional cases of Parkinson's disease. The pattern supposedly characteristic 
of Wilson's disease was also seen in persons with Huntington's chorea.

PMCID: PMC1928158
PMID: 14275039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Contemp Neurol Ser. 1975;12:45-70.

Patterns of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Parkinsonism-Dementia on Guam.

Brody JA, Stanhope JM, Kurland LT.

The striking concentration of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonismdementia (PD) among the Chamorro people of Guam has attracted 
attention since the early 1950's. Extensive studies conducted over the past 20 
years have not revealed the causes of these diseases and the reasons for their 
remarkable concentrations on Guam. Approximately 1 in 10 Guamanian deaths over 
age 25 is from ALS, and another 1 in 10 is from PD. ALS still occurs 
approximately 50 times more frequently on Guam than in the continental United 
States. Advances in virologic and biochemical techniques, and long years of 
study, appear to be leading us to a point where some of the problems will be 
resolved. We shall attempt to review the pertinent background information and 
summarize the data and observations up to the present time.

PMID: 1095295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Apr;101(4):287-301. doi: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112097.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam, 1945-1972. I. 
Descriptive epidemiology.

Reed DM, Brody JA.

An overview of the epidemiologic studies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
and parkinsonism-dementia (PD) from 1945 through 1972 is presented. During this 
period 350 cases of ALS were documented. PD, which is apparently unique to the 
native Chamorro population, was not recognized during the early years of the 
study. A total of 213 PD patients have now been seen. The rates of both diseases 
have declined by approximately 50 per cent since 1965. In the early years 
incidence per 100,000 for ALS males approached 60; for females it was about 40. 
For PD males it was about 50; for females it was close to 20. The declines in 
both diseases have occurred in both sexes and at all age groups and no cohort 
phenomenon was observed. Marked geographic differences in the distribution of 
the diseases were observed with southern villages having the highest rates and 
western villages having the lowest rates; the remainder of the island was 
intermediate. Recent declines have been most marked in the southern high-rate 
villages. Chamorros living on the island of Rota have rates similar to those on 
Guam; those on Saipan have lower rates. A possible excess of ALS among Filipino 
residents ofGuam was noted; ALS has not been seen among other ethnic groups. 
Geographic mapping even in high incidence areas did not reveal true clusters or 
foci. Extensive case-control studies did not reveal any patterns of prior 
illness, life-style, or exposures distinguishing patients. A tendency for 
patients to be of somewhat lower socioeconomic level, have less education, eat 
more homegrown foods and raw meats, and more contact with animals was found. No 
Mendelian genetic patterns were observed; males were affected more frequently 
than female for both diseases. Cases did not occur before age 20, reached 
maximum frequency between ages 55 and 65 and there-after declined. Environmental 
factors associated with some aspects of the traditional way of life seem to be 
causally involved, but, since most aspects of the traditional life have changed 
in the past 50 years, the specific factors remain elusive.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112097
PMID: 1124759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Apr;101(4):302-10. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112098.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam, 1945-1972. II. 
Familial and genetic studies.

Reed DM, Torres JM, Brody JA.

The extraordinarily high rate of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD) in the Chamorro linguistic group on Guam suggested a 
genetic etiology for these diseases. Results of three studies are described. Two 
involved comparisons of the rates of disease in relatives and spouses of index 
patients and controls. In the third we examined offspring of doubly affected 
parents, 10 spouse pairs with ALS, 3 spouse pairs with PD and 13 spouse pairs in 
which 1 spouse had ALS and the other PD. Within the limitations of numbers and 
age of offspring, we found a tendency among siblings and offspring of ALS cases 
to have a higher risk than control relatives. Numbers were small and in no 
instance were significant differences encountered. Spouses of patients had at 
least as high risk of developing ALS or PD as any of the groups of blood 
relatives. A slightly higher age-specific rate of ALS and PD occurred in the 
offspring of doubly affected parents. The only group large enough for present 
analysis are 60 offspring of doubly affected ALS parents over the age of 20. 
Thus far only 3 have developed ALS. Within our entire patient population of 350 
ALS cases and 219 PD cases there were 12 instances in which one parent of the 
patient was not Chamorro. In addition there is a consistent two- to threefold 
excess of affected males which could not be accounted for by competitive risks 
of death from other causes among females. While a familial tendency does exist 
these findings and observations are not compatible with any simple Mendelian 
form of inheritance. It is possible that genetic influences affect the 
occurrence of these diseases but our studies suggest that environmental factors 
play at least as important a role.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112098
PMID: 1124760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Exp Med. 1975 Aug 1;142(2):483-94. doi: 10.1084/jem.142.2.483.

RNA-instructed DNA polymerase activity in a cytoplasmic particulate fraction in 
brains from Guamanian patients.

Viola MV, Frazier M, White L, Brody J, Spiegelman S.

Nervous system tissues from a number of patients with idiopathic neurological 
disorders were examined for biochemical evidence of RNA tumor virus infection. 
RNase-sensitive DNA polymerase activity was found in a cytoplasmic particulate 
fraction from two patients with Guamanian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
but not in brains from two normal U.S. individuals. The buoyant density of the 
enzyme-containing fraction was 1.16-1.18 g/ml and could be converted to a denser 
region of the gradient (1.24 g/ml) by treatment with the nonionic surfactant, 
Sterox. The cation and detergent requirements for the endogenous RNase-sensitive 
DNA polymerase reaction were determined. The early (5 min) endogenous reverse 
transcriptase product was analyzed by cesium sulfate gradient centrifugation. 
RNase- and heat-sensitive RNA-DNA hybrids were detected in the product analysis 
of two ALS, one Parkinsonism-dementia (PD) brain, and two brains from 
asymptomatic Chamorros but not in brains from normal U.S. individuals and a 
number of patients with neuro-psychiatric disorders. The DNA product was a 4.5S 
heteropolymer that hybridized more extensively to RNA extracted from the 
enzyme-containing pellet from PD brain as compared to a similar fraction from 
normal U.S. brain. The DNA product appeared to be unrelated to Rausvher or visna 
virus 70S RNA as determined by RNA-[-3H]DNA hybridization.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.142.2.483
PMCID: PMC2189894
PMID: 49390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1976 Apr;39(4):367-74. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.39.4.367.

Acetylcholine and choline in cerebrospinal fluid of patients with Parkinson's 
disease and Huntington's chorea.

Welch MJ, Markham CH, Jenden DJ.

Lumbar cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) acetylcholine (ACh) and choline (Ch) levels 
were measured in patients with Huntington's chorea (N=11), Parkinson's disease 
(N=8), and subjects at risk for Huntington's chorea (N=4), and all three groups 
were found not to differ significantly from normal controls (N=10). The values 
found for lumbar CSF ACh and Ch levels in the normal subjects were comparable 
with previously reported values. The use of physostigmine, a cholinesterase 
inhibitor, in collecting the CSF samples did not appear to make a difference 
with regard to ACh and Ch concentrations. Evidence suggesting a 
ventricular-lumbar gradient, with lumbar CSF Ch concentration being less than 
ventricular CSF Ch concentration, was found. Finally, ACh levels in CSF did not 
correlate with corresponding Ch levels.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.39.4.367
PMCID: PMC492287
PMID: 132512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Clin Invest. 1977 May;59(5):922-32. doi: 10.1172/JCI108714.

Antibodies to human caudate nucleus neurons in Huntington's chorea.

Husby G, Li L, Davis LE, Wedege E, Kokmen E, Williams RC Jr.

Antibodies reacting with neuronal cytoplasmic antigens present in normal human 
caudate and subthalamic nuclei were detected in 37 of 80 probands afflicted with 
Huntington's disease (HD). IgG antibodies were detected by immunofluorescence 
using frozen sections of unfixed normal human and rat brain. Specificity of IgG 
binding was confirmed using pepsin F(ab')2 fragments of IgG isolated from 
positive sera. In vitro complement fixation of IgG antibody was detected in 22 
of 31 sera tested. Neuronal cytoplasmic antigens reacting with positive HD sera 
were diminished after trypsin or RNAase treatment of tissue sections but were 
not removed by DNAase, neuraminidase, EDTA, or dithiothreitol treatment. 
Antibody staining of neurons could be removed after absorption with isolated 
caudate nucleus neurons or by using perchloroacetic acid extracts of caudate 
nucleus. Prevalence of antibody reacting with neuronal cytoplasm was 3% in 60 
normal controls and 6% among a wide variety of patients with diverse 
neurological disorders. However, one-third of 33 patients with Parkinson's 
disease showed presence of antineuronal antibody. Among patients with HD, a 
significant association was noted between duration of clinical disease greater 
than 7 yr and titers of antibody of 1:2 or greater (P less than 0.001). When 115 
family members of HD probands were tested, 30% of unaffected spouses showed 
presence of antineuronal antibody. 23.2% of first-degree relatives at risk for 
developing HD was also positive (P less than 0.001). 10.5% of second-degree 
relatives showed presence of antineuronal antibody. These data may support an 
environmental or infectious factor somehow involved in the ultimate expression 
of HD.

DOI: 10.1172/JCI108714
PMCID: PMC372300
PMID: 140183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Can J Neurol Sci. 1977 May;4(2):81-8.

Slow infections of the central nervous system.

Becker LE.

This review describes the recent advances in slow infections of the nervous 
system emphasizing the pathogenetic aspects of these diseases. A theoretical 
model for the pathogenesis of subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE) is 
proposed, illustrating the factors that may affect host response to the measles 
virus and allow it to persist and produce the panencephalitis. The isolation of 
an oncogenic virus from progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) has 
implications in the consideration of a viral etiology for some brain tumors. The 
agent responsible for the transmissibility of kuru and Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease 
(CJD) remains uncharacterized despite recent interest in viroids and 
abnormalities in replication of cell membranes. The epidemiological data on 
multiple sclerosis suggests an exposure to an infectious agent at an early age 
of life modified by the host response. No specific agent has been consistently 
associated with multiple sclerosis. Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), 
Parkinson's disease, Mollaret's meningitis and Behcet's disease are other 
examples where a virus is suspect but unproven. The ability of viruses to 
persist in the host for months to years has linked many chronic neurologic 
diseases to an infectious agent, enlarging the spectrum of disease caused by 
viruses.

PMID: 322829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Arch Neurol. 1977 Nov;34(11):683-5. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1977.00500230053008.

Cerebrospinal fluid gamma-aminobutyric acid variations in neurological 
disorders.

Enna SJ, Stern LZ, Wastek GJ, Yamamura HI.

Neuropathologically, Huntington's disease is characterized by a profound 
reduction in neuronal cells originating in the corpus striatum and globus 
pallidus. Since one of these cell types utilizes gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) 
as a neurotransmitter, it may be possible to differentially diagnose this 
disorder on the basis of the CSF content of this amino acid. In order to 
determine the validity of this hypothesis, cerebrospinal fluid GABA was 
analyzed, using a recently developed radioreceptor assay procedure and was found 
to be significantly reduced in patients diagnosed as having Huntington's disease 
and also lower in patients with Alzheimer's disease, though no difference was 
noted between Parkinson patients and control subjects. The results suggest that 
analysis of cerebrospinal fluid GABA may have diagnostic, and perhaps 
predictive, value in certain neurological disorders.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1977.00500230053008
PMID: 143928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Acta Med Scand. 1978;203(1-2):75-85. doi: 10.1111/j.0954-6820.1978.tb14835.x.

Factors influencing the occurrence of "on-off" symptoms during long-term 
treatment with L-dopa.

Granérus AK.

"On-off" symptoms were found to have developed in 43 of 85 parkinsonian patients 
who had been treated with L-dopa for five years or more, the risk of such 
symptoms apparently being greater the younger the patient had been at the début 
of the disease and at the start of treatment. The dopa dose had been higher 
throughout the treatment in the patients developing "on-off" symptoms than in 
those maintaining an even effect, and, furthermore, the initial improvement had 
been more marked and dyskinesia had appeared earlier and in a higher frequency. 
The clinical observations in the present studies seemed to be related to some 
pharmacological findings, where different degrees of the nigrostriatal neuron 
degeneration and the efficacy of the remaining neurons could be of importance 
for a varying therapeutic response. It also seemed possible that a higher dopa 
dose could evoke "on-off" symptoms more easily than a lower one in thereto 
predisposed individuals. As the patients maintaining an even symptomatology 
during long-term treatment with L-dopa were older, and in particularly as they 
had dementia in a higher frequency than those developing "on-off" symptoms, the 
possibility of a more widespread neuron damage, influencing the clinical 
manifestation in these patients, had to be taken into consideration.

DOI: 10.1111/j.0954-6820.1978.tb14835.x
PMID: 626117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Encephale. 1979;5(3):219-37.

[Neuropharmacological data on the striatum].

[Article in French]

Allain H, Reymann JM, Bentue Ferrer B, Menault F, Van Den Driessche J.

The striatum constitutes the most voluminous basal ganglia in man. It is issued 
from ganglionic eminences which are very early bound by limbic kernels. If the 
cortical and reticulo-spinal projections have been first described the existence 
of anatomical connexions with the limbic system offers a large number of 
functional possibilities. The knowledge of the distribution of the different 
chemical substances which are present within this structure as well as the 
enzymes necessary for their synthesis and destruction permits to establish a 
chemical mapping, the dopaminergic one being the best known. The dopaminergic 
synaptic function in the striatum helps to understand the respective roles of 
the pre and post-synaptic receptors as well as the mechanisms by which the other 
neuromediators can modulate the dopaminergic activity, the cyclic nucleotides 
being often necessary for this action. These fundamental data subtend the 
mechanism of action of most of the drugs which are involved in extrapyramidal 
phenomenons (neuroleptics, dopaminergic agonists) and allows to put forth 
physiopathological hypothesis on Parkinson disease, Huntington chorea, as well 
as certain induced or spontaneous dyskinetic states. The functions of the 
striatum are then evoked: if the role of this structure in motor control is 
critical, its involvement in complex behaviours is strongly suggested.

PMID: 39737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Acta Neurol Scand. 1979 Mar;59(2-3):80-7. doi: 
10.1111/j.1600-0404.1979.tb02914.x.

Changing epidemiology of Parkinson's disease: predicted effects of levodopa 
treatment.

Marttila RJ, Rinne UK.

Recent studies suggest that levodopa treatment reduces the excess mortality due 
to Parkinson's disease, found to be three times that expected in the general 
population. This will affect the equilibrium state of the epidemiology of 
Parkinson's disease. The predicted increase in prevalence of Parkinson's disease 
was calculated according to two mortality patterns, one the same as expected in 
the general population and the other 1.5 times that expected; the proportional 
increase in prevalence is 1.8 and 1.4, respectively. The predicted increase in 
the duration of the disease if 6.3 or 3.2 years. As a consequence, there will be 
an increase of patients with long-term levodopa treatment difficulties, and with 
Parkinson's disease symptoms not treatable with levodopa, e.g. dementia. This 
seriously warrants the research of new approaches in the treatment of 
Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1979.tb02914.x
PMID: 452843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


13. J Neural Transm Suppl. 1980;(16):111-28. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8582-7_12.

Progressive supranuclear palsy: clinico-pathological and biochemical studies.

Jellinger K, Riederer P, Tomonaga M.

Ten autopsy cases of Progressive Supranuclear Palsy (PSP) are reported. Age at 
onset ranged from 16 to 67 years and the duration of illness 3 to 24 years. The 
clinical features were aggressive mental retardation in 4 cases with early 
onset, paroxysmal dysequilibrium, ophthalmoplegia, rigidity and akinesia, 
pseudobulbar palsy and variable degrees of dementia. Neuropathology showed 
widespread neurofibrillary degeneration associated with system-bound neuronal 
loss and gliosis in subcortical areas, particularly affecting the subthalamic 
nucleus, substantia nigra, brainstem tegmentum and dentate nuclei, with no or 
little involvement of the cerebral cortex. The distribution of the lesions and 
the ultrastructure of the neurofibrillary tangles made of 15 nm straight 
filaments (seen in one case) in PSP are different from postencephalitic 
parkinsonism, Guam Parkinson-dementia complex and brainstem affection in 
(pre)senile dementia. Post-mortem biochemical analysis of two brains disclosed 
severe reduction of tyrosine hydroxylase, the key synthetic enzyme of the 
catecholamine pathway, not only in the nigrostriatal system as seen in 
Parkinson's disease, but in most areas of the brain-stem and limbic system. The 
implication and possible pathogenic and therapeutic significance of these 
biochemical findings are discussed. The etiology of PSP and its nosological 
position within the degenerative extrapyramidal disorders remain unknown.

DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-8582-7_12
PMID: 6107328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Q J Med. 1980;49(195):283-93.

The impact of treatment with levodopa on Parkinson's disease.

Shaw KM, Lees AJ, Stern GM.

The progress of 178 patients with Parkinson's disease who began treatment with 
levodopa between November 1969 and December 1972 is reviewed after six years. 
One hundred and twenty-five patients showed an initial improvement of their 
individual total disability scores exceeding 25 per cent, but after six years of 
sustained treatment only 37 patients still obtained similar benefit. By 1978 
only five patients had maintained their initial improvement compared to 69 
patients after two years therapy; however, 47 patients were still better than 
before treatment. The overall mortality ratio--the ratio of observed to expected 
death rate--for all the patients was 1.45:1. In those patients who unable to 
tolerate levodopa for longer than two years the ratio was 2.38:1; in those who 
were able to tolerate sustained medication, life expectancy was normal (ratio of 
0.91:1 for males and 1.14:1 for females). Involuntary movements were the 
commonest complication of treatment. Three main types were distinguished. Peak 
dose dyskinesias, beginning 20 to 90 minutes after an oral dose and most severe 
midway through the inter-dose period, affected 80 per cent of patients. Early 
morning and end-of-dose dystonia occurred in 20 per cent of patients and 
biphasic dyskinesia--two distinct episodes of involuntary movements within each 
inter-dose period--was the least common pattern affecting 3 per cent of 
patients. Involuntary movements increased in frequency and severity as treatment 
continued. End-of-dose deterioration ('wearing-off' effect of individual doses) 
occurred in 65 per cent of patients: unpredictable oscillations in motor 
performance (the 'on-off' phenomenon) unrelated to the time and dosage of 
levodopa, occurred in 10 per cent. Psychiatric side effects included toxic 
confusional states, visual pseudohallucinations and paranoid psychoses and 
constituted the most frequent reason for stopping medication. Forty (22 per 
cent) of the patients had suffered severe depression before the onset of disease 
and levodopa had no sustained antidepressant effect in this group. After six 
years of treatment with levodopa, 32 per cent of the patients had unequivocal 
dementia.

PMID: 7465763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mech Ageing Dev. 1980 Sep-Oct;14(1-2):253-64. doi: 10.1016/0047-6374(80)90125-6.

Levodopa in the treatment of (pre) senile dementia.

Jellinger K, Flament H, Riederer P, Schmid H, Ambrozi L.

A progressive decrease of dopamine and related enzyme activities and a decline 
in the dopaminergic receptor functions in the striatum and limbic system 
controlling behavior have been observed in senescent brain. These changes 
provide a neurochemical basis for some behavioral and mental disturbances of the 
aged and suggest the possibility of a substitution therapy of neurotransmitter 
deficiency of senile and presenile dementia. Previous reports on the effects of 
levodopa treatment of dementia in parkinsonism and aging have given conflicting 
results. A controlled double-blind study of 6 months' administration of levodopa 
plus decarboxylase inhibitor given at oral doses of 250 mg daily versus placebo 
in twelve patients aged 54--60 years showing initial signs of organic dementia 
was performed. Clinical rating of twelve parameters of organic brain syndrome 
and psychometric studies using three subtests of the HAWIE (digit span, coding B 
test and block design) indicate improvement in the overall scores of organic 
brain syndrome and in particular in the visuospatial functions, visual memory, 
and visual-motor coordination. In general, improvement increased with the 
duration of levodopa treatment. These preliminary data suggest some beneficial 
effect of levodopa treatment in early stages of presenile dementia and thus open 
new therapeutic aspects in neurogerontology.

DOI: 10.1016/0047-6374(80)90125-6
PMID: 7010010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 1980 Sep;43(9):846-8. doi: 10.1136/jnnp.43.9.846.

Dementia associated with Parkinson's disease: a genetic study.

Heston LL.

Relatives of 12 probands who had severe dementia associated with Parkinson's 
disease were studied. A high risk for Parkinson's disease was found among 
relatives but only one instance of dementia. The high risk to relatives and the 
dementia of the probands appeared to be related to the overall severity of the 
Parkinsonian illness.

DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.43.9.846
PMCID: PMC490678
PMID: 7420108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Semin Nucl Med. 1981 Jan;11(1):32-49. doi: 10.1016/s0001-2998(81)80051-7.

Positron computed tomography studies of cerebral glucose metabolism in man: 
theory and application in nuclear medicine.

Phelps ME.

The capability of positron computed tomography (PCT) to delineate the 
substructures of the brain and its facility for accurately measuring the local 
tissue radioactivity concentration allow the application of tracer kinetic 
models for the study of local cerebral function in man. This principle and an 
adaptation of the 14C-deoxyglucose (DG) model of Sokoloff et al. with 
18F-2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) is being used at UCLA. Brookhaven National 
Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania, NIH, and the Massachusetts General 
Hospital to determine the local cerebral glucose metabolic rate (LCMRGIc) in 
normal man at rest and during sensory activation and the changes that occur in 
patients with a variety of cerebral disorders. Kinetic studies with PCT have 
been employed to measure the rate constants of the model in different gray and 
white matter structures of the brain in both normal and ischemic states. The 
precision of the method in normals has been shown to be about +/- 5% for 1.5-2.0 
sq cm regions of the brain. Studies in normals have yielded values for 
hemispheric CMRGIc that are in agreement with measurement using the Kety-Schmidt 
technique and LCMRGIc values in agreement with values in monkeys using DG 
autoradiography. Studies in volunteers subjected to visual and auditory 
stimulation are demonstrating the potential of this technique for investigating 
the human brain's response to different stimuli. STudies in patients with stroke 
show excellent correlation between the degree, extent, and particular structures 
involved and the clinical symptoms. The method consistently detected 
hypometabolism in cortical, thalamic, and striatal tissues that were 
dysfunctional due to deactivation or damage but which appeared normal on x-ray 
CT. Studies in patients with partial epilepsy have shown hypometabolic zones 
that highly correlated anatomically with interictal EEG spike foci and were 
associated with normal x-ray CT studies in 77% of the patients studied. The 
studies on epilepsy at UCLA have resulted in the integration of the LCMRGIc 
study into the clinical workup of patients with partial epilepsy that are 
candidates for surgical resection of their epileptogenic focus (effective June 
1979). Studies on Huntington's chorea, Parkinson's disease, aphasia, dementia, 
schizophrenia, and tumors are in early stage of investigation but also are 
providing exciting new results. Further studies are needed to determine the role 
of the local function information obtained with the PCT-FDG method in 
elucidating the basic mechanism and the potential to aid in improving the 
approach to medical therapy.

DOI: 10.1016/s0001-2998(81)80051-7
PMID: 6972094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Arch Neurol. 1981 Jun;38(6):339-42. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1981.00510060041004.

Organic mental syndrome and confusional states in Parkinson's disease. 
Relationship to computerized tomographic signs of cerebral atrophy.

Sroka H, Elizan TS, Yahr MD, Burger A, Mendoza MR.

Ninety-three patients with a diagnosis of Parkinson's disease, otherwise 
unselected, were specifically evaluated for organic mental syndrome (OMS) and 
other neurologic motor signs other than those referrable to extrapyramidal 
dysfunction; in addition, they had cranial computerized tomography (CT) to 
measure any structural changes in brain parenchyma. Cortical (sulci) atrophy and 
ventricular enlargement as CT signs of cerebral atrophy were correlated with 
different clinical patterns of the disease. An age-adjusted control population, 
with intact mentation, was similarly studied. The presence of classic OMS in a 
sizable segment of the usual parkinsonian population was invariably associated 
with CT signs of cerebral atrophy. Atrophic changes on CT scans, however, were 
not necessarily correlated with any intellectual dysfunction, or only weakly so, 
independent of age. The "typical" parkinsonian patients without evidence of OMS 
were indistinguishable from an age-adjusted control group with regard to 
structural changes in their scans. However, the parkinsonian patients with 
definite, permanent OMS and other focal neurologic deficit probably constitute a 
separate or distinct subset of the parkinsonian population, with a pathologic 
substrate more likely to be similar to that of the so-called Alzheimer-type 
dementias. Duration of the parkinsonian syndrome was not predictive of either 
mental status or scan findings, after adjustment for age as a factor.

DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1981.00510060041004
PMID: 7236060 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Gerontology. 1982;28 Suppl 1:35-52. doi: 10.1159/000212572.

Parkinson's disease as a model for changes in dopamine receptor dynamics with 
aging.

Rinne UK.

Parkinson's disease ranks among the most prevalent neurological diseases in the 
elderly. The disease usually begins after the age of 50 years, and the risk of 
the disease rises steeply with advancing age. The primary etiology of 
Parkinson's disease is still unknown, although the aging process may be an 
important predisposing factor. There is some overlapping between Parkinson's 
disease and senile dementia of Alzheimer's type, although both seem to be 
disease entities. In Parkinson's disease, the most prominent and significant 
neuropathological change is the progressive loss of substantia nigra dopamine 
neurons. Studied of striatal dopamine receptors showed that the specific binding 
of 3H-spiroperidol was either significantly increased or reduced in the caudate 
nucleus and putamen of parkinsonian patients without levodopa therapy. Scatchard 
analysis showed that there were corresponding changes in the number of 
receptors, but no significant changes in the mean dissociation constant. 
Increased binding of 3H-spiroperidol in the basal ganglia was also found in 
parkinsonian patients suffering from psychotic episodes and treated with 
neuroleptic drugs. Normal and low binding of 3H-spiroperidol was found in 
patients treated with levodopa. The behavior of dopamine receptors in the 
nucleus accumbens was similar to that of dopamine receptors in the striatum. 
Clinically, the patients with low binding of 3H-spiroperidol in the striatum 
were more disabled and had lost the beneficial response to levodopa. Thus in 
some patients with Parkinson's disease a denervation supersensitivity seemed to 
develop and in others a loss of postsynaptic dopamine receptor sites in the 
neostriatum. The latter alteration may contribute to the decreased response of 
parkinsonian patients to long-term levodopa therapy. However, in patients with a 
deteriorating response to levodopa, there seem to be still enough dopamine 
receptors in the striatum for drugs stimulating the dopamine receptors to 
alleviate directly the parkinsonian disability. Indeed, dopaminergic agonists 
seem to be a significant and valuable adjuvant therapy to levodopa for 
parkinsonian patients with a deteriorating response and/or on-off phenomena.

DOI: 10.1159/000212572
PMID: 7044903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Clin Neuropharmacol. 1982;5 Suppl 1:S29-37. doi: 
10.1097/00002826-198200051-00006.

Behavioral alterations and the therapy of parkinsonism.

Klawans HL.

The pathologic changes of parkinsonism and the side effects of drug therapy may 
produce pronounced behavioral changes in patients with Parkinson's disease. 
Dementia is the primary manifestation of disease-induced mental alterations and 
careful pharmacologic management is necessary. Psychosis is the most dramatic of 
the changes induced by levodopa. It may occur early in the course of therapy, 
usually in patients with a past history of a schizophreniform disorder, or after 
several years of treatment. Therapeutic intervention with dosage adjustments 
and/or drug holidays are indicated when psychosis occurs. Treatment of 
depression in the Parkinson patient is essentially the same as in a nonparkinson 
patient.

DOI: 10.1097/00002826-198200051-00006
PMID: 7116345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1982 May;30(5):312-7.

Definition and therapy of chronic cerebro-vascular diseases.

Agnoli A, Denaro A, Ruggieri S.

Chronic cerebro-vascular disorders could be considered in a broad sense as a 
large body of knowledge in which three main categories of clinical disturbances 
have to be be considered: 1) Pathological aging that manifest itself with light 
short term memory impairment associated with a mild parkinsonian symptomatology 
or pseudobulbar signs. 2) Senile dementia Alzheimer type and multi infarct 
dementia. 3) Chronic cerebro-vascular disorders as defined by the Ad Hoc 
Committee (Paris, 1980). At present the therapy of chronic cerebro-vascular 
disorders is based on two main groups of drugs and can be divided into: 1) A 
treatment of prevention or secondary prevention which tends to correct or modify 
the different risk factors. 2) A treatment that seeks to control and modify the 
neurological and neuropsychological after effects and the disorders of the 
higher nervous activities which result from the lesion.

PMID: 7048224 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 1983;95:43-55. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01516.x.

Neurochemical insights into monoamine oxidase inhibitors, with special reference 
to deprenyl (selegiline).

Riederer P, Jellinger K.

Monoamine oxidase (MAO) is distributed in neurons and non-neuronal tissue in the 
human central nervous system. It occurs there as MAO type A and MAO type B. It 
is not, however, established where both types are located intra- and/or 
extra-neuronally. Recently, the use of selective MAO-B blockers has shown 
beneficial effects in the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD). Knowledge about 
the locus of action of MAO inhibitors is therefore of great importance. Our 
findings indicate that MAO-B inhibitors like deprenyl act by blocking neuronal 
and extra-neuronal MAO-B. This demonstrates that in the early stages of PD the 
action of deprenyl improves dopamine neurotransmission and hormonal action, 
whereas in the advanced stages of the disease, when there is progressive loss of 
dopaminergic neurons accompanied by gliosis, the drug seems to exert beneficial 
effects via the hormonal route.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01516.x
PMID: 6145282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Acta Neurol Scand Suppl. 1983;95:19-26. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01513.x.

Problems associated with long-term levodopa treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Rinne UK.

Levodopa treatment improves significantly not only the parkinsonian disability 
but also the mortality rate. However, during long-term levodopa treatment the 
therapeutic benefit gradually declines. Furthermore, most cognitive skills 
improve initially, but long-term levodopa treatment is associated with declining 
intellectual capacity and dementia. In patients on long-term levodopa treatment 
there seems to be a low threshold for certain clinical side-effects, especially 
postural hypotension, psychiatric disturbances and various types of fluctuations 
in disability. Low age at onset of Parkinson's disease, and at the commencement 
of levodopa therapy, the duration of levodopa treatment and a high dose of 
levodopa seem to be significant risk factors for the development of response 
fluctuations, but not the pretreatment duration of Parkinson's disease nor the 
disability of the patients. A readjustment of the levodopa dosage, and as an 
adjuvant drug treatment, deprenyl, a specific inhibitor of MAO type B, or a 
direct-acting dopamine agonist may prove helpful in the management of 
fluctuations in disability. It is important, moreover, to try to prevent these 
phenomena by taking into account the predictive risk factors of response 
fluctuations in the treatment strategy of Parkinson's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1600-0404.1983.tb01513.x
PMID: 6587715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Eur Neurol. 1983;22(4):240-55. doi: 10.1159/000115567.

Lisuride in the treatment of parkinsonism.

McDonald RJ, Horowski R.

Lisuride is a new effective antiparkinson agent that is useful in the management 
of patients in an advanced stage of parkinsonism where levodopa therapy is no 
longer sufficient and/or limited by 'wearing off' reactions. Patients with these 
problems usually respond favorably to 1.5-4.5 mg of lisuride daily provided the 
daily dose is built up gradually over a period of 4-8 weeks. All the clinical 
features of parkinsonism may be improved and the daily dose of levodopa may be 
reduced by 30-40%. In some instances it may be possible to give lisuride as a 
replacement for levodopa. Less established, however, is the potential role of 
lisuride in treating patients in the early stages of parkinsonism and the 
long-term effects of lisuride. And, as with other ergots, caution should be 
exercised in using lisuride if patients have a history of hypotension, hepatic 
dysfunction, cardiac arrhythmias, and dementia. Finally, lisuride, unlike other 
drugs, is highly water soluble with a nearly immediate outset of 
antiparkinsonian action when given intravenously and may therefore be of 
considerable value in the emergency treatment of severe parkinsonism.

DOI: 10.1159/000115567
PMID: 6884394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Am J Med Genet. 1983 Feb;14(2):289-98. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.1320140209.

Blood groups, immunoglobulin allotypes and dermatoglyphic features of patients 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia of Guam.

Garruto RM, Plato CC, Myrianthopoulos NC, Schanfield MS, Gajdusek DC.

Blood group frequencies, immunoglobulin allotypes, and dermatoglyphic patterns 
were determined on patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD), two chronic, degenerative, neurologic disorders of 
unknown cause found commonly among the Chamorros of the Mariana Islands, in an 
attempt to identify a specific genetic or phenetic marker associated with either 
disorder. With the exception of the Kidd system, no significant differences were 
found in blood group frequencies nor in immunoglobulin allotypes between ALS 
patients, PD patients, and unaffected controls. The dermatoglyphic analysis 
demonstrated that ALS patients had higher frequencies of palmar patterns and 
accessory triradii in the IV interdigital area, and PD patients had 
significantly higher frequencies of complete simian creases and of palmar 
patterns in the thenar/I interdigital area than unaffected controls. The 
frequencies of the remaining dermatoglyphic traits showed no significant 
differences. We conclude that none of the marker systems tested show a 
particular pattern of association in patients and controls or a genetic 
predisposition to either disorder, and that early identification of at-risk 
individuals remains elusive.

DOI: 10.1002/ajmg.1320140209
PMID: 6573136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Gerontol. 1983 Jul;38(4):414-9. doi: 10.1093/geronj/38.4.414.

Immune function among normal Guamanians of different age.

Hoffman PM, Robbins DS, Gibbs CJ Jr, Gajdusek DC.

To determine if immune function differed in normal Guamanian Chamorros at 
various ages we measured the percentage and total numbers of lymphocytes and 
T-lymphocytes, their response to phytohemagglutinin (PHA), and serum levels of 
immunoglobulin A, G, and M in subjects 20 to 83 years of age. Regression 
analysis showed highly significant negative correlations for total lymphocytes 
and T-cells with age and a less significant negative correlation for PHA 
response with age in this population. Serum IgA levels increased with age, IgM 
levels declined, and IgG levels were unchanged. These findings are similar to, 
but less marked than, immunologic aberrations previously observed in Guamanians 
with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis or Parkinsonism-dementia. The occurrence of 
prominent differences in immune functions between younger and older individuals 
in a population where neurofibrillary degeneration in brain occurs at an early 
age and neurodegenerative and other age-related diseases are highly prevalent 
suggests the possibility that immunity and age-associated degenerative disease 
may be linked etiologically in this population.

DOI: 10.1093/geronj/38.4.414
PMID: 6602828 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Riv Patol Nerv Ment. 1983 Nov-Dec;104(6):243-54.

Sporadic multi-system atrophy with early onset and rapid fatal outcome (atypical 
O.P.C.A.?). Case report.

Barontini F, Marconi GP, Arnetoli G.

The authors report the clinical, instrumental and histopathological data 
observed in a 27 year old man, who died 20 months after the onset of a rapidly 
progressive neurological syndrome referable to a multitopic brain damage. The 
clinical picture, which at its fully developed stage was represented by 
supranuclear ophthalmoplegia, cerebellar ataxia, akinetic-rigid parkinsonism 
with axial dystonia and dementia, appeared consistent with the diagnosis of 
P.S.P. The histological examination showed degenerative changes of varied degree 
in the cerebellum, the brain-stem and the basal ganglia, but the neurofibrillary 
tangles characteristic of P.S.P. were not found, either with 
electron-microscopy. The case presented considerable difficulties regarding its 
nosological classification. Nevertheless, the lack of neuropathological findings 
of storage disease as well as the particular location of the degenerative 
lesions have induced the authors to consider it as an atypical form of sporadic 
O.P.C.A. in the field of M.S.A.

PMID: 6543985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ann Med Psychol (Paris). 1983 Nov;141(9):945-56.

[Parkinson's disease and mental deterioration. Apropos of 30 cases].

[Article in French]

Mouren P, Poinso Y, Oppenheim G, Mouren A, Nguyen Quang N.

The influence of Parkinson illness on intellectual faculties is appreciated in 
different ways. The existence of a real parkinson dementia is contested by some 
who see in the intellectual impoverishment of these patients a simple decline in 
efficiency. This is often partial and linked to neurological consequences which 
are not always taken into account by psychometric tests. 30 parkinson patients 
are beeing examined in this light. In spite of the small number, quite clear 
tendencies are apparent and which confirm the possible existence of these two 
types of phenomena, one beeing dementia and the other simply weakness without 
authentic senility. Risk factors are also isolated which emphasize age and 
accidents due to L-Dopa intolerance.

PMID: 6666920 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Rev Neurol (Paris). 1984;140(10):539-52.

[Neurotransmitter anomalies in Alzheimer's disease].

[Article in French]

Berger B.

Neurochemical and histochemical techniques for characterization of 
neurotransmitters and their receptors in normal and pathological human brain 
have modified our understanding of Alzheimer's disease. From a hopeless 
clinico-pathological entity, it has become one of the models of possible 
physiopathological relations between neurotransmitter anomalies and dementia 
processes. Three types of neuromediator (or neuro-modulator): cholinergic, 
aminergic and peptidergic, appear to be affected to different degrees in 5 
electively involved anatomical systems: cholinergic innominocorticoamygdalian 
and septohippocampic systems, noradrenergic ceruleocortical system, 
serotoninergic pontocortical system and cortical somatostatin and substance P 
systems. Critical analysis of neurochemical data shows that the biochemical 
nosology of Alzheimer's disease is confronted by the difficulty of constituting 
homogeneous series of both normal and pathological cases. Difficulties are 
increased when an attempt is made to establish correlations between 
neurotransmitter deficits and lesions or the demential process. This is the 
result of several factors: individual variability, difficulty in selecting valid 
controls, time elapsed before post-mortem sampling, imperfect understanding of 
the progressive topographical course of both cortical and subcortical lesions, 
which only now are being studied systematically and in a quantifiable manner, 
and finally the frequent absence of distinction between early and late forms of 
the disease. Truly senile forms should probably be distinguished, some authors 
believing them to be a particular type of aging process, from the presenile 
forms with more extensive biochemical changes. The constant presence of 
cholinergic symptoms show these to be fundamental features of the dementia but 
lesions of noradrenergic and serotoninergic systems also probably play an 
important role, and this triad is found in other dementia processes: trisomy 21, 
Parkinson's disease with dementia. Numerous questions concerning the 
neurotransmitter disorders in Alzheimer's disease remain unanswered: to what 
extent are the lesions due to neurone destruction? What occurs to the receptors? 
What factors condition severity of the disease? May the latter be directly 
correlated with the severity of the global dementia process or rather with the 
constitutive elements of the syndrome such as memory or attention disorders? 
What are the consequences of the peptidergic lesions? What is the sequential 
relation between lesions of corticopetal and intracortical afferent systems and 
what are their respective physiopathological significance?(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
400 WORDS)

PMID: 6150545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Ann Neurol. 1984;15 Suppl:S119-25. doi: 10.1002/ana.410150723.

Patterns of cerebral glucose utilization in Parkinson's disease and Huntington's 
disease.

Kuhl DE, Metter EJ, Riege WH, Markham CH.

Patterns of local cerebral glucose utilization were measured with positron 
emission tomography using the fluorine-18-labeled fluorodeoxyglucose (18FDG) 
method in 8 patients with Parkinson's disease, in 13 patients with Huntington's 
disease, in 15 subjects at risk for Huntington's disease, and in aged-matched 
normal control subjects. On the average, global cerebral metabolism in patients 
with Parkinson's disease was moderately reduced (20%), but the relative 
distribution of glucose utilization throughout the brain in these patients was 
normal. These results support the conclusion that alterations of the 
nigrostriatal pathway in Parkinson's disease have no major selective effect on 
the metabolism of particular cerebral regions. In Huntington's disease, however, 
there was a characteristic decrease in glucose utilization in the caudate nuclei 
and putamen, and this local hypometabolism appeared early and preceded bulk 
tissue loss. In patients with Huntington's disease, glucose utilization 
typically was normal throughout the rest of the brain, regardless of the 
severity of symptoms and despite the apparent shrinkage of brain tissue. The 
results also suggest the possibility that the caudate nuclei may be 
hypometabolic in some asymptomatic subjects who are potential carriers of the 
autosomal dominant gene for Huntington's disease.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410150723
PMID: 6234856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Ann Neurol. 1984 Jan;15(1):42-8. doi: 10.1002/ana.410150108.

Calcium and vitamin D metabolism in Guamanian Chamorros with amyotrophic lateral 
sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia.

Yanagihara R, Garruto RM, Gajdusek DC, Tomita A, Uchikawa T, Konagaya Y, Chen 
KM, Sobue I, Plato CC, Gibbs CJ Jr.

We evaluated 16 Guamanian Chamorros with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and 33 
patients with parkinsonism-dementia for disturbances of calcium and vitamin D 
metabolism. The serum immunoreactive parathyroid hormone level was mildly 
elevated in 6 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in 5 patients with 
parkinsonism-dementia. There were significant positive correlations between 
serum immunoreactive parathyroid levels and duration of illness in male patients 
with motor neuron disease, but not in female patients or in patients with 
parkinsonism-dementia. Intestinal absorption of calcium, as assessed by serum 
and urinary activity of calcium 47 following oral administration, was decreased 
in 2 patients with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and in 4 patients with 
parkinsonism-dementia, all of whom had low levels of serum 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin 
D. Reductions in cortical bone mass were striking in patients with motor neuron 
disease. A significant negative correlation was found between the percentage of 
cortical area of the second metacarpal bone and muscle atrophy and weakness, and 
significant positive correlations were found between degree of immobility and 
ratio of urinary hydroxyproline to creatinine in patients with amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia. In general, abnormalities in 
calcium metabolism were subtle. Thus, if the demonstrated deposition of metals, 
particularly calcium and aluminum, in central nervous system tissues of 
Guamanians with these two conditions is a cause of the diseases and of the early 
appearance of neurofibrillary tangles in neurons, the accumulation has 
apparently occurred long before onset of symptoms, and detectable abnormalities 
of calcium and vitamin D metabolism may already have been corrected.

DOI: 10.1002/ana.410150108
PMID: 6546847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Neurology. 1984 Mar;34(3):310-4. doi: 10.1212/wnl.34.3.310.

HLA-linked complement markers in Alzheimer's and Parkinson's disease: C4 variant 
(C4B2) a possible marker for senile dementia of the Alzheimer type.

Nerl C, Mayeux R, O'Neill GJ.

We determined the gene frequencies for the alleles of the HLA-linked complement 
markers C2, properdin factor B (BF), C4A (Rodgers) and C4B (Chido), and the red 
cell enzyme glyoxalase-I in 38 unrelated patients with senile dementia of the 
Alzheimer type, 42 patients with idiopathic Parkinson's disease, and 59 
unaffected, aged-matched control blood donors. In senile dementia of the 
Alzheimer type and in Parkinson's disease, no significant difference was found 
in the gene frequencies of alleles at either the BF, C2, or GLO-I locus compared 
with those of age-matched controls. In senile dementia of the Alzheimer type, a 
striking increase in the frequency of the rare C4B locus allele, C4*B2, was 
apparent, resulting in the high relative risk of RR = 8.8 (p less than 0.0001) 
for this disorder.

DOI: 10.1212/wnl.34.3.310
PMID: 6538270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Aust Fam Physician. 1984 May;13(5 Suppl):6-8, 11.

The drug treatment of Parkinson's disease.

Morris JG.

The drug treatment of Parkinson's disease should be tailored to the age of the 
patient, coexistence of dementia or postural hypotension, duration of the 
disease process and the emergence of side effects. In the early stages of the 
disease when disability is minimal, amantadine or anti-cholinergic drugs may 
suffice. As the patient's lifestyle becomes hampered, levodopa in combination 
with carbidopa or benserazide is introduced. Mild dopa induced dyskinesia can be 
ignored but when it is troublesome the dose of levodopa should be reduced. 
Fluctuations are minimised by giving small doses of levodopa frequently 
throughout the day or by adding bromocriptine to the drug regimen. Postural 
symptoms often respond to fludrocortisone and elevation of the head of the bed. 
In elderly or demented patients anticholinergic drugs and amantadine should be 
avoided. In these patients small doses of levodopa alone may be preferable to 
the combined preparations. More effective drugs with fewer side effects are 
likely to emerge with future successful research into the different types of 
dopamine receptors and other possible transmitters.

PMID: 6497767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Fortschr Neurol Psychiatr. 1984 Jun;52(6):207-14. doi: 10.1055/s-2007-1002019.

[Exogenous psychoses in Parkinson syndrome. Frequency and causal conditions].

[Article in German]

Schneider E, Fischer PA, Jacobi P, Grotz A.

Exogenous psychotic symptoms of a wide variety have been reported to appear more 
and more frequently since the introduction of levodopa in the therapy of 
Parkinson's disease. They were considered to be caused by treatment related 
imbalance of cerebral neurotransmitters and hypersensitivity of the dopaminergic 
receptors, respectively. In the present investigation an analysis was done 
concerning the relevance of different antiparkinsonian drugs and other factors 
such as severity of neurological and cerebroorganic symptomatology, age, 
duration of treatment, EEG and brain atrophic changes and additional physical 
diseases for the appearance of psychotic symptoms. The questions were posed to 
152 patients (54 men, 88 women) aged 34-76 years, which received a treatment 
with levodopa alone, in combination with a decarboxylase inhibitor, amantadines 
and/or anticholinergics for a period of 1-9 years. An exogenous psychotic 
symptomatology was observed in 42 patients (27,6%), explicitly under all 
antiparkinsonistic drugs, but not when amantadines were given as the initial 
treatment. In patients receiving levodopa/decarboxylase inhibitor psychotic 
symptoms could be observed most frequently but at the same time the duration of 
treatment was the longest. In 15 patients psychotic symptoms appeared under 
different antiparkinsonian drugs. In 28 patients this symptomatology was 
followed by a constant severe dementia. Predisposing factors for exogenous 
psychosis proved to be: a higher age at the beginning of the treatment and the 
initiation of treatment, a pronounced neurological symptomatology and signs of 
dementia as well as additional physical diseases. Because of the very complex 
conditions under which exogenous psychosis can be observed and the additional 
fact that they can appear under each antiparkinsonian substance, levodopa cannot 
be considered as the sole cause.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1055/s-2007-1002019
PMID: 6745832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Br J Psychiatry. 1984 Jul;145:20-38. doi: 10.1192/bjp.145.1.20.

Genetics, ageing and dementia.

Wright AF, Whalley LJ.

The contribution of genetic differences to variation in ageing and the 
relationship of ageing to certain types of dementia are discussed. 
Neuropathological changes commonly found in the ageing brain are present in more 
severe form in Alzheimer-type dementia, Down's syndrome, multi-infarct dementia, 
and a substantial number of patients with Parkinson's disease. An increased 
frequency of ageing-associated changes outside the brain have been reported in 
Alzheimer-type dementia, Down's syndrome, and multi-infarct dementia, although 
the evidence is generally meagre and in many cases requires further 
corroboration. Genetic studies of Alzheimer-type dementia support the existence 
of heterogeneity on the basis of family history and age of onset; early onset is 
associated with greater genetic risk and severity of abnormality. The increasing 
evidence of an association between DNA damage, premature ageing, and neuronal 
cell loss may provide insights into the aetiology of these and other forms of 
dementia.

DOI: 10.1192/bjp.145.1.20
PMID: 6234964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Neurol Clin. 1984 Aug;2(3):473-86.

Progressive supranuclear palsy. Clinical and pharmacologic update.

Jankovic J.

A distinct clinicopathologic entity, PSP is differentiated from Parkinson's 
disease by the presence of supranuclear ophthalmoparesis. Downward gaze palsy 
that can be overcome by oculocephalic maneuver is the most characteristic 
clinical finding. The other distinguishing clinical features of PSP include 
axial distribution of rigidity and broad-based gait with early postural 
instability. Furthermore, pseudobulbar palsy is an early feature, while profound 
dementia usually occurs late in the course of the disease. Because of the 
variable clinical presentation and occasional lag in the onset of 
ophthalmoparesis and other distinguishing signs, the diagnosis of PSP is often 
delayed for many years. However, the constellation of axial rigidity, 
pseudobulbar signs, and parkinsonism without tremor when combined with 
ophthalmoparesis should suggest the correct diagnosis. Pathologic examination of 
the PSP brain reveals neuronal cell loss, gliosis, granuolvacuolar degeneration, 
and unique neurofibrillary tangles in the pontomesencephalic tegmentum, tectum, 
basal ganglia, vestibular nuclei, periaqueductal gray matter, and dentate 
nuclei. The etiology of this neurodegenerative disorder is unknown and the 
neurodiagnostic studies usually are not helpful in proving the diagnosis. The 
treatment of PSP is unsatisfactory, but the anti-parkinson drugs, particularly 
dopamine agonists, may be useful in the early stages of the disease.

PMID: 6398402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1985;457:35-51. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1985.tb20798.x.

Neurobiological studies of transmitter systems in aging and in Alzheimer-type 
dementia.

Price DL, Kitt CA, Struble RG, Whitehouse PJ, Cork LC, Walker LC.

Dysfunction and death of specific neuronal systems are important processes 
occurring in aging and in Alzheimer's and in Parkinson's disease. The 
neuropathology and neurochemistry of some of the neuronal systems at risk in 
these settings are subjects of active research; the nature and consequences of 
these cellular pathologies have begun to be clarified. The availability of 
animal models (including aged monkeys, macaques with cholinergic deficiencies, 
and monkeys with MPTP-induced nigrostriatal pathology, all of which recapitulate 
certain features of human aging or disease) allow the opportunity to assess the 
efficacies of new pharmacotherapies, neural grafts, and trophic factors. These 
approaches can be monitored by behavioral testing and, in some instances, by in 
vivo imaging methods, which can in turn be correlated with morphologic and 
chemical analyses of brain. Demonstration of the efficacy of these procedures in 
nonhuman primates would have profound implications on the development of new 
therapies designed to alleviate the effects of aging and disease on the human 
brain.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1985.tb20798.x
PMID: 2869729 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Surg Neurol. 1985 Jan;23(1):59-63. doi: 10.1016/0090-3019(85)90161-2.

Parkinsonism as a manifestation of brain tumor.

Polyzoidis KS, McQueen JD, Rajput AH, MacFadyen DJ.

Neoplasm is an uncommon cause of the parkinsonian syndrome. We are presenting 
three cases of intracranial tumors whose major manifestations included 
parkinsonism. Surgical treatment resulted in control of the extrapyramidal 
symptoms in two of our patients. Because no curative treatment is available for 
the vast majority of parkinsonian patients, early detection of an underlying 
neoplasm may offer a most rewarding outcome. Unilaterality of the symptoms, 
overwhelming dementia, or suspicion of a mass should lead to the performance of 
computed tomography.

DOI: 10.1016/0090-3019(85)90161-2
PMID: 2981121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Res Publ Assoc Res Nerv Ment Dis. 1985;63:199-209.

Local cerebral glucose utilization in symptomatic and presymptomatic 
Huntington's disease.

Kuhl DE, Markham CH, Metter EJ, Riege WH, Phelps ME, Mazziotta JC.

Patterns of local cerebral glucose utilization were measured with positron 
emission CT using the 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose method in 13 patients with HD, 15 
subjects at risk for HD, and control subjects. These data were compared with CT 
measures of cerebral atrophy, age, and duration and severity of symptoms. The 
results indicate that in HD there is a characteristic decrease in glucose 
utilization in the caudate and putamen and that this local hypometabolism 
appears early and precedes bulk tissue loss. In contrast to demented patients 
with Alzheimer's disease or Parkinson's disease, in these HD patients glucose 
utilization typically was normal throughout the rest of the brain, regardless of 
the severity of symptoms and despite apparent shrinkage of brain tissue. Our 
results indicate that the caudate is hypometabolic in some asymptomatic persons 
who are carriers of the autosomal-dominant gene for HD.

PMID: 3161165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Am Geriatr Soc. 1985 Mar;33(3):167-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1985.tb04886.x.

A case-control study of maternal age in Alzheimer's disease.

English D, Cohen D.

A case-control study of maternal age as a risk factor for Alzheimer's disease 
was conducted in Washington state. Clinically diagnosed cases of Alzheimer's 
disease (n = 64) were identified from two sources, an outpatient clinic at the 
University of Washington and an organization of relatives of patients with 
Alzheimer's disease. Controls were spouses of the Alzheimer's disease cases and 
spouses of 87 patients with Parkinson's disease, also identified at the 
University of Washington. Mail questionnaires were sent to all subjects; 
responses were received for 90 cases and 96 controls, although nine of those 
cases, whose medical records of diagnostic evaluations were incomplete, were 
excluded. Among the 69 cases and 94 controls whose mothers' ages were known, 
there was no evidence that the mothers of cases were significantly older than 
the mothers of controls (chi-square test for trend, P = 0.82). These findings do 
not support the theory that persons born to older mothers are at increased risk 
of developing Alzheimer's disease.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1532-5415.1985.tb04886.x
PMID: 3973334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

