1. Can Med Assoc J. 1965 Mar 6;92(10):514-6.

FINGERPRINT PATTERNS IN HUNTINGTON'S CHOREA AND PARKINSON'S DISEASE.

BARBEAU A, TRUDEAU JG, COITEUX C.

In the course of a continuing search for means of predicting Huntington's chorea 
before the onset of neurological symptoms, a study of fingerprint patterns was 
undertaken, using the technique employed by Hodges and Simon in the 
investigation of patients with Wilson's disease. Fingerprint patterns of 61 
patients with Huntington's chorea and 50 with Parkinson's disease were compared 
with norms established by Scotland Yard. Although an increased incidence of the 
"whorl" pattern was seen in the left second and third fingers in patients with 
Huntington's chorea, this finding could not be interpreted as having diagnostic 
or prognostic value as it was found also in some normal subjects and in 
occasional cases of Parkinson's disease. The pattern supposedly characteristic 
of Wilson's disease was also seen in persons with Huntington's chorea.

PMCID: PMC1928158
PMID: 14275039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Contemp Neurol Ser. 1975;12:45-70.

Patterns of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis and Parkinsonism-Dementia on Guam.

Brody JA, Stanhope JM, Kurland LT.

The striking concentration of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonismdementia (PD) among the Chamorro people of Guam has attracted 
attention since the early 1950's. Extensive studies conducted over the past 20 
years have not revealed the causes of these diseases and the reasons for their 
remarkable concentrations on Guam. Approximately 1 in 10 Guamanian deaths over 
age 25 is from ALS, and another 1 in 10 is from PD. ALS still occurs 
approximately 50 times more frequently on Guam than in the continental United 
States. Advances in virologic and biochemical techniques, and long years of 
study, appear to be leading us to a point where some of the problems will be 
resolved. We shall attempt to review the pertinent background information and 
summarize the data and observations up to the present time.

PMID: 1095295 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Apr;101(4):287-301. doi: 
10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112097.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam, 1945-1972. I. 
Descriptive epidemiology.

Reed DM, Brody JA.

An overview of the epidemiologic studies of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
and parkinsonism-dementia (PD) from 1945 through 1972 is presented. During this 
period 350 cases of ALS were documented. PD, which is apparently unique to the 
native Chamorro population, was not recognized during the early years of the 
study. A total of 213 PD patients have now been seen. The rates of both diseases 
have declined by approximately 50 per cent since 1965. In the early years 
incidence per 100,000 for ALS males approached 60; for females it was about 40. 
For PD males it was about 50; for females it was close to 20. The declines in 
both diseases have occurred in both sexes and at all age groups and no cohort 
phenomenon was observed. Marked geographic differences in the distribution of 
the diseases were observed with southern villages having the highest rates and 
western villages having the lowest rates; the remainder of the island was 
intermediate. Recent declines have been most marked in the southern high-rate 
villages. Chamorros living on the island of Rota have rates similar to those on 
Guam; those on Saipan have lower rates. A possible excess of ALS among Filipino 
residents ofGuam was noted; ALS has not been seen among other ethnic groups. 
Geographic mapping even in high incidence areas did not reveal true clusters or 
foci. Extensive case-control studies did not reveal any patterns of prior 
illness, life-style, or exposures distinguishing patients. A tendency for 
patients to be of somewhat lower socioeconomic level, have less education, eat 
more homegrown foods and raw meats, and more contact with animals was found. No 
Mendelian genetic patterns were observed; males were affected more frequently 
than female for both diseases. Cases did not occur before age 20, reached 
maximum frequency between ages 55 and 65 and there-after declined. Environmental 
factors associated with some aspects of the traditional way of life seem to be 
causally involved, but, since most aspects of the traditional life have changed 
in the past 50 years, the specific factors remain elusive.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112097
PMID: 1124759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Epidemiol. 1975 Apr;101(4):302-10. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112098.

Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and parkinsonism-dementia on Guam, 1945-1972. II. 
Familial and genetic studies.

Reed DM, Torres JM, Brody JA.

The extraordinarily high rate of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) and 
parkinsonism-dementia (PD) in the Chamorro linguistic group on Guam suggested a 
genetic etiology for these diseases. Results of three studies are described. Two 
involved comparisons of the rates of disease in relatives and spouses of index 
patients and controls. In the third we examined offspring of doubly affected 
parents, 10 spouse pairs with ALS, 3 spouse pairs with PD and 13 spouse pairs in 
which 1 spouse had ALS and the other PD. Within the limitations of numbers and 
age of offspring, we found a tendency among siblings and offspring of ALS cases 
to have a higher risk than control relatives. Numbers were small and in no 
instance were significant differences encountered. Spouses of patients had at 
least as high risk of developing ALS or PD as any of the groups of blood 
relatives. A slightly higher age-specific rate of ALS and PD occurred in the 
offspring of doubly affected parents. The only group large enough for present 
analysis are 60 offspring of doubly affected ALS parents over the age of 20. 
Thus far only 3 have developed ALS. Within our entire patient population of 350 
ALS cases and 219 PD cases there were 12 instances in which one parent of the 
patient was not Chamorro. In addition there is a consistent two- to threefold 
excess of affected males which could not be accounted for by competitive risks 
of death from other causes among females. While a familial tendency does exist 
these findings and observations are not compatible with any simple Mendelian 
form of inheritance. It is possible that genetic influences affect the 
occurrence of these diseases but our studies suggest that environmental factors 
play at least as important a role.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.aje.a112098
PMID: 1124760 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Exp Med. 1975 Aug 1;142(2):483-94. doi: 10.1084/jem.142.2.483.

RNA-instructed DNA polymerase activity in a cytoplasmic particulate fraction in 
brains from Guamanian patients.

Viola MV, Frazier M, White L, Brody J, Spiegelman S.

Nervous system tissues from a number of patients with idiopathic neurological 
disorders were examined for biochemical evidence of RNA tumor virus infection. 
RNase-sensitive DNA polymerase activity was found in a cytoplasmic particulate 
fraction from two patients with Guamanian amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) 
but not in brains from two normal U.S. individuals. The buoyant density of the 
enzyme-containing fraction was 1.16-1.18 g/ml and could be converted to a denser 
region of the gradient (1.24 g/ml) by treatment with the nonionic surfactant, 
Sterox. The cation and detergent requirements for the endogenous RNase-sensitive 
DNA polymerase reaction were determined. The early (5 min) endogenous reverse 
transcriptase product was analyzed by cesium sulfate gradient centrifugation. 
RNase- and heat-sensitive RNA-DNA hybrids were detected in the product analysis 
of two ALS, one Parkinsonism-dementia (PD) brain, and two brains from 
asymptomatic Chamorros but not in brains from normal U.S. individuals and a 
number of patients with neuro-psychiatric disorders. The DNA product was a 4.5S 
heteropolymer that hybridized more extensively to RNA extracted from the 
enzyme-containing pellet from PD brain as compared to a similar fraction from 
normal U.S. brain. The DNA product appeared to be unrelated to Rausvher or visna 
virus 70S RNA as determined by RNA-[-3H]DNA hybridization.

DOI: 10.1084/jem.142.2.483
PMCID: PMC2189894
PMID: 49390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]